
































































Hansard: June 09, 1980


4215 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
Monday, June 9, 1980. 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. C.O. WHITE (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to 
introduce to you and other members of the Assembly 15 students from Peart School accompanied by 
their principal, Mr. Needham, and another teacher, Miss Brydon, seated in the Speaker’s gallery. I very 
much enjoyed my visit to their school during pitch-in week when we did a bit of work on the school 
yard, and everyone received Celebrate Saskatchewan pins. I hope members of the class, or some at least, 
have had an opportunity by now to look at The Pictorial History of Saskatchewan which they received at 
that time. I also hope that you enjoy your visit to the legislature today and that you find the question 
period interesting and informative. I will be meeting with them later for pictures and refreshments. 
Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker I would like to welcome 18 students from my 
constituency. They are from South Corman Park School. It’s the newest school in my constituency. 
They are sitting in the east gallery. There are 18 students from Grade 6, and I’ll be joining them later to 
chat and for a picture. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
Protection of Rail Lines 

 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of 
Agriculture I’d like to direct a question to the Acting House Leader or whoever is in charge over there 
today. Last Friday, the federal Minister of Transportation announced his intention to rescind the orders 
in council passed by the former minister of transportation that relate to the protection of rail lines in the 
Prairies. Now this defies all logic and common sense, and is not in the best interest of the prairie 
provinces. I wonder (and I know you’ll have to take notice of this) if you will ask what representation 
your Department of Agriculture has made, or your government has made, to the federal Minister of 
Transportation to see that these orders in council are not rescinded, that they do act in the best interests 
of the prairie provinces. 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Rural Affairs is prepared to deal with the question. 
 
HON. E.E. KAEDING (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Rural)): — Mr. Speaker, first of all I think I 
should take notice of the question for the minister, because I think he will want to give a more detailed 
report. I can assure the members opposite that the minister will be dealing most forcefully with this 
particular item, and I can assure them that he will be dealing with the members of the grain companies 
trying to develop some kind of counter-policy to what was announced last Friday. 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4216 

MR. BERNTSON: — While the minister is taking notice, I wonder if he would also ask the Minister of 
Agriculture, while he is communicating with Ottawa, if he would also exercise what influence he has on 
the federal member for Yorkton-Melville, whose actions in the House prevented the Neil report from 
being tabled. Had that not been done, those rail lines would have been protected today. 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Well, Mr. Speaker, of course I wouldn’t accept that on the part of the member 
opposite. However, I will refer that matter to the minister and I’m sure that he will respond to it 
adequately. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Would the minister not agree that grain companies and elevator companies 
cannot plan or do any marketing analysis, etc. unless or until there is some definitive statement relative 
to these branch lines, and that what we need now is a definitive statement as to what’s going to happen 
to these branch lines, get them on the books and keep them there and get the grain moving? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I agree whole-heartedly with what the member opposite says. I 
think it’s most unfortunate that the government in Ottawa should have made the kind of statement and 
brought the kind of uncertainty back into the branch line and the redevelopment program in the grain 
handling system which this has done. I am sure that we will be taking all the steps we can to try to 
reverse that. 
 

Movement of Grain to Eastern Canada 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I would direct a question to the former minister 
of agriculture in absence of the minister. As a direct result of the recently announced drought relief 
program by the Minister of Agriculture, the Canadian Wheat Board issued a stop order on all movement 
of non-board feed grains to eastern Canada. Interestingly enough, Mr. Minister, that was followed by an 
allocation of boxcars for movement of grain to eastern Canada. I wonder if you would, in taking notice 
of this question, advise the Minister of Agriculture that he might co-ordinate this obviously 
unco-ordinated series of events that have taken place since the announcement of the drought relief 
program? 
 
MR. KAEDING: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we have had some conversations with regard to that and 
certainly we were concerned with the conflict of orders which were coming from the Canadian Wheat 
Board on that particular issue and I’m sure that the minister has already undertaken some conversation 
with the board on that matter. 
 

SGEA Resolution No. 34 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Minister of 
Finance. Mr. Minister, I have in my hand Resolution No. 34, passed at the recent annual convention of 
the SGEA (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Association), which in effect assesses 80 per cent of 
their salaries as dues from those members of the union who crossed the picket lines and which in effect 
is a punishment against these members. Have you considered or have you looked at the legality or the 
illegality of this particular resolution? 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, the Public Service Commission 
has been looking at the resolution. I have not personally been involved in it and I do not yet have a 
report on it. Clearly it is a matter within the jurisdiction of the 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4217 

Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Association in that it is an internal union matter. My first 
assessment of the situation is that is where it should and will lie. Meanwhile, until I receive a report 
from the Public Service Commission in more detail, there’s nothing more that I can add. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the minister, it is not quite an internal matter since it 
will be your responsibility to provide information from the pay roll. Have you made that decision yet as 
to whether or not you will provide pay roll information to the SGEA in order for them to assess the 
proper amount from those members who crossed the picket lines? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — As part of the collective bargaining agreement which exists and which has 
existed prior even to the present one, it is a requirement that the Public Service Commission does 
provide to the SGEA the payment that is made to the employees who are members of the SGEA. That 
happens on a regular basis. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, the minister avoided my question. I’ll repeat my question. I am 
aware that you submit the payment. My question is, will you inform the SGEA as to the amount of 
money these people earned, in other words, the pay roll information so that they assess 80 per cent and 
will you then take the 80 per cent from their next cheque to submit to the SGEA? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — As far as I know, Mr. Speaker, the request has not come forward to the 
Public Service Commission from the SGEA that such a deduction take place and until it does, I will not 
be in a position to decide on it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister has still avoided my question. 
Will you provide the information from the pay roll? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Well, as far as I know (and I might be corrected on this), that information is 
provided, Mr. Speaker, on a regular basis, as I indicated in my first response to the member’s question. 
The pay roll information, as to who is on the pay roll, and the payments that are made, is provided to the 
SGEA on a regular basis, and I do not see why that should change. 
 

Boating Safety 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Acting Premier. Could the minister 
inform this House if there are any instructions from the Attorney General’s department on getting tough 
about life preservers in boats throughout the province, and is there an order out to go after people 
without life jackets? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of anything that indicates the Attorney General’s 
department would have been issuing get-tough orders. As the hon. member perhaps knows this comes 
under the federal jurisdiction, federal law, and not provincial law. While we do have the responsibility 
of enforcing the law by agreement, it comes under federal jurisdiction, and I’m not aware of the 
Attorney General’s department issuing any get-tough orders. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the RCMP over the weekend was stopping 
all boats and forcing the boats in to shore for not having Department of Transport-cleared life jackets. 
Do you realize that every store in this province is permitted to sell jackets that aren’t legally usable in 
boats throughout this province? 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4218 

Are you, as government, going to do something to stop these life jackets from being sold in the 
province? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that since it is under the federal jurisdiction, and the federal 
Department of Consumer Affairs is also an agency that has the responsibility of testing quality of 
products, I will be prepared to take the matter as notice, and to inquire whether the Department of 
Consumer Affairs of the Government of Saskatchewan has taken any action, or is examining the matter, 
as well as to inquire what steps, if any, have been taken by the Attorney General’s department. 
 

Licensing of Antique Vehicles 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister responsible for the 
highway traffic board. Mr. Minister, you will no doubt be aware, and I am sure all of us are aware, of the 
special role played, especially during this summer season, by owners of antique vehicles in all districts 
in the province in helping communities to celebrate their parades, homecomings, and so on. Will you 
this year, in view of the fact it is our Celebrate Saskatchewan year, give consideration to special 
licensing provision for these antique vehicles so they don’t have to go through the annual red tape of 
picking up permits, and so on, to take part in their community functions? 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, the licensing of 
vehicles is under the jurisdiction of my seatmate, the Hon. Wes Robbins, and I’ll take notice. We have 
accommodated these vehicles before, but it’s not directly under me. I’ll take notice and see that the 
minister advises. I am sure that I can say without even inquiring that everything possible is being done 
to make Celebrate Saskatchewan the success that it’s going to be. 
 

Family Life Programs 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — A question to the Minister of Health. On June 2 you were 
quoted as saying that you will push for an increase in the number of family life programs in 
Saskatchewan schools, in response to a growing number of teen-age pregnancies in the province. My 
question to you is, have you any research which would indicate that an increase in family life education 
will indeed cause a decrease in teen-age pregnancies? 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Health): — No, Mr. Speaker, I have no such research with which I 
could back this up. But I do believe that an informed mind would probably be able to act in a more 
rational fashion knowing what the consequences may be of being sexually active. If many of our young 
people are going to be sexually active (and they obviously are because we do have a high number of 
pregnancies, not only in this province but across the country), then what we have to do (and my response 
was, Mr. Speaker) is instil in our young people a knowledge of sexuality. Along with that, Mr. Speaker, 
I indicated very clearly that we have to instil in our people individual responsibility for their actions. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, I indicated my priorities were that family planning should be done by the 
parents, first of all. Secondly, it should be done by the church. Thirdly, I thought it should be done by 
the schools. If all three of those failed, there would be only one other alternative where our young people 
could learn, and that would be on the 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4219 

streets. That, Mr. Speaker, was unacceptable to me. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, the research which has been done in the United States would point out 
that the teaching of family life education has not caused a reduction but an increase in teen-age 
pregnancies. I think perhaps I should encourage the minister to try to read some of that research. Why 
would you proceed to make a statement like you made in Saskatoon without first having adequate 
information at your disposal? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Because, Mr. Speaker, I am a responsible individual. Mr. Speaker, I feel that one 
cannot keep his head in the sand. As Minister of Health I am concerned about the number of teen-age 
pregnancies. What the member is trying to tell me is that all those parents who have been teaching their 
youngsters and their children family life education programs (and this has been done for many, many 
years) are being irresponsible in telling their children or getting their children informed about sexuality; 
that doesn’t make sense. I think there are many parents who are responsible. There are parents who have 
relegated that responsibility to the schools and to the churches. That is their responsibility and their 
right. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the shoe fits, wear it, member of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I indicated to the Pro-Life group which I met with, that I felt informed individuals, young 
people who were informed about sexuality, would be able to behave and to react more responsibly than 
those who were not informed or ill-informed. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary to the minister. Mr. Minister, when I was raising this, it was with 
regard to sex education in the schools. In your reply you went off on a tangent and raised sex education 
at home by the family. That is quite a different thing. If you are in agreement that sex education should 
be taught at home, will you go out and say that to the public rather than state that it should be taught in 
the schools? That is the concern. 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, the member does not observe very well. I told him already my 
priorities are that the first and primary responsibility for sex education rests with the parents. It is a fact 
that many parents do not do this today. They do not. They either feel uncomfortable about teaching 
sexuality to their children or they have relegated that responsibility to the schools. What I am saying to 
the member opposite is that the parents have the right to relegate that responsibility to the school 
systems, if they so see fit. 
 
I indicated to the Pro-Life people that they should immediately have a meeting with the school boards to 
make sure they have those kinds of programs and material in those programs that they could accept. 
However, I still indicated to them it would be my preference that sexuality be taught by the parents. 
 
I recognized, however, because we have the family breakdown, many of our marriages end up in 
divorces, many are separated, we have many single parent families who simply cannot accept this 
responsibility, or are unwilling to do so. I therefore say our society has a responsibility to make our 
young people aware of and knowledgeable about sexuality. Mr. Speaker, I think that is a responsible 
position to take, and that many parents would accept that. 
 

Business of the Legislature re Bill No. 105 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the government 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4220 

House Leader, and we will all wait with bated breath to see who that may be. Mr. House Leader, 
(whoever he is) I note today that Bill No. 105 is going to be called again. If I am not mistaken that will 
make the sixth or seventh consecutive day on which Bill No. 105 has been called. My question to the 
House Leader is simply this: how much longer do you intend to play this game, how much longer do 
you intend to prevent the business of this legislature from being carried out, how much longer is it going 
to be before we in the opposition are going to be able to deal with questions such as agricultural 
estimates, the Executive Council, the Attorney General’s department? In other words, when are you 
going to allow the MLAs in this Assembly to earn what they are being paid to do? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 105 is part of the business of this House. Perhaps the hon. 
member might consult with his former political leader as to how long he wants to debate the issues, 
since they have been friends and colleagues. So long as the hon. member is still interested in personally 
debating the bill, we will give him every opportunity to express his views. 
 
Obviously the members of the opposition are also interested in this matter being debated because the 
hon. member on several occasions tried to adjourn debate on Bill No. 105 and we felt he should continue 
speaking. The members of the opposition have agreed with us so far. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question to the minister. Did you say final, Mr. Speaker? Oh, 
isn’t that interesting. We’ve already decided that it’s over before I’ve asked my question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Proceed. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I have a supplementary, Mr. Speaker, in fact, I have a couple, but I’ll try to get 
them both into this one. Mr. Minister, by the time today has been concluded (assuming that the member 
for Nipawin is able to go until 10 o’clock this evening) will the House Leader concede that the amount 
of money going to the Unionest Party has been spent on the cost of paying MLAs, support staff and 
everything else that goes into keeping this legislature open? Will you acknowledge that we have already 
spent more than that amount of money? Will the House Leader also acknowledge that, in light of the 
fact that this is a record session, in light of the fact that some MLAs have other things to do than to 
waste the taxpayers’ money (perhaps even under false pretences here), it is now time for the minister to 
call other business and let us proceed with the normal business of this Assembly, and let the member for 
Nipawin talk at a later date until the cows come home? 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not in a position to either confirm or deny anything in terms of 
the amount of money which has been spent. It is very difficult to calculate or determine the money spent 
on legislative work, and how valuably it is spent from time to time. I’m sure there have been those, on 
occasion, who have wondered whether the money was being spent wisely when the hon. member has 
been on his feet from time to time. However, we always gave him the benefit of the doubt. We’ve 
listened to him, sometimes agreeing with him, sometimes disagreeing with him. That’s the way the 
parliamentary process and democratic process work. In terms of MLAs wanting to do other things, I 
don’t think that this House has ever denied any member to do other things from time to time if they felt 
it were more pressing and more urgent for them. I have noticed that the hon. member quite often has 
been absent from this House. Obviously, he made a priority that it was more important that he do 
something else in 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4221 

his constituency or be away doing other business than to be here. 
 

Reasons for Not Calling Closure 
 
MR. THATCHER: — New question. Mr. Speaker, might I then ask the minister and the House Leader 
if it is a fair conclusion to draw from your comments that you are in effect saying that someone in 35 
hours is unable to make a point? Are you saying that after allowing this one individual 35 hours that he 
is being denied freedom of speech and he may not have had a sufficient opportunity to make his point? 
Isn’t it true that the reason you don’t call closure is because you are playing a foolish political game with 
taxpayers’ dollars by keeping him up? Because you are keeping us from getting on with the pressing 
business of agriculture and the Attorney General that everybody knows has these terrible stories in it. 
 
MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the Unionest Party has obviously heard the 
remarks of the member for Thunder Creek. Perhaps he might take heed and take his advice since they 
have been very close working partners in the past and influenced each other from time to time in one 
form or another. Perhaps he might take the advice because I’ll tell you, during the course of the debate, I 
thought he had made his point repeatedly so perhaps he might take heed today. It’s a new week. In terms 
of closure, the freedom for closure rests with everybody. The hon. member is just as free to move a 
motion of closure as anybody else is in this House. 
 

Use of the Wang Computer by Sask Tel 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Question to the minister in charge of Sask Tel. Earlier in the 
session, Mr. Minister, you indicated that Sask Tel was going into the computer business. Now I 
understand that presently there are negotiations going on between Sask Tel and the Wang computer 
company. Could the minister advise the Assembly if Sask Tel has decided on the Wang computer as a 
machine they’re going to use? 
 
HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Mr. Speaker, the answer is yes, we have decided that 
we will be using Wang word processing equipment. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Will the minister advise the Assembly at the initial stage, is it your intention to 
simply use one word processor; in other words, the only machine that you will be using will be the 
Wang word processor? 
 
MR. CODY: — That is correct. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Final question, Mr. Minister. As you know, that company is an American 
company. Did the minister not at all look at the possibility of using Canadian manufactured hardware in 
the communications industry as opposed to having to go to a Boston outfit? 
 
MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, we certainly did look at other word processing hardware. There’s no 
question about that. We don’t rush into things that quickly. We do all kinds of studies in-house and we 
have various people advising us as to what type of equipment we should be using, whether that be in 
computers or telephones or fibre optics or you name it. We always have studies done for us and we 
follow certain recommendations by the people who do this kind of work for us. Most of the time the 
people who make the recommendations would be our own staff. We have very qualified staff on hand 
who, in this particular case, indicated to us that the Wang word processing equipment was the 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4222 

best they could recommend to us. They made that recommendation and we, as a board of directors, 
decided it would be the equipment we would use. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, as I understand Bell Telephone and various provincial telephone 
companies have rejected the Wang system in favour of a Kado system or other types of computer 
hardware. Would the minister not admit it would make sense if you are going into the computer 
industry, that you would have a system similar to other telephone companies in Canada so there could be 
an interchange of both the hardware and the software programs of the various machines? 
 
MR. CODY: — Well, it is pretty obvious the member doesn’t know anything about software because 
software programs are compatible with other pieces of equipment whether you use the Wang equipment 
or whether you use the other equipment. You can make them adaptable. All you have to do is simply use 
the various mechanisms available to you and you can get the software packages to work on different 
hardware. With regard to the hardware, if the member did a little bit of research throughout the country, 
he would find that we are not the only telephone company that uses or will be using Wang hardware. It 
is being used in Newfoundland, in New Brunswick, and as I understand it, B.C. Tel uses it as well. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I want to take this opportunity to make an introduction and I draw all members’ 
attention to an important group of visitors we have in the Speaker’s gallery today. This large delegation 
from southeast Asia has nine members in it; six of them are from Malaysia and three of them are from 
the city-state of Singapore, both members of the Commonwealth. I want all members to join with me in 
welcoming them. Later today they will be visiting a Saskatchewan farm and a Saskatchewan grain 
elevator and tomorrow they may have a brief nodding acquaintance with potash in some form or other, 
although they don’t have time to go down a mine shaft on this particular trip. 
 
This delegation is on a cross-Canada tour and for the short time they are here in Saskatchewan, the 
members will want to make them welcome. The Malaysian delegation is headed by the Hon. Abu 
Hassan Bin Haji Omar and the Singapore delegation is headed by Dr. Yeoh Ghim Seng who is the 
Speaker of the Singapore Assembly. I would ask those gentlemen to rise. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 
Premier Blakeney and the Government of Saskatchewan, I extend a welcome to the parliamentarians 
from Malaysia and Singapore. I express the hope that their visit to our province will be a rewarding 
experience and that they will have fond memories of their visit to Saskatchewan for many years to come. 
May I also express the hope that their visit throughout Canada is going to be a rewarding experience. As 
the delegation representatives from those two countries may be aware, Canada at the present time is 
having some problems and difficulties. We are presently involved in a constitutional conference. 
Premier Blakeney and all the other premiers of Canada are today meeting with the Prime Minister. We 
are looking with certain anticipation and some new hopes that this conference will be very productive 
and very useful in keeping our country united and progressive and that we can share our experiences 
with you in the years ahead. 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4223 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition I would 
like to welcome the delegation from Singapore and Malaysia to Canada. I hope you have enjoyed your 
visit to Canada and especially to the province of Saskatchewan. I hope you enjoy the session which is 
taking place in our legislature this afternoon. I believe this evening there is going to be a banquet. From 
our side the member for Maple Creek, Mrs. Duncan, and I will be joining you for supper and we look 
forward to a discussion with you at that time. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cowley 
(Provincial Secretary) that Bill No. 105 – An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t rise to welcome the 
members from the other two Commonwealth countries. They certainly left quickly so I won’t continue 
with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there seems to be a little problem with the microphone. If you just give me a moment, I 
will attempt to become a little more efficient. Can every member now hear satisfactorily? I wouldn’t 
want, Mr. Speaker, any member to miss one iota of any remarks I might have to make with regard to 
Bill No. 105. I say that for all members. 
 
Before the Acting House Leader, in conducting his business of the Assembly, leaves the Assembly, I do 
want to draw one thing to his attention about his remarks during question period. It is very brief, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is about his remarks with regard to Bill No. 105. I think this exemplifies the kinds of 
remarks made by ministers opposite . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — If I allow the member to proceed, he will be out of order, because we are not at this 
time allowed to discuss what went on in the question period. The question period is done and closed. All 
the member for Nipawin can discuss now is the principle of Bill No. 105, which is before us, and I trust 
that I won’t have to ask the member to adhere to the discussion of the principle any more today. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I do want to say though, Mr. Speaker that the remarks which I have made in 
opposition to Bill 105 have been attacked by members opposite, and I refer you to a newspaper article 
with reference to the Attorney General, Mr. Romanow, and his remarks. Mr. Speaker will recall I have 
read them to the Assembly before; he said the bill will go through sooner or later with the majority 
government vote. I have told members opposite on many, many occasions, that if it is going to go 
through anyway, if their minds are not capable of being changed on the principle of Bill No. 105, then 
they should introduce closure. Mr. Speaker will know that under Rule 31, page 23 of the rule book, it 
specifically states that closure may only be introduced by a minister of the Crown rising in his place. 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4224 

I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to realize and recognize that it is that kind of statement which has been 
bandied around in Saskatchewan, and throughout the discussion of the principle of Bill 105, that is 
causing confusion in people’s minds. And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, whether it is confusion on the part of 
the members opposite and confusion on the part of, specifically, the former minister of finance and 
member for Regina North-East, that is bringing about this kind of confusion, and misunderstanding of 
all of the principles of Bill 105. 
 
THE SPEAKER: — The Acting House Leader has not entered this debate; therefore he said nothing in 
this debate. Therefore the member for Nipawin can’t attribute thoughts or words to the member for 
Regina North-East because he hasn’t been in the debate. Therefore, the member is out of order. I try to 
get the member to stick to the principle of the bill that’s before us. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I’m terribly sorry. I thought he had spoken on the bill, if not, 
certainly during the course of this particular debate, at other times, either inside or outside the legislative 
Chamber. And I thought, Mr. Speaker, it was my right to speak in reference to things that members have 
said outside the Chamber or inside the Chamber, relative to the principle of Bill 105. 
 
However, we certainly won’t carry that further. Now, Mr. Speaker, before I get on with the fascinating 
topic of bias and natural justice, because the ramifications of that, I think are extremely key with 
reference to the bill, I do wish to bring to Mr. Speaker’s attention some remarks made in the Saturday 
issue of the Regina Leader-Post by one Morris Shumiatcher, a Regina lawyer and free-lance writer, with 
reference to Bill 105. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he wasn’t commenting on the procedures in this Chamber. Mr. Speaker will be 
aware that Beauchesne is quite specific about not being able to comment on press articles about 
proceedings in this Chamber. But Mr. Speaker will also be aware that it is important for members of . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, every member of the House. The member for Thunder Creek wanted to 
bring up from his chair that we comment on press articles. Well, every member does, but Mr. Speaker 
will be aware that Beauchesne is quite specific in that it states that you may not comment on a press 
article which is commenting on the procedures of the House. But I think Mr. Speaker will be aware that 
you can comment on a press article that is pertaining to the issue before the Assembly. After all, Mr. 
Speaker, it is only fair and reasonable that if one individual, such as Mr. Shumiatcher, can set himself up 
as an expert, in so far as the people are concerned, and pass along this article to the people of the 
province, making certain suggestions to the government members with reference to Bill 105 and to his 
legal interpretation of Bill 105, I think that it is extremely important that members in the House 
understand, first of all, what are Mr. Shumiatcher’s qualifications to speak. That’s first of all. What are 
his qualifications to present himself as an expert on this matter? And, secondly, they should hear 
countering arguments to Mr. Shumiatcher’s comments, since he is attempting to speak as an eminent 
Regina attorney and expert on everything. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in commenting firstly on the qualifications of this author to make a presentation to 
the people of Regina, as he did on Saturday, I have never been able to quite understand why the Regina 
press corps seems always to run to Morris Shumiatcher for his comments and opinions on every single 
subject from soup to nuts. I have never been able to quite understand that. If Mr. Speaker desires, I will 
table this article so Mr. Speaker can have the article before him and understand the comments made by 
this gentleman in the Regina Leader-Post. I will if Mr. Speaker so desires (he 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4225 

hasn’t asked me to, so I won’t but when and if he does I would be able to table this item) so that Mr. 
Speaker will be fully aware that this man is not commenting on procedures of the House. He is only 
commenting on the principle of the bill. 
 
Now, to comment further on these qualifications . . . 
 

Point of Order 
 

MR. THATCHER: — Shocking as it may sound, I am attempting to listen to the member for Nipawin 
and I’m getting very sick and tired of that raucous conduct from the other side. If he’s got a point of 
order over there, then I wish he’d make it or acknowledge it, but it is most annoying, unparliamentary 
and everything else that goes with it. If he’s got something to say, he should get out of his chair. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I want to say, for all members of the House to hear, that at any time I can get the 
member for Thunder Creek to support me on a point of order about the decorum in this Chamber, I’m 
going to take advantage of it. And I will say to all members of the House that if they have something 
bothering them about a point of order, they should state it on their feet and not on their seat. It’s a rule in 
this House and if members have a point of order they should raise it before the House. I want to say that 
even though there was some undercurrent of noise in the Chamber, I was able to hear the member for 
Nipawin quite clearly. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that having called the House to order, 
it will definitely be in order. Now I would like to make these few brief comments about the 
qualifications of Mr. Shumiatcher to bring forward this legislation. I’ve often wondered about the press 
corps in Saskatchewan and why they keep running to this fellow. I wondered about this through personal 
experience. I wondered about this through a great many experiences when they kept running to this 
fellow although there were many eminent attorneys in Regina who could answer any number of 
questions. It suddenly came to me last week, when a member of the Saskatchewan press corps (who 
shall remain nameless) came to me and said he had taken Bill 105 to a Regina lawyer to get his opinion 
on what I’m doing. I said, who did you take it to? And he said Morris Shumiatcher. I said, why in the 
world did you go to Morris Shumiatcher? And he said because he doesn’t charge us; our regular lawyers 
charge us, but Morris Shumiatcher does it for nothing. 
 
I thought that was a very interesting point of view in the light of experience that I knew of from one of 
my former clients, a very substantial client, who on another totally unrelated matter had gone to this 
particular lawyer and asked him if he would represent him in a particular matter. Mr. Shumiatcher, in his 
so-called charge-free fashion, said, before you can sit in my office you must pay $5,000. Now these 
people were not very rich; they didn’t have a lot of money but they were required to give him $5,000 as 
a retainer to sit in his office to tell him about their problem. After that Mr. Shumiatcher made one 
telephone call and wrote one letter on behalf of that client. 
 
The person became disenchanted with the work that Mr. Shumiatcher had conducted for him and he 
went back to him and said, that’s not reasonable; give back my money. Mr. Shumiatcher’s answer was, 
no, I won’t return your money; you paid it as a retainer and that’s it; that’s my fee. Now thank goodness 
this particular client came and asked me about it. I said that’s not proper and you should go to a court of 
law and have the work tariffed. This client did that; they had it tariffed and Mr. Shumiatcher found 
himself in the position of having to refund most of the money. 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4226 

But I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the Regina press corps in its enthusiasm and the Regina Leader-Post 
in its enthusiasm for this lawyer, who doesn’t charge anything to the press, go out and invite the 
opinions of this particular individual on every subject from soup to nuts. They obviously solicited his 
opinion on Bill No. 105 because he presented it in the newspaper on Saturday evening. 
 
Now, I’d like to briefly mention, Mr. Speaker, some of the less well-known qualifications of this 
individual so that members will know how much stock to place in the article which appeared in the 
Regina Leader-Post. I think that’s important, Mr. Speaker, because members have undoubtedly read that 
article and are perhaps interested in Mr. Shumiatcher’s opinions. I thought it would be extremely 
important that they find out something about the background of this gentleman. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, any of my remarks today I am prepared, for the benefit of the press corps, to repeat 
in the corridor outside this Chamber. I pass that along to them so that they are well aware that any time 
they like, I will repeat these very remarks outside. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because the Regina press corps has been overenthusiastic about Mr. Shumiatcher, people 
may be impressed with the initials after his name. I would like to refer to the Western Weekly Reports, 
Saskatchewan, 1948 in which a justice, one Justice C.J.K.B. Brown of the court in Saskatchewan 
reported as follows: 
 

I notice that the learned counsel for the Minister of Natural Resources . . . 
 
Oh, surprise, surprise! Isn’t that a surprise, Mr. Speaker – the counsel for the Minister of Natural 
Resources? Who was the government back in 1948? – the CCF! Isn’t that a shock! Isn’t that a surprise! 
 

The counsel for the Minister of Natural Resources signs all documents signed by him and 
endorses all documents filed by him as follows: Morris C. Shumiatcher, Esq. BA, LLB, 
LLM, Dr. Jur., Barrister and Solicitor, Regina, Saskatchewan. 
 
This is so unusual as to call for comment. 

 
And I say this, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of all members and for the benefit of the press because this is 
what this judge reported. 
 

Those several indications of academic attainment can and will no doubt be recognized as 
meritorious and in other circumstances may be appropriately displayed but they no way 
assist in the argument which the learned counsel is called upon to make. In my 
experience, counsel who support such marks of distinction with most credit to themselves 
are careful to supress them in legal proceedings. 
 
It may be that in some instances the temptation to emphasize can be attributed to a 
worshipful stenographer and in such cases the matter can, of course, be overlooked. 

 
The point being, Mr. Speaker, that this individual is not quite as meritorious in so far as the judges of 
Saskatchewan are concerned or in fact his peers. I am about to get to that because I don’t think the press 
corps is fully aware of what Mr. Shumiatcher’s real 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4227 

qualifications are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to refer to a case in the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. I’d like to refer to a 
document which I do not intend to read to this House, Mr. Speaker. I’ll only quote very briefly from it. 
This was the case under which (and I’m only going to read from the front part of it) Mr. Shumiatcher 
won his appeal against a conviction. I only want to read what the charge was and what the conviction 
was, just to let members know precisely what kinds of qualifications this gentleman has in presenting all 
of these arguments he has so wonderfully presented to the people of Saskatchewan in all of his very 
great many articles that primarily appear in the Leader-Post. But in fact . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I am having some trouble relating what the member is saying to the debate 
that is supposed to be before us at this time. I question whether the Assembly is at this time concerned 
about the qualifications of somebody outside of the Assembly who is venturing his opinion on this 
debate. If somebody venturing his opinion on this debate is quoted, he in fact has as much power in this 
Assembly as the members of this Assembly, and no one is in that position except those who are elected 
to this Assembly. I have let the member go on in an attempt to find some relevance in the comment on 
the qualifications of the person who has commented on this debate. Now, this doesn’t necessarily 
exclude anyone who may have made some comments on this subject, not necessarily for this debate but 
at some time prior to this debate. Then the member is perfectly at liberty to cite those opinions in this 
Assembly in support of his argument. 
 
I want to refer for a moment to Beauchesne, Fifth Edition, paragraph 332, so that all members will be 
clear on where we stand on citing the arguments of people who are outside this Assembly on debates 
that are proceeding in this Assembly. This is subsection 1. 
 

On March 17, 1933, a Member quoting a newspaper in debate was ruled out of order by 
the Deputy Speaker who said: ‘The rule is quite clear, that the quoting of a newspaper, an 
author or a book which reflects upon debate before the House, either directly or indirectly 
is entirely out of order, because Members are here to give their own opinions and not to 
quote the opinions of others . . . Members may quote an article or a book stating facts, but 
a commentary on any proceeding or any discussion in the House with the object of 
swinging an opinion to one side or the other, is out of order.’ 

 
And that’s the end of the citation. I think the member will see clearly what I am getting at. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I can certainly see what you are getting at. And I think that was 
quite correct, Mr. Speaker – the Beauchesne’s comment on the reflecting on the debate in the House – 
and I think that that’s fair enough. But Mr. Shumiatcher was not reflecting on the debate in the House. 
He was holding himself out as a legal expert. I quote from the Regina Leader-Post, and they refer to him 
as ‘Dr. Shumiatcher’ – ‘Dr.’, if you can imagine such a thing; I don’t know of any lawyer in the world 
who uses doctor in front of his name except this one. However, Dr. Shumiatcher is a Regina lawyer and 
free-lance writer. He is presenting his view as an expert opinion to the people of Saskatchewan. Now, 
he’s not commenting on the debate. He was commenting on the principle of Bill No. 105. And he was 
pointing out some, I think interesting, if not . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member has made my case for me. He said that Dr. Shumiatcher 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4228 

was commenting on the principle of Bill No. 105. Now, we in this Chamber are not necessarily 
interested in Dr. Shumiatcher’s opinion. If Dr. Shumiatcher had written an article to the Leader-Post 
which appeared in the Leader-Post and was written prior to this debate starting, the member would be 
quite in order to stand up and quote if it were relevant to the debate. But he has written an article which 
apparently appeared in the Leader-Post after this debate began; therefore that person in effect has a seat 
in this House, if I may state it that way, and is able to voice his opinion in this House on this debate. And 
from my understanding of the situation the only members, the only people, who are allowed to voice 
their opinion in this debate are people who are duly elected to this Chamber. The member has said that 
Dr. Shumiatcher was voicing his opinion on the principle of Bill No. 105. I’m afraid I can’t accept his 
opinion in this Chamber. I’m not interested in it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I accept your ruling for what it’s worth. I hope Mr. Speaker will 
recall all the adjourned debates on Bill No. 13 that were before this House. The bill was introduced in 
December and members were bringing every single day into question period articles and newspaper 
articles quoting from outsiders on Bill No. 13. Debate commenced in December. Second reading debate 
concluded some ten days or two weeks ago and yet every single day, there were . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! It’s unfortunate that the member for Nipawin didn’t rise on a point of order 
at that time because I would have been prepared to listen. I’m not prepared to listen to his point of order 
now because really, in effect, he is debating my ruling by bringing in some other evidence which he 
feels is valid. Had it been valid when it was raised in the House, it would be valid now. But it wasn’t 
raised in the House. I can’t recall any member raising a point of order on that question. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — No, I can’t recall any member raising a point of order on that question either, Mr. 
Speaker. Certainly, as I say, I’m not prepared to debate your ruling any further. I had quite a bit of 
information on this individual which I would have been prepared to present to the members for their 
information and edification. I’m sure anyone who wants to see this information may do so outside the 
Chamber. I’d be happy to bring it up there. I hope that the Regina press corps is as fair in presenting the 
crap (unparliamentary word), the stuff, that I have on Dr. Shumiatcher as they were about presenting Dr. 
Shumiatcher’s stuff on me. That I think is only fair and reasonable and rational. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, once again we find ourselves in the position of having to debate Bill No. 105. Once 
again I have seen the House Leader, whoever that may be, rise in his place. You know, ignorance is bliss 
but I tell you in the terms of the members opposite, ignorance is a vocation. Everyday they bring 
forward this Bill No. 105. Now the document and the other business of the day are so smudged that you 
can hardly read the business of the day because they keep taking a copy from a copy from a copy. We 
are now into the eighth day in which they’ve copied the business of the people. I suggest that we get on 
with the business of the people. We have lots of time today to get on with the business of the people and 
I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Motion to adjourn debate on Bill No. 105 negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

Yeas — 3 
 
Thatcher Collver Ham 
 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4229 

Nays – 34 
 
Pepper Allen Kramer 
Baker Skoberg McArthur 
Shillington Mostoway Banda 
Kaeding MacAuley Feschuk 
Byers Vickar Cowley 
Tchorzewski Cody Koskie 
Matsalla Lusney Prebble 
Nelson Poniatowski Lingenfelter 
Solomon Berntson Larter 
Taylor Swan Pickering 
Muirhead Katzman Duncan 
McLeod   
 
MR. COLLVER: — Yes, the member for Saskatoon Centre says, getting closer – that is what it is 
doing. Every day, in every way, you get a little better. That is the only way to do it. 
 
Now, we will recall that natural justice . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You may run out of years. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, run out of time, run out of years – I am not so 
sure that is true either. Just by compounding arithmetic tables you would think you wouldn’t run out of 
years. 
 
You will recall, Mr. Speaker, in my attempts to bring to the members’ attention that Bill No. 105 was 
against the principles of natural justice, that the principle of bias was one of the most important 
principles leading to the deficiency of this amendment as it relates to natural justice. I don’t want to go 
back, because then you would say I was being repetitive. I don’t want to go back over that history. I will 
have to just interrupt, since this debate has been stretched out over the weekend. Members may forget 
just exactly where in this discussion I was. But I am sure, Mr. Speaker, they can pick up Hansard. I am 
sure they can just see it continue right along. 
 

It is sometimes difficult to determine whether any real likelihood of a bias existed. 
Nevertheless, there are cases where the court has quashed a decision of a tribunal upon 
the grounds that the aggrieved party had reasonable suspicions, without the Court coming 
to any conclusions on the matter. 

 
Now, you see, Mr. Speaker, that really says there are cases in the past in which the courts have 
determined that the likelihood of bias would create a situation (and you will recall even the likelihood of 
bias would create a situation) in which the matter would be struck down as being opposed to the 
principles of natural justice. Unfortunately, in Bill 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4230 

No. 105, although I have already proven it was biased, that it contained bias, and is therefore totally 
against the principles of natural justice, you have to color the matter, not in black and white terms, but in 
gray terms and in gray areas. 
 

Thus in R. v. Huggins, (1895) 1 Q.B. 563, it was held (upon the hearing of a summons 
under section 598(1) of The Merchant Shipping Act (1894)) that a qualified pilot 
belonging to the pilotage district within which an offence had been committed, had by 
reason of his membership of the class in whose interest the proceedings were taken, such 
an interest as would disqualify him from acting as a justice. This was so even though by 
reason of the peculiar nature of his employment as a pilot he was not brought into 
competition with unqualified pilots and had consequently no personal interest in the 
conviction. 
 
In R. v. Sussex Justices, Ex parte McCarthy (supra) the Court quashed a conviction 
where a justice’s clerk who was interested professionally in civil proceedings arising out 
of the subject matter of the complaint was present while the justices retired to consider 
their verdict. 

 
You see, Mr. Speaker, even there the decision was quashed. That is carrying it right as far to the 
extremities of the law as you can imagine. The judges weren’t even present on the matter. Yet they were 
able to proceed and attempt to get the clerk himself. The justice’s clerk proceeded to provide the 
decision and because it was biased, it wasn’t possible. 
 
In Cottle v. Cottle (1939) 2 All E.R. 535, where one of the parties alleged that her acquaintances with 
the justice were such that he would be inclined in her favor, it was held that it was not necessary to show 
that the justice was in fact biased. 
 
Now that’s where they are bringing the issue back a bit. The matter is that they are attempting to indicate 
(or there’s an attempt to build up) the British common law and the Canadian tradition. Mr. Speaker, I 
will be getting on very shortly to the Canadian example. As you are well aware, the British example is 
the one which has been followed in Canada for some hundreds of years. But, Mr. Speaker will be aware 
that there are other examples. As a matter of fact there are some Saskatchewan examples of what 
constitutes bias and therefore opposition to the principles of natural justice. 
 
I would like to leave that section on Britain at this point because I think there has been enough light cast 
upon the subject matter with reference to the British example. However, there are some cases which 
need to be brought to the attention of members to get more specific about what kinds of bias may 
disqualify when it comes to dealing with certain matters. Keep in mind the principle that a judge may 
not judge himself as we are doing in this case. In the case of Bill No. 105, the Legislative Assembly is 
judging its own actions and going totally against the principles of natural justice. 
 
These are the examples of bias which may disqualify and I am not going to cite all of them because not 
all of them are applicable. But I will cite them all to give the members a background so then we can pick 
up the ones we think are most applicable to this case. They are: (a) family relationship, (b) membership 
of organizations of various types, (c) personal hostility or personal friendship, (d) personal attitude 
toward the issue and (e) ministerial attitude. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker can see that of those five reasons which are the reasons to disqualify, 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4231 

four of them apply in this case. The first one, family relationship, does not apply. I won’t delve into the 
matter. Membership of organizations of various types – all members of this Assembly are members of a 
political party and those political parties have various and sundry views. When the members, however, 
are elected to this Legislative Assembly, they are supposed to wear two hats. 
 
They are supposed to wear the hat of their political party in so far as they are a caucus, a government 
vis-a-vis opposition vis-a-vis third party. But they are also to maintain the hat of the member looking 
after the interest of all of his constituents. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that of prime concern to all members is 
the job which they have of looking after the interests of all their constituents no matter what political 
party they may belong to. That, I think, is an overriding principle under which the members of this 
Assembly are elected. 
 
I mentioned before examples of members who from time to time have seen fit to change hats in 
midstream, as it were, to change parties in midstream. But their prime function is to look after the 
interests of all of their constituents. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker can see, therefore, that the organizations you belong to may disqualify you, as it 
comes to natural justice, for bias, because the political party, for example the NDP, does not have the 
same views as the Progressive Conservatives or the Unionest Party of Saskatchewan. Basically since the 
views are not the same, and since they are members of different organizations (you will see, Mr. 
Speaker, that the cases will bear this out), they should be disqualified from voting on, or taking part in 
the debate on an act which remunerates them and in which two members of the Assembly who form a 
minority in the Assembly, are being retroactively attacked. So, first is membership in organizations of 
various types. 
 
Second is personal hostility or personal friendship; it is against the principles of natural justice to set 
yourself up as a judge if you have either personal hostility or personal friendship. In the case of this 
Chamber, whether a man or a woman sits on that side or on this side of the House, there are personal 
animosities that develop and also personal friendships. I would be inclined to think that perhaps, in this 
place, the animosities outweigh the friendships. Even within the parties there are personal animosities 
and the reason for that is obvious. Members are chosen by local constituency organizations, not by any 
central organization, so there is no generally accepted kind of member, as it were. The members are 
chosen at the local constituency organization level and come from many and varied walks of life. I think 
the old adage that politics makes strange bedfellows is more true in this Chamber than perhaps in any 
other. And of course the strangest of bedfellows . . . Well, that would be out of order; I don’t think I’ll 
say anything further on that. I think that adage specifically applies here. 
 
Now, individual members, therefore, being thrown together in this situation, having to spend many 
hours per day, for brief bursts of time (and in the case of this particular legislative session, not so brief) 
find themselves thrown together in this Chamber and outside the Chamber as well. Although they may 
have some goals or aims in common with the people next to them, I don’t think that necessarily means 
that they are going to be good friends. 
 
I think that there are some friendships that develop, but generally speaking, because of the varying 
backgrounds and the various walks of life of individual members, there is mostly animosity. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I won’t bore the Assembly with various examples, although I well could (both bore the 
Assembly and provide the examples), but it would 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4232 

suffice to say that in the case of Bill No. 105, and the attack on the member for Swift Current and the 
member for Nipawin that the personal hostility, I think, is the most apparent. I can recall for example, 
Mr. Speaker, the 1978 election, when (I’m sorry he’s not here) the member for Regina North-East 
announced that I was the Richard Nixon of western Canada. That would certainly indicate personal 
hostility. I can remember the member for Saskatoon Centre in this very House shouting across things 
about the Bessborough, and Swiss bank accounts and all kinds of things. I can even recall Mr. Speaker, 
as late as the day before yesterday, a member of this very Chamber raising the issue of balconies and 
things like that in this Chamber. It was the member for The Battlefords. I can remember that. 
 
Mr. Speaker will be aware that there are definite examples, certainly as it relates to me. There is definite 
personal hostility that exists between members opposite and me. These are documented; they are in 
Hansard over the last five years. I won’t bore them with it. There was a period of time, though, that I 
must draw to the attention of members. Back in 1976-77, there was a period of time in which the 
legislature sat. My research staff at the time went through and examined the speeches of every NDP 
member of this legislature at the time, and there was a personal reference to me from every single 
member who spoke on every single issue, for a period of 23 days in 1976-77. In every single speech 
given by NDP members opposite on every issue there was a personal reference to me for a period of 26 
days. Well, you see, Mr. Speaker, I would think that might indicate personal hostility to any reasonable 
man observing the scene and reading through the Hansard of the time. I invite all hon. members to return 
to that period of time and examine the record, the remarks that were made, the personal attacks. Personal 
abuse actually would be a more reasonable phrase for it. 
 
As I say Mr. Speaker, it happened as late as just two days ago so it’s not past history. Two days ago a 
member rose in his place having been granted by me permission to interrupt my speech and introduce 
people. As I say I’m sorry he’s not here because certainly he might . . . I think that would indicate 
personal hostility. I don’t see anything else that you can say for it. Why would a member abuse his 
privileges in this Chamber in such a way if there weren’t personal hostility? Why would a member 
suffer the rancor of other members of the Chamber to act in such a way, if there weren’t personal 
hostility? I couldn’t imagine why anyone would show such bad manners if there weren’t personal 
hostility. I can’t think of a reason; it must be personal hostility. Now that, Mr. Speaker, as you know is a 
bias which may disqualify, and therefore, because it may disqualify, is against the principles of natural 
justice. 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, I would say the fourth example of bias which might disqualify could be difficult to 
relate to Bill No. 105, but I think that I can do it. It is personal attitude toward the issue. Under that 
category (and I intend to go into this in some depth), I would like to cite for the hon. members some of 
the comments made by the Attorney General of the province, some of the comments made by the 
Premier of the province, outside this legislature. Those are just two individuals whose views were 
published. For example (and I won’t necessarily bore the members by reciting every occasion this 
occurred) the bill was brought forward by the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, and here, Mr. 
Speaker, is an article which appeared in a Vancouver paper. It is written by Fred Cleverley, and I don’t 
suggest that is necessarily how he wrote the article. The title of the article is Is Unionest Taken 
Seriously? He opens up by saying: 
 

The speed at which Premier Allan Blakeney introduced retroactive legislation designed to 
withdraw tax money from the newly formed Unionest Party is an indication of the 
embarrassment caused by the two members of  



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4233 

the Saskatchewan legislature who have opted not only for western separation, but for 
immediate union with the United States. 

 
Well, I think Mr. Cleverley has misinterpreted a little bit. We didn’t say, immediate union. We said we 
should seek union. Nevertheless, that’s how he opens up. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to read this entire article, but with reference to personal attitude 
toward the issue this is the Premier of the province, and he would, I think, be held to be speaking on 
behalf of all ND.CP members of this legislature; I would think so. I don’t think the NDP would deny 
him. If they would we would certainly like to see an example of it. We have never yet seen the NDP 
deny anything the Premier has said outside this legislative Chamber; we’ve never seen them deny 
anything he has said outside the Chamber, so presumably the Premier speaks for all NDP members. This 
is what he says, Mr. Speaker. Now listen to this: 
 

At the western Canada premiers’ conference in Lethbridge, Premier Blakeney said it was 
never the intention of the Saskatchewan legislation to provide massive public support to 
people who want to break up Canada. He said the legislation (now get this, Mr. Speaker) 
was designed to accommodate the Liberal Party in the province, which might run 61 
candidates, and elect two. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, at the western Canada Premiers’ conference 
in Lethbridge, says it was never the intention of the Saskatchewan legislation to provide massive support 
to people who want to break up Canada. He said the legislation was designed to accommodate the 
Liberal Party in the province which might run 61 candidates, and elect two. Mr. Cleverley goes on to 
say: 
 

When the Premier returned to Regina he lost no time in introducing legislation that made 
the public support applicable to only those parties which were in existence during the last 
Saskatchewan election in 1979. This legislation will effectively freeze the new Unionests 
out of the game as far as getting tax support . . . 

 
Now, listen to that, Mr. Speaker. Here is the Premier, speaking on behalf of all of the NDP, saying that 
one political party in opposition (not his own) which got 13 per cent of the vote in Saskatchewan (I 
personally got 49.5 per cent in my constituency). . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member who introduced this bill had ample opportunity in this debate to present all of 
these facts to the people and to this Chamber. Did he avail himself? I’m about to get into that shortly. He 
is the only member of the NDP who has spoken in this debate. He has a great deal to say. He has a great 
deal to say from his chair, Mr. Speaker. He says, what about now? And I say to the minister, if this were 
a bill to force the member for Swift Current and the member for Nipawin to seek a by-election, to vacate 
the Chamber, then I could understand why he said that. If that were the case and this bill said we should 
be required, by law, as members (because we changed parties or changed our views between elections) 
to quit the Chamber and seek office by election, then his comment is perfectly acceptable. 
 
But it’s not that kind of bill. If he were to bring up that kind of bill, Mr. Speaker, one might (you will 
recall I have mentioned this before) have to remind him of the NDP and the 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4234 

potash issue. One might have to remind him about Walter Erb. One might have to remind him about the 
member for Thunder Creek and the member for Qu’Appelle. One might have to remind him of a great 
many of these issues. One might have to remind him of Winston Churchill as well. 
 
One might even have to remind him of the CCF members of the legislature who were elected and then 
changed views entirely halfway between and became the NDP. One might have to remind him of these 
instances if he should bring in such a bill. But that’s not this bill. That’s not this bill at all. I see he’s 
leaving and it’s probably just as well. 
 
Now, here’s the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan indicating to the people through the media 
that the reason the NDP brought this bill in was so that it could support the Liberal Party. That’s what he 
said in this article. The reporter, Fred Cleverley, is one of the national reporters in Ottawa, and he 
happened to be at the western premiers’ conference. So I don’t think he would misreport what the 
Premier of the province had to say. The Premier said he brought it in to help the Liberals. That’s what he 
said. That was the intention of the bill. That was why it was there before. 
 
Now, can you imagine the Government of Saskatchewan, in May of 1979 or in 1978 . . . You will recall 
that, Mr. Speaker. I brought into this debate the times that this bill has been changed – ’76, ’78, ’79 and 
now ’80. I read everything there was on the record about the introduction of The Legislative Assembly 
Act. On no occasion did any speaker from the NDP who was introducing it, one of whom was Allan 
Blakeney, one of whom was . . . I’m sorry. One was the Premier; one was the Attorney General; one was 
the member for Biggar and now it’s the member for Biggar again. 
 
It wasn’t mentioned in the Hughes committee report. At no time did they say they were going to write 
third party legislation so that the Liberals, if they ran 61 and elected 2, could be protected by third party 
legislation. Does that mean the Premier . . . I suppose not. Generally speaking I think he will find it’s a 
pity he is at the meeting which he’s attending at the moment. I think he’ll find it is probably of less value 
to him than sitting in this Chamber. At no time during the debate did the Premier of the province of 
Saskatchewan ever suggest that was the purpose of the legislation. 
 
Does that mean he was misleading the House back then? You will recall that I read every single word of 
that into the record on this debate. The Premier did not give one inkling to anyone, not a soul, that the 
purpose for the changes in The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act were, and I quote Mr. 
Cleverley again: 
 

. . . designed to accommodate the Liberal Party in the province which might run 61 
candidates and elect 2. 

 
Can you understand, Mr. Speaker, and can the members understand the implications of that statement? 
In 1978 the Premier himself introduced the changes which brought about the changes in the legislation 
for the third party. He didn’t even mention it. Mr. Speaker, that means either one of two things since that 
is the Premier’s present stand. 
 
On the one hand it could mean that the NDPers, in their cabinet and in their caucus, when they discussed 
the changes to The Legislative Assembly Act back in 1976-78 (as a result of the Hughes committee 
report), said we had better bring in this legislation to accommodate the Liberals, who in 1976 and in 
1978 were actually sitting in this Chamber. They had 12 and the Conservatives had 12 in 1978. (In 1976 
they had 15 and the Conservatives had 7.) They actually discussed in their caucus and in their 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4235 

cabinet that they should bring up legislation at that time to accommodate the Liberals who might run 61 
candidates and only elect 2 members. That’s what they said because that’s when these changes were 
made, and the Premier, when he presented the bill, and the Attorney General when he presented the bill 
(because those are the two who presented those two bills) actually misled the Chamber. 
 
Either the NDP actually discussed it behind closed doors and then the Premier came forward and 
presented it but misled the Chamber because he didn’t mention anything about the Liberals or 
accommodating them or anything, or what he says now is totally false. You can come to no other 
conclusion. Either he is telling a complete falsehood now, or he was telling a complete falsehood then. It 
can’t be both. 
 
I invite the member, who is sighing so wonderfully from his chair, to step outside and explain to anyone 
how the Premier could have made this comment at the western premiers’ conference less than one 
month ago, exactly like this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, that’s what it’s about – Bill No. 105. 
No, no, he was commenting on the existing law then, not Bill No. 105. He was commenting on what The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act stated at that point. Then he came back and 
introduced, or had the member for Biggar introduce, Bill No. 105 in order to correct the problem. He 
says originally the act was changed to accommodate the Liberals who might run 61 candidates and elect 
only 2. Now that was when the Liberals were in this Chamber you see. 
 
What other thought could you have? There was never a mention of it in the record. If that had been true, 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that there might be a great many people in western Canada, and in 
Saskatchewan, inclined to call the speaker that word which is not able to be used in this Assembly. 
There might be a great many people inclined to say that – either he did that (and I can’t use that word) 
back in 1976 or 1978 or he did at the western premiers’ conference because it can’t be both ways. There 
isn’t a possibility. Therefore the Premier misled this Assembly (or seems to have) back in 1976-78 or 
he’s not telling the truth today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me ask you this. Why would he say to Mr. Cleverley that the legislation was designed 
to accommodate the Liberal Party in the province which might run 62 candidates or 61 candidates and 
elect them? Why would he say that at this stage of the game? Why would he make that statement 
public? Well, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that that indicates nothing less than a personal attitude 
toward the issue that completely betrays what the member for Biggar said in his opening remarks on this 
bill. You see he said (and I’m going to get to that so that the members will know in detail what he said) 
generally speaking, this is a housekeeping bill. That’s all. This one is just to clean up the legislation. 
 
You talk about free speech and the rights of minorities. Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, if what the 
Premier says is true what that would mean to Saskatchewan? I wonder if the members to my right, those 
eminently qualified individuals who are sitting as Conservatives now, have considered what the Premier 
just said means in the province of Saskatchewan? At the time that they were negotiating and dealing 
(and I say this especially for the member for Rosthern) in May of 1979 on The Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act behind the closed doors, the NDP was in fact, according to the Premier, 
talking about accommodating the Liberal Party which might run 61 candidates and elect 2. Could you 
have believed that, when you voted in favor of The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
back in 1979? Can you imagine, Mr. Speaker, anyone in this House or on this side of the House (since 
we were all 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4236 

Conservatives here at that time) standing up in favor of the changes in The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Act which were specifically designed to accommodate a party that had only achieved 
13 per cent of popular support in 1978 at the time of the previous election? To accommodate that group, 
(the party of Pierre Elliott Trudeau and the federal government in Ottawa) we are going to create a bit of 
third party legislation so that if they run 61 candidates and only elect 2, they will get the necessary 
funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t you say that any reasonable person, any reasonable man, examining that would 
say that there was a bias here? Wouldn’t you say that would be the conclusion of any reasonable man 
examining the result – the legislation that was forthcoming after the Premier said this? First of all, he 
said before hand it was designed for the Liberals. After the legislation came out, it is still designed for 
the Liberals. I think I’ve pointed out in this very House that after it passes, if we select this legislation 
and vote in favor of it and proclaim it, that if the member for Swift Current and the member for Nipawin 
then declare as Liberals, then it’s O.K. Then we would get third party funding and third party 
recognition in this Chamber. Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t you agree with what I said earlier in this debate 
about the law being specifically an attack against the views of two individual members, and therefore 
totally biased? Wouldn’t you say that the words of the Premier himself have spelled that out, that this is 
in fact an attack on minority opinion? 
 
Wouldn’t you say it was specifically designed because of the recognition by the Premier of the Liberal 
Party and because the law itself would recognize the Liberal Party even after it is passed, in effect 
saying that the NDP Government of Saskatchewan would rather have the Liberals in here opposing them 
than they would have the Unionests opposing them. That’s what they’re saying, bold faced, right up 
front; that’s what they’re saying – we don’t mind the Liberal opposition and the reason, Mr. Speaker, 
that they don’t mind the Liberal opposition is because the Liberals are the Government of Canada and 
they have to deal with the Liberals from time to time. 
 
Now, the Liberals have very little support, if any, in western Canada. I’ve said it before and I’ll say it 
again: the Unionest Party has more support in Nipawin and Swift Current and in many other places than 
has the Liberal Party in terms of Saskatchewan and western Canada. That’s a fact, a demonstrable fact 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, they say it is not a demonstrable fact. Mr. Speaker, 
there was a meeting of the Liberal Party of Canada at the Sheraton Cavalier this weekend. I happened to 
be staying at the Sheraton Cavalier and I happened to have been there when that meeting commenced 
and Mr. Speaker, we have had more supporters of the Unionest Party in our office at Suite 146 in the 
Legislative Building of Saskatchewan (and it is a very, very tiny office) than the Liberal Party of Canada 
had at this meeting held at the Sheraton Cavalier this weekend. I was there and I saw what they had – 
they had nothing. 
 
The NDP says they’re O.K.; that party is O.K. We recognize them; we think they’re a good party; we 
think they’ll make a good opposition so we are ready to recognize them in opposition, but nobody else. 
The Premier himself said that was how the bill was drafted before. Now, Mr. Speaker, I can say that 
when I was the leader of the opposition in this Chamber, not for one moment would I have stood for 
(nor would any member of the caucus at the time) a bill which came into this legislature specifically 
designed to support the Liberal Party or any other specific party. At no time would we have gone along 
with that; it wasn’t mentioned and it wasn’t designed that way. It didn’t say the Liberal Party; it didn’t 
say that at all, Mr. Speaker. 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4237 

The bill was very clear. If two or more members who subscribe to a political party which is recognized 
under The Elections Act as a political party are elected to this Assembly, they shall be a party in this 
legislature. That’s what the bill says. That’s what the old law says, and that’s what the Premier brought 
forward in his remarks, that’s what the Attorney General brought forward in his remarks, and that’s what 
the member of Biggar brought forward in his remarks, when the bill came in. Not that it was specifically 
designed for one party – this legislature couldn’t stand that. 
 
No legislative Chamber could have a bill brought in designed as the Premier says, to accommodate the 
Liberal Party in the province. No legislature could withstand that kind of abuse, but the NDP with its 
majority, its overriding majority thinks it can ram that idea down people’s throats. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the answer is it can’t. 
 
Let me say this to you, Mr. Speaker. When the member for Swift Current and I first put forward the idea 
of the Unionest Party the immediate reaction was twofold. Yes, the immediate reaction on one side was 
revulsion and on the other side was support. Now, that is a fact. I would say revulsion was far more 
common than support at the time – at the time! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Barry Goldwater’s support. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Well, Barry Goldwater received 28 per cent of the popular opinion in the United 
States of America at the time he ran for president and 28 per cent at that particular juncture amounted, 
Mr. Speaker, to some 24 million voters who voted for Barry Goldwater when he ran, which is more than 
the number of voters in Canada. Mr. Speaker, that’s more than 100 per cent of the number of voters in 
Canada, so I suggest the member for Saskatoon Centre should stick to his facts and understand what’s 
going on. 
 
The point, Mr. Speaker, is this. It doesn’t matter, for the benefit of the member for Moose Jaw North . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, of course it matters about Nipawin. Those are my constituents. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I must tell you that between elections, as the member for Nipawin, I do not ask a constituent 
who phones me or an organization whether they voted for me in the last election. I don’t ask them 
whether they are Conservative, NDP, Liberal, Socred, Unionest or anything else. The most recent 
example of that is Mr. Brown, the teacher from Ridgedale, who brought his students to this Assembly 
along with two or three other people from that area. I can say to you without fear that Mr. Brown did not 
object to the steps I had taken. Nor did he object to the stand I am taking. 
 
I must tell you that a great many in the Nipawin area are in favor of the steps I took. There are people in 
the Nipawin area who aren’t in favor of the steps I took. But, my goodness, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t get 55 
per cent or 60 per cent or 80 per cent of the vote. I got 49 per cent of the vote in Nipawin. Now that 
means 51 per cent of the people, even when I was elected, were opposed to me. I might say, however, 
Mr. Speaker, that I was among the top 10 or 11 members of this Assembly in percentage of the popular 
vote. I believe the member for Moose Jaw North, for example, received considerably less than 49 per 
cent of the vote in his riding for this particular Assembly. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to go get the 
percentages. Well, he may be among the top 10 or 11 then; but I can only say, Mr. Speaker, that the vast 
majority of members of this Assembly were elected with a lot less than 49 per cent of the vote. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, here is the point. 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4238 

I don’t, as a member of this Chamber, ask people whether they are New Democrats, Conservatives or 
Liberals. I treat them all the same. That, I understand, is the role of a legislator in this Assembly. But if 
the members are interested, I will table – if that would help them to change their minds – in this 
Assembly a petition which was presented to me by my constituents in Nipawin; it is a very thick 
petition. I would be happy to table that petition, which asked that I remain an MLA under whatever 
circumstances and for whatever party – it didn’t mention party; it didn’t mention the date. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What date? 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Oh, the date – last fall. Oh, but, Mr. Speaker, the petition didn’t say which party. 
You see, Mr. Speaker, at that time – and I’m just speaking for myself – there were lots of press reports 
about how I was going to resign and about how I was going to quit the legislature and so on about my 
business – a great many press reports. And the people in my constituency at that point presented a 
petition to ask that I stay on as a member of the legislature. I don’t think that makes any difference. 
 
For example, I could drum up a petition of people living in Moose Jaw North which would ask for the 
resignation of the member for Moose Jaw North. No question about it. If I so desired, I could go out and 
find about 1,800 people to sign a petition in Regina Elphinstone to ask for the resignation of Allan 
Blakeney. Oh yes, absolutely. You know, surprisingly enough . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s not 
true. 
 
There were 1,800 people who voted against Allan Blakeney in the last election. They’d be happy to sign 
a petition asking him to resign. The point is, what value is that? I might even get more than that because 
of the way the NDP is behaving in terms of their autocratic behavior and the way they are reacting 
toward people. There has been a great deal of slippage in the last little while and they are going to find 
out that perhaps even more would sign such a petition. 
 
But that’s not the point. The point is that members don’t have to put up with this. I could go out and 
draw up a petition. As a matter of fact, if I had a petition with every single constituent of Saskatoon 
Centre asking for the resignation of the member for Saskatoon Centre because of some of his 
peccadilloes . . . If I did that, I’m not saying how many I’d get. But if I went out and had every single 
constituent sign the petition asking for his resignation, you know, Mr. Speaker, under our law (and that’s 
the way it should be) the member would not have to resign. Nor should he resign. 
 
I might go out with my little petition and I might have written on the petition – be it resolved that the 
member for Saskatoon Centre, the Hon. Paul Mostoway, resign his seat and seek re-election in a 
by-election. I might do that. But even if I got 9,000 or 10,000 or 12,000 people to sign it, what might 
happen, as has happened before from time to time, is that although that’s what the words say on this . . . 
What you do is put a nice little lie on the other side. You know, I remember the by-election in 
Saskatoon-Sutherland, when members went around saying, this is our stand in the by-election. But 
through the side door they were saying, I want you to look at the terrible things that have happened to 
the leader of the Conservative Party. 
 
I wouldn’t want to accuse anybody of doing that but there were a great many people who thought there 
were some NDP people wandering around pointing this thing at them, while they were telling them 
about the candidate. 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4239 

I don’t think that is meaningful . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the member 
for Saskatoon Centre, from his chair as usual, with his mouth full as usual, is yelling across this 
Assembly saying that the Tory candidate repented and voted for me. Is that true? I’m going to put this 
on the record now and I do want the member for Saskatoon Centre to rise and correct this if it’s wrong. 
 
The member for Saskatoon Centre said that the Tory candidate in the last provincial election, 1978, 
repented at the last minute and voted for him. You see, Mr. Speaker, the member doesn’t rise on a point 
of order to correct . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh no, he may rise. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order, order please. I think we could do with a little less assistance to 
my right here. I would ask the hon. member to confine his remarks as closely as possible to Bill 105, and 
I hope that it expedites things here in the House. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. The reason, however, that I asked the member 
to rise on a point of order on that item was to point out one aspect of Bill 105 that I’ve been talking 
about now for some time. The member said from his chair, he repented at the last minute and voted for 
me. But you see, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t say, he repented at the last moment and voted NDP. Oh no. He 
voted for me, he said, Paul Mostoway; me he said, Dick Collver; me, he said, Larry Birkbeck. Me, he 
said. That’s what he said. And that’s a fact, Mr. Speaker. The people don’t vote for a party. They vote 
for an individual. So you see, we’re right back to that argument again. 
 
Now I would like to return, Mr. Speaker, I really would because some of the members have tried to 
entice me into getting off the topic. But what I was talking about was bias and the item personal attitudes 
toward the issue. 
 
I think that Mr. Blakeney’s comments in this paper, about the legislation being designed to 
accommodate the Liberal Party, not the Conservative Party and not the Unionest Party, but the Liberal 
Party, shows a personal attitude toward the issue that is biased. It is biased, and I don’t think there’s a 
single, solitary person who could look at that evidence and not agree that that’s a bias. Now if a bias 
exists, then the bill is against the natural law. Bill 105, specifically designed to attack minorities, is 
against the natural law. We’ve already discussed what happens to legislation that is against the natural 
law. I don’t need to remind members of that again. 
 
Now (e) ministerial attitude. Although this doesn’t directly apply to Bill 105, I think it does apply since 
it was a minister of the Crown who introduced the bill – a member of the treasury bench introduced the 
bill. Now it has to be because it’s a money bill and that’s why the minister introduced it. It’s not a 
private member’s bill. That means that ministerial attitude can be used to indicate that a bias exists and 
therefore may disqualify that person from being able to judge himself. 
 
Now let’s get into the fine area of the law to figure out how far the general topic of membership in 
organizations of various carries. I pointed out that members of the NDP, members of the Progressive 
Conservatives and members of the Unionest Party are members of organizations of various types. 
Should that disqualify them from sitting in judgment on themselves through this change in The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act? 
 
The general principle is that justice must manifestly appear to be done, and this is illustrated in the 
following case. Now you remember what I said before, Mr. Speaker, on 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4240 

natural justice. Justice must not only be done, but must appear to be. In R. v. Gaisford (1892) 1 Q.B. 
381: 
 

. . . a justice of the peace who had moved a resolution at a vestry meeting and who was a 
ratepayer of the parish, subsequently sat and adjudicated with another justice upon the 
case. It was held that the justice who had moved the resolution was disqualified, as the 
part previously taken by him suggested there was a suspicion of bias on his part, although 
there might not have been, and there was also the pecuniary interest which he had in the 
case as a ratepayer. 

 
Now, think of that. Here we are sitting in this legislative Chamber, attempting to change our own 
salaries, attempting to adjust our own expense accounts. Here is a fellow back in 1892, in Britain, who is 
a justice of the peace, and he moved a resolution at a vestry meeting. He was precluded from moving the 
resolution by law, because he had already indicated that he was biased. 
 

Similarly, in R. v. Brakenridge (1884) 48 J.P. 293, it was decided that it was improper for 
a clerk of the court to act as a solicitor for the party. Again, in R. v. Sussex Justices, Ex 
parte McCarthy (1924) 1 K.B. 256, a clerk was a member of a firm of solicitors which 
was acting for a party in civil proceedings, the result of a motor accident in connection 
with which the other party was convicted of a criminal offence by the justices. The 
conviction was quashed because it was held to be improper for the clerk, who was acting 
for his firm’s solicitors, to be present when the justices retired to consider their decision. 
 
A stronger case was R. v. Essex Justices Ex parte, Perkins (1927) 2 K.B. 475, where the 
clerk’s own firm had given advice on matrimonial matters to a party who subsequently 
instituted matrimonial proceedings before the justices. The clerk retired with the justices 
while they considered their decision and it was held that objection could be taken to the 
presence of the solicitor as clerk to the justices which would create a reasonable 
impression that justice was not being done. 

 
You can see, Mr. Speaker, how far the law goes in this. They aren’t just saying that if you happen to be 
dealing with your own money, as we are here, you shouldn’t be sitting in judgment on your own case. 
They are actually going further than that; they are saying you can’t even be a member of a firm which is 
doing that. You can’t even be a party to it. You must disqualify yourself. But members don’t do that. 
Now they should have, in my judgment. They should have in 1976. I said so. They should have in 1978. 
I said so. They should have in 1979. I said so. And I say so again in 1980. This, Mr. Speaker, is not the 
first amendment to this act which has occurred in the last four years, as you know. On every single 
occasion I have suggested that the members should not be sitting in judgment on themselves. But, Mr. 
Speaker, on other occasions I wasn’t forced into the unreasonable position of having to fight for my 
rights as an individual MLA because I was being retroactively declared a lawbreaker. That is, Mr. 
Speaker, probably the major bone of contention between the NDP and myself. I don’t think it is 
reasonable to retroactively call someone a lawbreaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have broken the law. When I have, I am prepared to pay the penalty and I am prepared to 
admit it publicly. But, Mr. Speaker, I do not think that when I have not broken the law a majority should 
be able to use its power and majority to make me a 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4241 

lawbreaker retroactively. That is unacceptable; that is what’s wrong with this bill, basically and 
fundamentally. 
 

As a matter of general principle, the undermentioned cases have established that the same 
person should not act as clerk to the tribunal in the first instance, as well as clerk to the 
appeal tribunal if he appears to take any part in the discussion with the appeal tribunal. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we are the court of final appeal. That’s what this is. This is final appeal in so far as 
Saskatchewan is concerned. Now that isn’t true in terms of the country, but it is as far as Saskatchewan 
is concerned. We should act more carefully, more reasonably than any other citizen or group in the 
province. They are now doing so by attempting to pass Bill No. 105. 
 

Thus in R. v. Salford Assessment Committee, Ex parte Ogden (1937) 2 K.B. 1, it was 
held by the Court of Appeal that the Assessment Committee should be prohibited from 
allowing the officer acting clerk to the Assessment Committee to remain in attendance on 
that Committee during the hearing of the appellant’s objections and proposal and during 
the subsequent deliberations thereon. The grounds were that the Assessment Committee, 
in hearing the objections to the draft valuation list under the Rating and Valuation Act, 
was a body performing judicial or quasi-judicial functions and if the officer were present 
at the meeting of the Assessment Committee when this objection and proposal were 
being heard and advised that Committee on procedure, it would be impossible to hold 
that it was a case where justice appeared manifestly and undoubtedly to be done. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know, in this legislative Chamber, that it is possible to vote as you will. Not 
every member is motivated by the highest of morals on all issues. Not every member is motivated by the 
highest intelligence on all issues. It is only once in awhile that we are faced with an issue which is so 
obviously and manifestly unjust and unreasonable that, whether or not the public is in favor of it, we 
must not act in an unjust way, because the results of that will be anarchy, chaos, and a diminution of 
people’s respect for the law. 
 
I suppose the members can continue to believe that is not the case, that it would be better (some 
members in this Chamber think, I believe) to live in a lawless Canada than a lawful United States. Some 
members of the country believe we should live in a bilingual (compulsory) Canada rather than in the 
United States in which the language is uniform. Some members believe we should live in a Canada 
which requires and forces Ukrainian people and German people to feel like second-class citizens (and 
that’s what will happen if compulsory bilingualism is brought in) as opposed, Mr. Speaker, to living in 
the United States of America. Some members will say that. 
 
I say to the members that of all those issues the most urgent and pressing issue is that of lawlessness. If 
people do not have a respect for the law, in whatever society in which you live, whether you call it 
Canada, the United States, Britain, or any other country, then that country cannot and will not survive as 
a free society. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, with all the sincerity that I can muster, that there is no way, if 
you pass a law which is 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4242 

patently opposed to justice, natural justice and the natural law, that you will not develop in your society 
an anti-law syndrome which will in turn create all kinds of hardship. 
 
I’ll just use a prime example of that. One might say today, and this is just one example on the 
international scene, that the individuals who kidnapped and held hostage the 53 American diplomats in 
Tehran were accomplishing their aims and goals by pointing out to the world that the United States and 
others in that situation with the Shah were not reasonable or fair to the people of Iran. But, Mr. Speaker, 
in doing that, they broke the law. They broke the natural law. They broke international law which has 
held true during world wars. Japanese diplomats, for example, were sent home 10 days after the sneak 
attack on Pearl Harbour in 1941. That is an example. This is one of the first times in international 
endeavors that this has ever happened. 
 
Now, what is the result of breaking that natural law? The result of breaking that natural law is that the 
people in Iran no longer have a respect for any law of any kind and they are developing a society which 
is organized through anarchy. They can’t control any region of their country. Their entire country is 
breaking up. The city is in riotous condition. Why? Because they broke the natural law and people lost 
respect for the law. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, the situation is not like that in Saskatchewan at the 
moment. Bur this is the kind of thing that could lead the people of Saskatchewan into that disrespect of 
the laws of the province. 
 

In R. v. Architects Registration Tribunal, Ex parte Jagger (1945) 2 All E.R. 131, it was 
held that as regards the person who acted as clerk of the admission committee and of the 
registration council and who so acted when the applicant’s original application was 
considered and determined by those bodies respectively, no reasonable person could have 
suspected him of not being impartial. This applied either by the reason of the positions he 
held or by his conduct. His mere presence, when he took no part in the deliberations of 
the tribunal, did not vitiate the decision. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that means that even if members of this Legislative Assembly or legislative 
Chamber, when Bill No. 105 is finally called (whenever that may be), decide they don’t want their 
names associated with the passage of such repressive legislation and fail to stand in their places against 
the bill, they will be held by the natural law to be accountable anyway. It means you are accountable for 
the actions of this Assembly. We all are. As members, we are accountable for the actions of the 
Assembly. You may stay out of this Chamber and think you have avoided the responsibility, but there 
isn’t any way you can avoid the responsibility when it comes to bias. If the Chamber proves to be 
biased, then we will all take the smear of bias with us in our careers and our reputations. These decisions 
should be contrasted with: 
 

R. v. Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries, Ex parte Graham (1955) 2 Q.B. 140, where it 
was held by the Court of Appeal that although a sub-committee may be appointed by the 
Minister under the Agricultural Act 1948, at a hearing by a sub-committee so appointed, 
an official such as a land agent, may be present to act as clerk to the tribunal for the 
purpose of making notes of the proceedings and compiling a report which must be 
approved by the members of the sub-committee. Such official, however, must take no 
part in the deliberations of the tribunal. 

 
Now, I am sure that is obvious. The Clerk of the Legislative Assembly here takes no part 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4243 

in the proceedings. He certainly cannot be held accountable for the bias of this Chamber. But everyone 
else can be held accountable if this Chamber is biased, and therefore in opposition to the natural law. 
Every member of the government, every member of the opposition, every member of the Unionest Party 
and, Mr. Speaker, I might suggest even yourself, Sir. Even though you don’t take part in the 
deliberations as an elected member of this Chamber you, too, must bear some of the responsibility if a 
bias is shown and the natural law is abridged. And that, I think, is what these decisions are attempting to 
show – that we all have to accept part of the responsibility if we act in this irresponsible fashion. 
 

While in Re Lawson (1941) 57 T.L.R. 315, the question of the capacity of the secretary 
of the Pharmaceutical Society and its council to be present at the deliberations of the 
committee was one of substance and fact: that should justify his presence there, his 
position must be such that in substance and fact he could not reasonably be suspected of 
bias; that as, on the facts, no reasonable person could have suspected the secretary of not 
being an impartial person either by reason of his position or of his acts, the decision of 
the committee was not vitiated by his presence during his deliberations. 
 
Later it was decided in R. v. Welshpool Borough Justices, Exparte Holly (1953) 2 Q.B. 
403, that the justices were entitled to require their clerk to accompany them to their room 
to advise them on the law; and his subsequent presence in the room while they were 
discussing the facts was not sufficient objection to invalidate their decision. Moreover, as 
the shorthand writer was taking note of the evidence to which the justices were entitled to 
refer there was nothing improper in sending for her. Should such circumstances arise in 
future, it would be better if justices came into open court and requested a shorthand writer 
to read the notes required. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the author, Mr. Hewitt, goes on to discuss the role of the clerks, and I don’t really 
think that that applies to the situation of bias as it relates to this legislative Chamber. I only mention that 
to indicate the responsibilities of each of us when it comes to a presentation of ourselves when we are 
called to account before whatever bar of justice we consider important. 
 
Most members, I suppose, believe that the only thing of any value is getting re-elected. I’m not certain 
that that is the only thing of any value, but I think that’s one of the reasons Bill No. 105 has been 
brought forward. The prime motivating force that would bring this bill before this Assembly is that of 
getting re-elected. 
 
But as I tried to explain in the past, and I will continue to emphasize, that of itself is not sufficient 
motivation, and members will find that it backfires. It backfires when you go against the natural law. It 
backfires as it has in Iran. It backfires as it did in the cases that I have cited before this Assembly. It 
backfires in terms of decisions of the Government of Saskatchewan which I have already mentioned in 
this Chamber. It backfires when you go against the natural law. I say this will backfire on those 
members who support it, and this will backfire very big. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you really think that two years from today or whenever the next provincial general 
election is going to be (let’s say for the sake of argument it’s going to be two years from today), the 
political implications of the Unionest Party are going to be remembered? I would suggest to you the 
answer is no. Or the answer is going to be that everybody in the province is going to vote for him 
anyway and it won’t make any 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4244 

difference. Either the Unionest Party is going to die very quickly in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
the people of Canada are going to get together and solve their problems, or the people of Canada are not 
going to get together and solve their problems, as I believe is going to happen. There will be a split-up 
and there will be other answers chosen. There will be other solutions opted for. That’s going to be 
something that happens within the next two years. It’s not going to be something that drags on another 
10. Certainly it is apparent that’s what Mr. Levesque’s goal is. I only say to you, Mr. Speaker, that is 
going to happen very quickly. 
 
But, let me say this – let’s suppose, in the minds of every member here other than the member for Swift 
Current and myself, that the best thing happens and Canada stays together and there’s a nice provincial 
election in two years’ time, and the candidates at that time are the Conservatives and the Liberals and 
the New Democratic Party. That’s a government and two opposition parties – one of which is in the 
House and one of which is not in the House. Do you really think that anyone will give a tinker’s hoot 
what the government did to the Unionest Party two years before? The answer is no. 
 
But do you think they will remember, Mr. Speaker, that the majority of this Chamber, in an autocratic 
and overly heavy-handed way, tried to ram through this legislature an attack on minorities such as they 
are doing with Bill No. 105? I say the answer is yes. I say that’s the kind of thing the people will 
remember, and the kind of thing they will forget is whether or not we were a factor of any kind 
whatsoever. All they will remember is an attack on two members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my unpolitical way, I haven’t been totally unsuccessful politically in the past six or 
seven years. I say to the members opposite, not totally unsuccessful. I challenge any member of this 
Chamber to go out any time he wants to and take any organization that in the previous election got 2 per 
cent of the vote and build it up in five years to 39 per cent then say that he didn’t have some political 
acumen. I say to you that, in so far as the future is concerned, people will either not remember the 
Unionests or we’re going to be so big that you’re going to have to counter us some other way anyway. 
We’re either going to be so big, or forgotten. But they will remember the autocratic and heavy-handed 
attack on minorities which has existed in this legislature because that’s the kind of thing people do 
remember. 
 
Politically it’s not very smart when you go against the natural law. That’s the kind of reaction which will 
happen. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go on to the next section because, as I said earlier, there are one 
or two cases which it is necessary to bring to the attention of members under this section of bias which 
may disqualify – membership of organizations of various types. I think the members should realize how 
closely akin in their memberships within the political parties they are to these situations which are 
existent here and in which this principle of bias is being violated by Bill No. 105. 
 

In Jackson and Barry Railway Co. (1893) it was said by Bowen, L.J. at page 247: 
 
Employers find it necessary in their own interests, it seems, to impose such terms on the 
contractors whose tenders they accept, and the contractors are willing, in order that their 
tenders should be accepted, to be bound by such terms. It is no part of our duty to 
approach such curiously-coloured contracts with a desire to upset them or to emancipate 
the contractor from the burden of a stipulation, which however onerous, it was worth his 
while to agree to bear. To do so would be to attempt to dictate to the commercial 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4245 

world the conditions under which it should carry on its business. To an adjudication in 
such a peculiar reference the engineer cannot be expected, nor was it intended, that he 
should come with a mind free from the human weakness of a preconceived opinion. 
 
The perfectly open judgment, the absence of all previously formed or pronounced views 
which in an ordinary arbitrators are natural and to be looked for, neither party to the 
contract proposed to exact from the arbitrator of their choice. They knew well that he 
possibly or probably must be committed to a prior view of his own and that he might not 
be impartial in the ordinary sense of the word. 

 
Now that’s a coloration, Mr. Speaker, the other way. There’s no question about it; everybody has some 
preconceived views. So I think what the law is trying to do is say that although you can have some 
preconceived views and still act as an impartial judge, you cannot have exhibited them, and I think this 
is the principle they are attempting to state. Because you belong to a specific organization, you cannot 
through that organization specifically exhibit a bias because if you do then the natural law says that you 
must not sit in that position. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, can any reasonable man suggest that political parties have not taken public stands, 
that individuals who sit in this legislature as members of that party have not taken public views and 
public stands that would indicate a bias in opposition to the Unionest Party, the Premier of 
Saskatchewan suggesting he’d rather have the Liberals in opposition than anybody else? I think that 
obviously and totally exhibits a bias which members will know is a bar to natural justice. 
 

Again, in Ives and Barker v. Williams (1894) 2 Ch. 478, Lindley L.J. observed (at p. 488) 
. . . 

 
He mentioned again about subcontractors and I’ve mentioned that issue and I don’t want to go on. 
 
Eckersley v. Mersey Docks and Harbour Board 1894 – I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, that that was a very 
famous case. This is the third or fourth time that we’ve heard this case as it related to natural justice and 
to the principles of bias and other principles of natural justice. It is a very, very famous case. 
 

. . . it was held by the Court of Appeal that the rule which applies to a judge or other 
person holding judicial office – namely, that he ought not to hear cases in which he might 
be suspected of a bias in favor of the parties – does not apply to an arbitrator, named in a 
contract, to whom both the parties have agreed to refer disputes which may arise between 
them. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s no arbitration clause in The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Act, and the reason that there isn’t is that it is presumed and expected, I think, all members of this 
legislative Chamber will not use their position either in minority or in majority to attack other members 
of this Assembly. And the reason why that is so obvious and apparent, Mr. Speaker, is because at some 
time in future a member of one party can find himself in opposition. 
 
I wonder if anyone is bothering to follow the news on Ed Ziemba in the Ontario House. Now the 
circumstances are not the same. He was tossed out of the House by the 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4246 

Speaker for refusing to withdraw some remarks he made about some members and his own party 
members have stated that they are in favor. I shouldn’t say thrown out of the House. Interestingly 
enough they have a nice rule there, Mr. Speaker. He may attend the House but he may not speak or 
move a motion or ask a question or any of those sorts of things. He can attend on his constituents but he 
may not do that. I wonder how many members have been following the case to see what he is today. He 
may be something else tomorrow. 
 
Here’s this man who on principle brought something up in the Legislative Chamber. The Speaker ruled 
that he must withdraw. He refused to withdraw because he believed that what he brought up was correct. 
He was then handed this punishment. Now suddenly he found himself out of sorts not only with the 
opposition parties, but also with his own party because the Speaker of the Ontario legislature is an 
NDPer. So he suddenly found himself in the position where his own party was against him. So now he’s 
crying in the papers that he can’t understand why his own party would be against him. 
 
His own party is doing an interesting little thing. Members are standing up for the Speaker there, Mr. 
Speaker, and outside the House they are saying, but we think what the member said is right. Can you 
imagine that? I don’t know; they obviously have different rules down there about members speaking 
outside the House. I would have thought that if Mr. Cassidy or someone else from the Ontario 
legislature happened to be sitting in the Saskatchewan legislature and said, outside the House on TV, 
we’re going to stand up for the Speaker but what our member here said is right, there is political 
patronage involved in these two seats. I would have thought that because the Speaker ruled against Ed 
Ziemba that he would also rule against Mr. Cassidy. But maybe even there it’s hard to overcome the 
political bias which sometimes exists in all of us. One would hope, though, that we would make an 
attempt, Mr. Speaker, although we’re not always successful, to eliminate political bias. If we are to 
follow the principles of natural law, we should certainly try to overcome the tendency to be politically 
biased. 
 

In Panamena Europa Navigacion (Compania Limitida) Frederick Leyland & Co. Ltd. 
(1947) A.C. 428, it was held by the House of Lords that by entering into the contract the 
repairers agreed that the shipowners’ surveyor should discharge the duties both of expert 
and of quasi-arbitrator and, therefore, could not claim that he must be in a position of an 
independent arbitrator . . . 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, that’s just an attempt to try to give the law some distance between black and white 
to indicate the grey part of the law which exists with reference to people attempting to judge themselves. 
 
Now I mentioned a second area, if you like, a bias which may disqualify, is personal hostility or 
personal friendship. Now, Mr. Speaker, it may be necessary at some further time to indicate that 
personal hostility exists in this House. I hesitate to do this because it would be calling attention to 
various things. I mentioned earlier the personal hostility toward me. I will read cases to indicate that it 
doesn’t have to occur only against me. It can occur against any member, against anyone and shows that 
the situation is such that members should be disqualified for their actions. 
 

In the well known case of Maclean v. Workers’ Union (1929) 1 Ch. 602, it was said by 
Maugham J. at p. 625 that Blackburn J. in R. v. Rand (1886) L.R. 1 Q.B. 230, 232, 
referred to the objection of bias in the nature of ‘a challenge 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4247 

to the favour’. Maugham J. went on to say (at p. 625): 
 
‘Whatever may be the precise meaning of this phrase, I think that mere personal 
prejudice, even resulting from a previous dispute or altercation, is not comprehended 
within the term. 
 
It is doubtful whether this dictum can be supported as a general principle.’ In a voluntary 
organization there is often friction among members which leads to expulsion and the 
rules of such organisations generally permit the members to act as judges in their own 
cause. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not a voluntary organization although we all voluntarily come to it. We are 
compelled to act in this Chamber in a certain fashion and therefore we don’t do it voluntarily. 
 

Consequently, an expelled member will find it difficult to get his expulsion set aside by 
the court simply by showing that the members were not impartial towards him. 

 
I’m not trying to suggest that a political house, like the legislature in the province of Saskatchewan, 
should in some possible or potential way be not impartial. Of course, we’re not impartial. We are 
political opponents. I think that’s what these cases are going to show. It’s not a matter of not liking what 
the person stands for or not being totally impartial. It is when a personal hostility is shown that that can 
be a bias which may disqualify. ‘It will be necessary to establish that the members did not act fairly 
toward him and made up their minds before hearing his case.’ 
 
Did you hear that, Mr. Speaker? The members made up their minds before hearing his case; that would 
be the necessary action on the part of any group of individual who is not attempting to break the natural 
law. 
 
I draw to your attention the Premier’s comments under Fred Cleverley’s column which appeared 
recently in Vancouver. I also draw your attention, Mr. Speaker, to the comments made by the Attorney 
General: 
 

Romanow said Collver had made his point, he should let it go through. No matter how 
long the Unionest Leader continues, Romanow said the bill will go through sooner or 
later with the majority government vote. 

 
Now, I draw those two comments to your attention Mr. Speaker, because it indicates that before the 
decision is made, the NDP Leader and the NDP Deputy Leader, who as I’ve said before, are speaking on 
behalf of all of the NDP members of this legislative Chamber, have made up their mind prior to the 
passage of this bill. This means that is a bias which may disqualify under the natural law. 
 

This is shown in White v. Kuzych (1951) A.C. 585, where the Privy Council said, (at 
pages 595 and 596): 
 
. . . their Lordships are bound to conclude that there was, before and after the trial, strong 
and widespread resentment felt against the respondent by many in the union and that 
Clark, amongst others, formed and expressed adverse views about him. If the so-called 
‘trial’ and the general meeting 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4248 

which followed had to be conducted by persons previously free from all bias and 
prejudice, this condition was certainly not fulfilled. It would, indeed, be in error to 
demand from those who took part the strict impartiality of mind with which a judge 
should approach and decide an issue ‘between two litigates – that icy impartiality of a 
Rhadamanthus’ which Bowen L.J. and Jackson v. Barry Railway Co. (1893) 1 Ch. 238, 
248, thought could not be expected of the engineer arbitrator or to regard as disqualified 
from acting any member who had held and expressed a view that the ‘closed shop 
principle was essential to the policy and purpose of the union. What those who 
considered the charges against the respondent and decided whether he was guilty ought to 
bring to their task was a will to reach an honest conclusion after hearing what was urged 
on either side, and a resolve not to make up their minds before hand on his personal guilt, 
however firmly they held their conviction as to union policy and however strongly they 
had shared in previous adverse criticism of the respondent’s conduct.’ 

 
Mr. Speaker, can any reasonable person doubt in the province of Saskatchewan, given the statements of 
Allan Blakeney before Bill No. 105 is even introduced, given the statements of the Attorney General 
when it is first introduced, that there was a will to reach an honest conclusion after hearing what was 
urged on either side? Mr. Speaker, I submit to you that because The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act is an act to provide for the indemnity of members, that members who have already made up 
their minds in advance before hearing both sides must be guilty of bias, which must disqualify them 
from proceeding along the case. Mr. Speaker, the point is that members, through their leaders here, well 
in advance of this legislation, expressed their views. They said that the bill will go through with an NDP 
majority anyway. At any rate, it will go through. Therefore, they are biased. They are not able (because 
they are dealing with their own pay, their own perquisites and their own party status), under the natural 
law, to judge themselves. They are biased. 
 
In Law v. Chartered Institute of Patent Agents (1919) 2 Ch. 276, it was laid down that a person who had 
a judicial duty to perform was disqualified from performing if he had a bias which rendered him 
otherwise than an impartial judge or if he had so conducted himself in relation to the matters to be 
investigated as to lead a reasonable man to suspect that he might have such a bias. Thus where the 
counsel of the defendant institute in the investigation of the complaint, had acted in the performance of a 
judicial duty as both accusers and judges, it was held that the resolutions for the expulsion of a plaintiff 
from membership of the defendant institute must be declared invalid and ultra vires. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I realize that whatever I present to this legislative Chamber is probably going in one 
deaf ear and out the other. We can show that it is in opposition to the Canadian Bill of Rights. We can 
show that it is in opposition to the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights. We can indicate that it is in opposition 
to the tradition that members must act on behalf of all constituents and not just on behalf of party 
constituents. We can present all of these arguments. The members have announced already that they 
have made up their minds and they are going to pass the bill anyway. 
 
You wouldn’t allow me to talk about Mr. Shumiatcher so I will just present his idea to you. It is an idea 
of my own. He was just confirming an idea which I already had. That is, Mr. Speaker, what is the need 
for Bill No. 105, when all you really have to do is interpret the existing bill in a different way? That is 
all you really have to do. 



 
June 9, 1980 

 

 
4249 

Mr. Speaker, the point is, why put the people of Saskatchewan through this? Why put the member for 
Nipawin through this? I have already told members opposite if that weren’t satisfactory, there are other 
ways to change the law that would be realistic and reasonable. I might not like them, but they wouldn’t 
be attacking individual members. They wouldn’t be against natural justice. They wouldn’t be against the 
Bill of Rights. They wouldn’t be against any of these things. They would be the choice of the legislature 
to decide. 
 
Now frankly, Mr. Speaker, I realize all of those arguments are also falling on deaf ears. In other words, 
the NDP (which I have never been able to understand) refuse to accept anything except their own initial 
idea on how to change something. I have never been able to understand that attitude. 
 
If someone comes up with a better way to change something, if you really want to change it, if you are 
bound and determined you are going to change it, why in the world won’t you take the better way? That 
is what I don’t understand. Is it something which goes against the mind of someone who is so narrow 
and so straight that that is the only way to do it, or is it something which you think is a political 
problem? 
 
If the problem, politically, is the fact you don’t want taxpayers’ money to go to someone who is going to 
break up Canada, then you can figure out other ways to do it. One is to take the way in the law which 
says there can be no leader and a party. Now, of course, one of the things that anyone who puts forward 
that suggestion doesn’t recognize is this, that a month or two months from today, maybe another 
member will join the Unionest Party. Then that particular way of avoiding the law might not be so good 
any more. All of a sudden, taxpayers’ money is going to an outfit they think (I don’t think) is out to 
break up Canada. So you see, there’s the point. Another member may come over, and then there would 
be three, not just two. 
 
But I say to them, that’s one way of looking at it. There are others. I realize that what I’m saying is 
falling on deaf ears over there. It’s too bad it’s falling on deaf ears. I’m starting to lose hope. I really am. 
I’m starting to lose my heart. I had a lot of heart and enthusiasm for this debate but when I hear the 
member for Biggar yell order, he’s starting to give me back my hope and my heart again. 
 
I was starting to drift away there for a minute. If your heart’s not in the debate and you don’t have any 
hope for success, that might shorten the debate considerably. But with the member for Biggar yelling 
order all the time, when I know that I am in order, then I might just get my heart back. As a matter of 
fact, that just shot some adrenalin back into my soul. 
 
I feel much better now, and I thank the member for Biggar. It’s just given me some new enthusiasm and 
I would want to return because I know this is exciting to members. I know this is uplifting and giving 
them all kinds of information and facts. You will remember that I was talking about the personal attitude 
toward the issue. I pointed out Mr. Romanow’s attitude and the Premier’s attitude and other attitudes 
toward the issue. That would certainly indicate that the spokesmen for the members opposite (and they 
haven’t denied this) are suggesting they have already made up their minds. If they have already made up 
their minds then they’re biased against natural justice. 
 

Thus in R. v. Deal Justices (1881) 45 L.T. 439, it was held that where justices who were 
subscribers to the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals and who took 
part in the case, there was nothing in these facts to 



 
June 9, 1980 
 

 
4250 

create a real bias in the minds of the justices which would amount to a disqualifying 
interest. 

 
Now you can see, Mr. Speaker, that they are being more than fair to animals here. But the members 
opposite must consider us to be less than animals in dealing with us in the way that they have with Bill 
105. 
 

Similarily, in R. v. Barton, Ex parte Young (1897) 2 Q.B. 468, a magistrate who was a 
member of the Incorporated Law Society . . . 

 
Well, for the member who just shouted across the Chamber that we’re not listening, I suggest to him that 
because of the importance of this issue and the importance of these cases I’ve been citing, then he’s only 
wasting his time here. He shouldn’t even bother coming into the Chamber. He should vote for adjourned 
debate or he should bring in closure or he should vote for adjournment of the House. . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . Mr. Speaker, it being near 5 o’clock, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. The member’s not in order to move a motion. The member has already 
moved the House do now adjourn. Order! The member originally moved that the debate be adjourned. 
He has now moved that the House be adjourned. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adjourn the 
House? The member has lost the motion. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, I then return to the debate and I will proceed with personal attitude 
toward the issue unless Mr. Speaker realizes it is 5 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


