






















































Hansard: May 20, 1980


3213 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 20, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Hon. D. W. CODY (Kinistino): — Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me today to have the opportunity to 
introduce to you and to the members of the House, 70 Grade 6 students from St. Dominic School in 
Humboldt. I am introducing them today in the absence of the Minister of Finance, their MLA, Mr. 
Tchorzewski, because he is out of the province on business. I want to welcome the students here and hope 
they have a good and educational time in the House this afternoon. I will be meeting them a little later for 
drinks and pictures. I also hope they have a safe journey home. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Use of Screenings for Livestock Feed 
 
MR. D. G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Agriculture. On the weekend I spent a lot of time visiting pastures in the constituency. I see that the drought 
task force met in Regina on Friday and recommended programs for feed, transportation and emergency water 
supplies. What plans is your government prepared to announce to help the livestock producers of this 
province? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. member, I 
report that a task force did meet. They have a proposal as outlined in the press release and as indicated by the 
hon. member. I report to the hon. member and to the House that I have asked the staff of the Department of 
Agriculture to get in touch with the various farm organizations this afternoon about the possibility of 
discussing the package as outlined, perhaps over the phone or perhaps arranging a meeting for as early as 
tomorrow to look at it, to see whether it is complete or whether something should be added to the package. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — A supplement, Mr. Minister. A few days ago, my colleague for Thunder Creek 
suggested we start cleaning grain in the elevators in our province, thereby having the screenings available for 
feed. What recommendations have you given regarding this suggestion? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the issue of availability of grain, the department is in 
contact with the Canadian Wheat Board with respect to the availability of stocks. That item will be part of 
the agenda along with alfalfa purchase, cattle transportation, feed transportation, water and so on to be 
discussed with the farm organization, as I say, this afternoon or perhaps tomorrow. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Final supplementary. It points out in this editorial that many ranchers and cattlemen are 
thinking of dumping their herds at this time. Will you assure this House, Mr. Minister, that in your 
deliberations you will make adequate provision for 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3214 

feed grains? You realize and I do that the alfalfa crop, the hay crop is ruined; so we have to do something for 
feed grains. Will you assure us there will be some provision made to have an adequate supply of feed grains 
so people won't have to decrease their herds and therefore damage the livestock industry and eventually the 
consumers in this province also? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, my reports with respect to the situation are not quite as critical as the 
hon. member indicates. It is true the private pastures are in very serious shape. This is the area where we will 
be involved in some cattle movement I suspect. The provincial pastures, the PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Act) pastures, except for the east central area (which is in the Yorkton area and the hon. 
member knows there was a very severe drought there last year) remain not too bad. In fact, most of them 
have a carrying capacity well into June. So the situation is not quite as critical with PFRA pastures and 
provincial pastures as with the private pastures; although I think it is essential that we do gear up. That is the 
process which is going on now. 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture. I wonder if it 
would be proper for you to review the possibility of opening up tourism lands which have been formerly shut 
off from grazing rights to the cattle industry and whether it would be a workable solution to open up certain 
tourism lands held by the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources for grazing rights formerly not 
open to the cattle breeders? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I think obviously alternatives will be considered. I was not aware 
there were grazing lands available. Certainly I will put that forward to the department. 
 

Volcanic Ash 
 
MRS. J. H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — A question to the Minister of the Environment. We are now 
witnessing, Mr. Minister, the phenomenon of volcanic ash falling over a widespread area of Saskatchewan. 
What procedures has your department put into place to adequately monitor the effects to the environment by 
the fall-out of this ash? 
 
HON. G. R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, there has been a committee 
of deputy ministers established, of which the deputy minister of environment is the chairman, which 
includes, health, agriculture, labour and urban affairs. We do have within the province a monitoring system 
set up for examining air quality and other matters. These are functioning. The Department of the 
Environment has been in touch with other agencies in Alberta, Manitoba, as well as in Montana and North 
Dakota. There is a close working relationship established. There has been, up to this point in time, no 
immediate danger either from the chemical hazards of volcanic ash, or any great danger from the fall-out of 
the ash itself. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Could you inform the House where these monitoring stations are located, particularly 
in the Southwest? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — At Regina, Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Weyburn, Melville, Saskatoon, North 
Battleford, Yorkton, Lloydminster and five stations at Coronach. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Because the concentration of the ash appears to be thickest in the extreme Southwest, 
because scientists have predicted that the effects of the fall-out could be with us for up to two years (that's 
just the effects of the initial blast, not to say 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3215 

what is going to happen in the future) does your department have any plans for establishing a permanent 
monitoring station in the extreme Southwest? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I attempted to indicate to the hon. member that the monitoring 
stations are there on a permanent basis relative to other air qualities in the province. They will continue to 
monitor this situation along with others. I understand that the readings, which began in Regina relative to the 
haze and the actual fall-out of materials, are below the 24-hour ambient air quality standard which we have 
for the province. As to the future, we'll just have to take it as it comes from time to time. The monitoring 
system is there. We will be utilizing it for that purpose. 
 

Reduce Speed Limit to 90 km./hr. 
 
MR. H. J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — A question to the Minister of Highways. Over the weekend I 
heard the Minister of Highways state he would like to reduce the speed limits on Saskatchewan highways to 
90 km./hr. except on the Trans-Canada. He also stated that the majority of people in the province support 
this move. My question to the minister is, what documentation do you have for the statement that the 
majority of people in Saskatchewan support the move? 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the members 
would take the time to read the Thibault report which was tabled in 1975, they would see that as far back as 
then there was a very, very, strong lobby for people to bring the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it 
certainly is. And the situation is worse, Mr. Speaker. It is also true that most of Canada and all of the United 
States have gone to a 55 mi./hr. speed limit. I am not suggesting (and bear in mind this is only a suggestion 
for discussion) that we wouldn't be disrupting Trans-Canada traffic. The Yellowhead is also Trans-Canada in 
my opinion. There are other four-lane highways that certainly would not be considered, I think in any 
sensible procedure. However, if we can reduce the use of energy by approximately 10 per cent and the 
incidence of serious injury and death by 5 per cent, I think we all have to take a mighty close look at it. 
That's why I am putting it forward for public discussion. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary to the minister. On the CBC this morning, 85 per cent of the people calling 
did not support the move to reduce the speed limit. Now, I think that doesn't verify your statement which 
says that the majority of people are supporting it. Are you prepared to admit that you really had no 
documentation for your statement this weekend? 
 
MR. KRAMER: — I certainly am not and I'm not prepared to use figures, Mr. Speaker, that are being put 
forward by biased reporters. I just finished listening to one — people who are coaxing questions out of 
people. I would sooner go by our safety experts, the safety surveys and the letters I have had over the years. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am, I think, to some extent a recent convert. The pressure was on me at the 
time of the introduction of seat belts in Safety '77 to reduce the speed limit to 55. I resisted that because I 
wanted the seat belt law to stand clearly on its own feet, which it did. We have the statistic clearly to one 
side. 
 
I'm prepared now to consider another step forward, not only in safety but in the saving of energy along with 
the rest of Canada. It has been accepted throughout most of the rest of Canada. We're not talking about the 
Trans-Canada Highway, we're talking about the highways and byways where most of the accidents occur. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3216 

MR. SWAN: — Supplementary to the minister. If you had a report in 1975 that stated you should be 
reducing the speed limit and you didn't, I wonder why you waited so long. I would like to have you table the 
information before this legislature that says the majority of people support it. If you fail to table it will you 
go out and apologize to the people of Saskatchewan for a very false and misleading statement. 
 
MR. KRAMER: — The only thing I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that the people opposite never get tired of 
being wrong. 
 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — A question to the Minister of Highways. In light of your announced 
policy of intending to reduce the highway speed limits, one of the reasons you've given for such reduction is 
the safety factor. Would the minister, in light of the past experience of reducing speed limits, indicate at 
what point in time after this next reduction there will be an increase in the automobile insurance rate which 
seems to follow every new safety program you implement? 
 

Fire in Primrose Bombing Range 
 
MR. G. M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Question to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Minister of Northern Saskatchewan have you by now been able to establish that the massive 
fire in the Primrose bombing range was in fact started by the crash of the American armed forces plane? 
 
HON. J. A. HAMMERSMITH (Minister of Northern Saskatchewan): — One of the three large fires in 
the weapons range — the most recent one — was started by the crash of an American air force jet. The other 
two fires were started on the Alberta side of the border, and there's some discussion yet as to the exact cause. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Since you do in fact have the information that a fire was started by the American air 
force jet flying out of the Canadian Armed Forces Base at Cold Lake, have you as the minister responsible 
for northern Saskatchewan made any official representation to the Department of National Defence, with a 
view to requesting compensation in helping with the massive cost of fighting that fire? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, the member for Meadow Lake will know that there has been in 
existence for a number of years an agreement between the Government of Canada and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, an agreement which, among other things, provides for an annual payment to the Government 
of Saskatchewan to cover part of the cost of such contingencies as forest fires. In addition to the annual 
payment, the agreement provides for a 50-50 cost sharing on suppression of any forest fires in the range, the 
cost of which suppression exceeds $10,000 per fire. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it not the case that the fire we're referring to, which 
was in fact started by the American air force jet, is burning and has burned out of the boundaries of the 
Primrose bombing range, and that the costs will now be borne by your department basically, and the 
firefighting costs will be much greater than would normally be the case had it been confined to the Primrose 
bombing range? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I have not been informed of the fact the fire is outside the range, 
and if so, to what extent it is; so I'm unable to provide a specific 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3217 

answer to the member on that matter. I will seek an answer and provide it to him in due course. 
 

Twinning Federal Ridings 
 
MR. D. M. HAM (Swift Current): — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, 
are you aware of a move by the federal Liberal government to ignore western protests and proceed with plans 
to twin federal ridings, not represented presently by Liberal MPs, and do you support this concept? 
 
HON. A. E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I was aware of the news stories which suggested 
there will be a twinning and perhaps there has been twinning. I think it somewhat fanciful to suggest that the 
member for, let's say, Timiskaming or Temiscouata is going to have a full grip on the problems of Calgary 
North or of Lloydminster, or whatever. While I think it may be some evidence of a desire to communicate 
more effectively with western Canadians, I doubt very much whether that particular device will prove very 
effective in that connection. 
 
MR. HAM: — Supplementary. Mr. Premier, first of all I ask you again, do you support the concept? 
Secondly, are you aware of any twinning proposals for Saskatchewan seats? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don't oppose the concept, but do not support it because I don't think it 
will be effective. As for twinning of Saskatchewan seats, our government has no information on whether or 
not the Liberal Party proposes to twin with Saskatchewan seats. 
 
MR. HAM: — Final supplementary. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Member for Arm River. 
 

Government Action re Commercial Cemeteries 
 
MR. G. S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. In view of the fact you 
perceived it as a joke about your involvement with commercial cemeteries, will you, Mr. Premier, inform 
this Assembly what you have accomplished as Premier from 1971 to 1980? With regard to the commercial 
cemetery fiasco or cemetery mess, which was operating for gain in the province from 1952 to 1980, what are 
you as Premier doing or have you done to clean up this mess? 
 
HON. E. L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Mr. Speaker, as minister in charge of The Cemeteries 
Act, I want to assure the hon. member opposite we will reserve a space for him. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COWLEY: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I have been minister in charge of The Cemeteries Act 
for, I believe, four years. I do not recall a letter coming to my office from a patron of a commercial cemetery 
during those four years. Now I may be mistaken; there may have been one that I can't recall, but it doesn't 
seem to me to be so. And I will tell you that the patrons have lots of relatives, as the member opposite will 
know, and they haven't been writing to me either. We have had problems; MLAs have talked to me about a 
couple of them and we solved those in terms of how a cemetery looked. But as for problems with contracts, 
people losing their money and anything like that, I don't 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3218 

recall any complaints in the four years I have been minister. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Do you not agree there is a problem with 
commercial cemeteries? We will pick one for instance. Weyburn memorial gardens, where your government 
has slipped under-the-table money to the tune of $114,150 in the last three years and even more if we want to 
go back to 1971. Now Mr. Premier, please answer the question. 
 
MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly be pleased to answer that question. The member 
talks about under-the-table money. I am sorry the member has never been here through our estimates because 
they have been voted every year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COWLEY: — And it may have been under-the-table, but that's only because the member was in the 
wrong position when he was viewing the estimates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COWLEY: — I want to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the members will check the record last year, I 
believe we even had a supplementary estimate which was solely due to the cemetery at Weyburn. I believe, if 
you check the transcripts, you will probably find my explanation of it in there. If it were under the table, Mr. 
Speaker, I am sorry, but I don't know how we could make it more public than that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Do you not agree, Mr. Premier, that any 
moneys paid to commercial cemeteries over the last nine years since you have been Premier should have 
been passed through the estimates? 
 
MR. COWLEY: — All I can say, Mr. Speaker, is that I think the member is passing something else. I 
thought that was what I said in answer to the last question. I appreciate the need for the members opposite to 
be well-prepared and to have their supplementary questions written out ahead of time. I have always found it 
a good policy that when the answer to the first question doesn't relate to the supplementary you want to ask, 
you should probably change the supplementary. 
 

Oil and Gas Fired Plant at Estevan 
 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of SPC 
(Saskatchewan Power Corporation). Mr. Minister, just recently the manager of SPC, Fred Ursel, in an 
interview with the Toronto Globe and Mail, mentioned what was taking place in the building of new power 
plants in Saskatchewan and their requirements. In this article he mentioned the SPC is going to retire 
expensive oil-and gas-fired plants at Estevan and Saskatoon. Now where is the oil-and gas-fired plant at 
Estevan? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have not seen the article which the member for Estevan alludes to. 
It could be there was some error in the reporting of what Mr. Ursel had said; however as far as Saskatoon is 
concerned, the station there is capable of burning oil as well as coal. 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3219 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, in this article he also states the possible three locations for plants are at 
Diefenbaker Lake, Courval, and possibly the first hydro unit at Nipawin. I've asked you this before and you 
said you hadn't considered it, but I would like to know now; with the 450 million tons of reserve coal at 
Estevan and the potential for a lake behind the proposed Rafferty Dam which would contain 650,000 
acre-feet of water, or about five times as much water as Boundary Dam, has SPC considered taking the 
power plant to where the coal is instead of taking the coal to where the power plant is proposed? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are possibilities of taking the power plant to coal locations 
other than Estevan. We have the problem at Estevan of water supply and I know the member has a solution 
to that. That's not without some cost and environmental consideration would have to be contended with — 
very significant ones. We are also very much concerned about all or the majority of our power producing 
facilities being located in one region of the province. It makes good sense to have some of that production 
capability spread throughout the province, perhaps closer to the southwestern portion of the province. 
Certainly there is a growing need for some greater security of production capabilities in northern 
Saskatchewan where our heavy demand is coming from. 
 
MR. LARTER: — A second supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the potential is not only for an 
extra power plant there (a brand new power plant), but also the body of water (650,000 acre cubic feet) 
supplies a potential for fresh water for Regina which is possibly more feasible than Lake Diefenbaker. Also 
there is an indication that the U.S. federal government and the Government of North Dakota would be 
willing to share in this dam rather than build one down at Burlington, North Dakota. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I hear what the member is saying. We have not discarded it out of 
hand; that is a possibility. We are just saying the timing we have in order to make a decision on the new 
power facility for Saskatchewan does not include that as an option. I am sure the member would agree with 
me that, even though there is support from other jurisdictions to look at that as the source of another 
generating capacity for SPC, given the time we have to turn on another plant of something in the 
neighbourhood of 300 to 500 megawatts, it is just not before us at this point. 
 

Jurisdiction of Television Programming 
 
MR. R. L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Attorney General. In your ongoing confrontation 
with the federal government relating to the total communications field, is it the position of your government 
that television programming is more properly left in the hands of the provincial jurisdiction as opposed to the 
wider federal jurisdiction of CRTC for such things as Canadian content rules, Canadian culture and 
television programming in general? Is that the position of your party? 
 
HON. R. J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, the position of — I was going to say all of 
the provinces but that may not be quite accurate — most of the provinces is that there is a greater role for 
them with respect to the programming-licensing aspects of cable television. The round of constitutional 
discussion, which was very active between the period of October 1978 to February 1979 and sporadically 
since that time, reflects the expression of opinion I have just stated. In fact the former Conservative minister 
of communications, David MacDonald, in the one meeting he convened of the communications ministers, 
went so far as to acknowledge that hardware ownership should be exclusively in the control of the provinces. 
As to the 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3220 

actual programming content, I think all the provinces would like to see a greater say for them, (keeping in 
mind the broader national framework). 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary. Does the Attorney General in that context acknowledge that when 
programming is left in a regional area or in a provincial area that the whole question of national unity, the 
whole question of the cultural movement of Canada, can stand in jeopardy as we have one region against 
another? And does it not magnify the regional question, the regional problem, by moving in that field? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, keep in mind the question was based on cable television. With 
respect to cable television we must be absolutely clear that we're dealing here with virtually the wholesale 
importation of American programming. We are not talking about a network kind of programming along the 
lines of the CBC network or the CTV network where there is a pooling of national cultural standards. With 
respect to cable television we're simply taking the American signals holus-bolus and applying them there. It's 
not 100 per cent true because it's treated as a community channel. But there can't be any kind of national 
connection to this. Accordingly the degree of relevance that the hon. member attaches to that national 
perspective does not apply to cable television. Of course, this government is a strong advocate of both 
regional culture promotion and Canadian cultural promotion. 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 11 - School Bus Safety 
 
MR. R. N. NELSON (Yorkton) moved, seconded by the member for Kelvington-Wadena (Mr. Byers): 
 

That this Assembly commend the Government of Saskatchewan, its agencies, the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association and the school boards of this province for their 
ceaseless efforts in the promotion of school bus safety which in the last year has seen the 
introduction of: (1) one of the most comprehensive school bus safety inspection programs in 
Canada; (2) the first ever safety standards in Canada for van type vehicles converted into 
school buses; (3) the development of a new and innovative school bus driver training 
program for implementation in the fall of 1979, plus a stringent and comprehensive testing 
program combined with demanding physical fitness standard. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, as a teacher of many years standing I am most pleased to move this resolution. While 
doing my research on this I discovered that over the years many people have been concerned about and 
involved in the safe transportation of school children. Because of the efforts and work of these people, travel 
by school bus is one of the safest means of transportation that there is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is a record that was not equalled when I was a student driving horses to school and 
certainly is not a record that has been equalled by private motor transportation. 
 
I know that when school buses were first used in Saskatchewan, parents and school officials expressed 
concern about bus transportation of children. There was a great deal of concern about the inclement weather, 
the sudden storms and what have you. 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3221 

The dangers are there, Mr. Speaker. If you turn a wheel on the road there is a possibility that some driver 
somewhere will be distracted and will not see the oncoming bus, oncoming train, or that truck which comes 
out of a side road without stopping. There are a thousand and one ways that injury and death could occur. 
 
It is due to the efforts of countless people that school bus transportation is, has been and will be, one of the 
safest means of transportation in Canada. 
 
The words of the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, when he spoke on the subject, were a completely 
inaccurate picture of the situation. When he was speaking about school bus safety in other times and places, 
the member continually repeated the phrase 'but nothing to protect the children of Saskatchewan' indicating 
that the children were riding to school in the most dangerous conditions imaginable. 
 
To condemn the school bus system is to condemn the people who have laboured so diligently over the years 
to provide safe transportation for the children of this province. 
 
Many groups have been deeply involved in developing this safe transportation system: bus drivers, teachers, 
school boards, the Saskatchewan Safety Council, Transport Canada, the Department of Education, just to 
name a few. 
 
Beside those organizations and departments, many individuals have worked long and diligently to make sure 
our children have school transportation that is as safe as is humanly possible. To say that nothing has been 
done for the safety of our children is an insult to all the groups and all the people who have worked so hard 
to ensure the safety of our children. 
 
When we recognize the special efforts of groups and individuals, we always run the risk of missing someone. 
But I think the work of at least two people in the field of safety should be recognized. The leadership and the 
work of these people have had a major impact on safety throughout this province and as a result throughout 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, the two people to whom I refer are Mr. Les Donnelly of the Saskatchewan Safety 
Council and Mr. Carl Shields of the Saskatchewan Transportation Agency. The leadership and the work of 
these people and their workers and the safety ideas they have presented have made it possible for 
Saskatchewan to be a leader in the field of safety. 
 
The various ministers in the Government of Saskatchewan who have been responsible for school bus safety 
and safety in other fields should also be commended for giving funding and encouragement to these agencies 
as well as enacting many of the ideas and concepts presented to them. You see, Mr. Speaker, the best safety 
ideas in the world are of no value if the government is not ready and willing to act upon them. 
 
In reference to school bus safety, I think we should look at the school bus safety record of this province. It is 
a record everyone can be extremely proud of. In fact, the figures I'm going to quote show that it is safer to 
travel by school bus than it is to travel by private automobiles. I'd like to refer all members to a study done 
by the University of Saskatchewan transportation centre in Saskatoon. It's a study on bus safety in 
Saskatchewan. This is the booklet from which I'm going to take some of these figures. 
 
This is called The School Bus Accident Record and is taken from that study by the University of 
Saskatchewan. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3222 

The total number of accidents in 1974-75 was 75. Although this goes back a few years, no more recent study 
than that has been done. In 1975-76, there were 113. The total number of injury accidents in '74-'75 was 11. 
In 1975-76, it was 17. The accidents million vehicle miles was 1.60 in 1974-75 and 2.40 in 1975-76; 
whereas with the private automobile it was 5.53. So it goes, Mr. Speaker. We could give you a whole list of 
statistics that prove it is much, much safer to travel by school bus than it is by any other means of 
transportation except by the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. 
 
In spite of the excellent record in the bussing of students in the past, those responsible for safety are not 
resting on their oars. Within the last two years, an extensive and ongoing safety program has been instituted. 
 
I would like to have all members take a look at these seven booklets. They are the Saskatchewan Safety 
Council's manuals for the school bus driver improvement program. These manuals were developed in 
Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan conditions. The program was first developed by Peat Marwich and 
Associates at a cost of $65,000. The program was first a three-inch thick manual that was changed into these 
seven booklets as it was used by the bus drivers across the province. 
 
The course has a style that is radically different from any other kind. There are no dry, schoolteacher style 
lectures. There are course managers who arrange for bus driver meetings and who also arrange for films, first 
aid courses and anything else the drivers feel is necessary as the course progresses. The manager, uses the 
manager's manual to set up the course, to find motion pictures and for tests. Rather than lectures, the drivers 
engage in group discussion based on the various booklets, films, etc. People with a penchant for lecturing 
others may feel that the course is inadequate but actually it is considered to be a superior way to learn. After 
all with bus drivers' schedules, it is sometimes difficult to get bus drivers together in some school divisions. 
In all school divisions the local boards also have different school board policies, and with this stand of 
course no one person is set up as the great authority on the subject. As a matter of fact, some divisions have 
set up policy for school bus transportation because the bus drivers in those courses have insisted on policy by 
the board for the protection of the school bus drivers themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this course is considered to be the state of the art in all of Canada. Almost all other provinces 
are taking this course and adapting it to their own conditions. Truly this is another Saskatchewan first in 
safety, for the most precious of all things, our children. Money, guidance and assistance for this program 
came from the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees' Association), the Saskatchewan Safety Council, the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Agency. Transportation Canada also put in a considerable sum of money 
(development money) on the grounds that the course would have a broader use than in just Saskatchewan. In 
fact, everyone who had an opportunity to make use of the course in its initial stages had input into its 
make-up and design. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with your indulgence I would like to very briefly go though these seven booklets just to 
give everyone an idea what the course is like. 
 
The first booklet that I mention is the course manager's manual. It is divided up into program description, 
managing the program, notes on the series, a master resource list, answers to overall skill test checks, and 
getting a school bus driver's licence — a whole series of films and tests and what not, that a manager needs 
with which to guide the group of school bus drivers in his division through the course. 
 
The second booklet is called Bus Operation Manoeuvres. In this module then you have 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3223 

driving manoeuvres, demonstrating basic driving manoeuvres, advanced bus driving manoeuvres, 
demonstrating advanced driving manoeuvres. And so you have this whole series on bus operation 
manoeuvres. 
 
The third consists of school bus inspection and maintenance. There are other booklets too that we will 
mention a little bit later, for school bus maintenance. The third book is loading and unloading. Of course one 
of the most dangerous times in the transportation of children is at the times the school buses are loaded and 
unloaded in the area because that is really the time in which children can forget themselves and dash out in 
front of oncoming cars. So this booklet then gives ideas for the control of students under those conditions. 
 
The fourth booklet is called Professional Driving Skills: accident preventability, hazard detection, pollution 
avoidance, emergency driving techniques. 
 
The fifth book in the series, Emergency Accident and Accident Procedures, contains all the procedures that 
bus drivers could go through or should go through in the case of accident and emergencies. 
 
The sixth one is called the Pupil Transportation System. Again then the final booklet gives ways in which 
the bus driver can handle situations and gives him ideas for handling of students. In this module you have the 
pupil transportation system, student management — practising good student management. All of these 
booklets are read on the bus drivers' own time and discussed in the meetings that the course manager 
arranges. It is an excellent course that is finding wide acceptance throughout Saskatchewan and throughout 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the safety of students isn't left only to bus drivers; students, teachers and parents can become 
fully involved. There is a video tape on school bus safety available to all schools designed for children from 
Kindergarten to Grade 6. It is entitled, Here Comes Our Bus. The film develops the idea that students have a 
responsibility for safety on the bus, safety in boarding and safety in getting off the bus. The film even shows 
methods of emergency bus evacuation. Of course the idea of getting students at a very early age and 
inculcating the idea of safety into them is really of the greatest importance. 
 
While this film is designed for the younger set, it could well be shown to parents. The film has been shown 
on school television broadcasts. All the principal of a school needs to do is send a blank videotape to Sask 
Media and the tape will be dubbed for him. Of course all schools are not equipped with videotape machines. 
For those schools there is a whole series of 16 mm films for motion picture projectors. There are also 36 mm 
slide projection sets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite like to make rosy comparisons with Alberta and Ontario. They like to let on 
that those PC provinces are the meccas of western democracy. I would like to show you the school bus safety 
pamphlets being used in Ontario. This is the school bus safety pamphlet set out for Ontario and it is called, 
Go Safely — The School Bus Manual by the Ministry of Transportation and Communications in Ontario. 
Let the record show it is a small booklet, about 6 inches by 8 inches in size with about 29 pages. They do 
have a few other supplementary booklets; one is called, A Truck and Bus Drivers' Manual, which again is 
very small; The Drivers' Handbook, which is very similar to our own manual in Saskatchewan; and a couple 
other small pamphlets, one called, Motor Vehicle Accident Facts for 1977, which really 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3224 

isn't all that great as far as school bus driving is concerned. Then of course they do have their classified 
driving licensing system, again of small value to the bus driver and certainly nothing in comparison to the 
courses available in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me show you what Alberta has for school bus safety. Again you have this whole series here which I have 
in my hand, just a few pages, about 120 in all, which includes the Highway Traffic Act of Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't want to imply that nothing has been done in those provinces for the safety of the 
students. On the contrary, the safety record in those provinces is fairly comparable to ours in Saskatchewan. 
The point I wish to make is that Saskatchewan is again taking the lead in the area of safety as it is in so many 
other areas. The results are that school bussing is, as I said at the beginning, one of the safest means of 
transportation around. 
 
There is only one mode of transportation whose record is superior to the record of school bus transport and 
that is the Saskatchewan Transportation Company. There is, of course, good reason for that, Mr. Speaker, 
namely that the people transported in the buses of the Saskatchewan Transportation Company are adults, and 
the ones transported in the school buses are younger people who tend to be a little more exuberant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
MR. N. E. BYERS (Kelvington-Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to second this motion sponsored 
by my colleague, the hon. member for Yorkton. All of us in this Chamber know that a good number of 
citizens, members of organizations, teachers, trustees and people who work in the field of safety, are very 
keenly interested in the safe transport of our students on school buses. With respect to school bus safety, we 
have certainly taken a number of initiatives in this province to make the transportation of school children and 
the public in general more safe. We have taken a number of initiatives dealing with the safety of the vehicle, 
proper training for our school bus drivers, development of the vehicle safety program and, more recently, the 
establishment of inspection stations and qualified mechanics to keep our school vehicles safe for transport. 
 
I think the question of school bus safety is receiving more attention in all jurisdictions in Canada. I had the 
good fortune to attend the annual meeting of the Canada Safety Council in Quebec City last fall and was very 
pleased that a number of jurisdictions in Canada are devoting a good deal more attention to school bus 
safety. You will know that I'm never an alarmist, but I wanted to draw two fairly simple facts to the attention 
of the legislature. 
 
We have in our province a fairly sophisticated program of school bus safety and inspection, but there are 
jurisdictions in Canada where, for example, flashing lights on school buses is not mandatory. A study 
undertaken and completed in the province of Quebec within the last year identified what I think we would 
regard as fairly horrifying situations on school buses. That study recommended that top priority be given to 
the removal of wood stoves from school buses. I think if the students in the constituency of the hon. member 
for Wilkie had to find the wood, much less ride on the bus, there would be a great deal of concern (and 
rightly so) shown by the parents. 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3225 

There are, I think a number of initiatives however which are still required to improve school bus safety. I 
would like to have an opportunity at another time to comment on these, and I would, therefore, beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 30 — Renewable Alcohol Production 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan): 
 

That this Assembly recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan consider providing 
economic incentives to encourage the production of renewable alcohol in Saskatchewan in 
the form of a 3 cent per litre rebate to those distributors of gasoline selling an acceptable 
blend of Saskatchewan produced alcohol with gasoline; and that all Saskatchewan 
government vehicles, including Crown corporation vehicles, purchase as fuel, an acceptable 
blend of gasoline and Saskatchewan produced alcohol. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise to speak on this motion. I think all of us are aware of the situation 
developing in this country since the OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) nations decided 
to do what they have done with the oil and the increasing demand and burden upon our country for the 
energy which we need to run our farm equipment and to make our province (where we have lots of 
transportation problems) easier to handle. 
 
Basically, Mr. Speaker, my motion refers to allowing a 3 cent per litre rebate for those people who have a 
product called gasohol (a combination of an alcohol base from wheat and so forth which can be mixed with 
fuel petroleum), which will provide a minimum of 10 per cent greater use of our present petroleum 
resources. 
 
The increased use would put less burden on our natural resources and therefore less financial burden upon 
this country so far as flowing out of dollars to foreign countries to purchase the offshore oil, which is 
required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at present there are many areas in the United States where individual farmers have been granted 
permission, for agricultural use, to make a blend of gasoline and alcohol to drive their gasoline burning 
equipment. Also, the University of Saskatchewan, from my understanding, has done work with rape seed oil 
which is being used with diesel fuel. They have had a tractor running several hundreds of hours on that 
concept and are finding no problem with the machinery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I am really saying is that there is one other benefit. The other benefit is that we can get 
approximately two and one-half gallons of alcohol from a bushel of grain. Now that would supposedly make 
a bushel of grain worth approximately $10. It would then make a farmer more self-sufficient because he 
would be able to use part of his own product, or buy a product developed from his own grain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a considerable amount of interest in Canada on the patents, rights, and so forth to 
develop this process. For us in Saskatchewan it is important that this process take place as soon as possible, 
not only because of the gasohol combination but also because of some of the by-products. When I refer to 
some of the by-products I would refer to the starch and protein that is left which could be used for 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3226 

our livestock industry and other parts of our industries. So the first step is to start developing the alcohol that 
can be mixed with a blend of gasoline and therefore move along. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest to all members of the House that they strongly consider supporting 
this motion because it will be beneficial within the communities of our province, to the farmers and the 
primary producers, and assist an out drain of capital from Canada. The 3 cents per litre is not a high price to 
pay. In fact I think it will pay off in the long run to the citizens of this province. Therefore, I move, seconded 
by Mr. Swan, Resolution No. 30 — Renewable Alcohol Production. 
 
MR. H. J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Speaker, I'm pleased to have the opportunity to second this 
motion today. I believe there was a slight mistake in the way that was typed. It should have been renewable 
energy; so we perhaps in our process should correct that. 
 
I believe that with the conventional supplies of energy depleting and perhaps a danger of running out of 
energy in a number of years we should now begin to look at forms of renewable energy. In the United States 
they have made some beginnings in the production of ethyl alcohol as a gasoline additive; and it's being used 
in many of the states with fair success I might say. They are finding as new technologies are being developed 
that the production of ethyl alcohol is becoming more and more feasible. At one point in time there was an 
energy deficiency when you produced ethyl alcohol and you actually consumed more energy than you 
produced. 
 
But because of new technology, that has changed significantly to the point where you can indeed produce 
ethyl alcohol with quite a large energy efficiency. I believe also that it's at the point where it's going to 
produce enough additional energy that we should be able to make Canada a self-sufficient country in a very 
short space of time (using this and other avenues that are available). 
 
There was a lot of concern expressed because the general population felt that when we started to use wheat 
to produce energy we were taking away food from people. But with the new research that has been done, 
that's not the case at all. Rather we take the high protein gluten out of the wheat to begin with and provide a 
product that would be very useful in the protein-short areas of the world. The gluten that's taken out will be 
about 86 per cent protein and with eight pounds per bushel it could readily be shipped to Africa or other 
Middle East countries that are short of protein. They could mix it with the food they are now using and it 
would make a balanced diet for them. The part used for the manufacture of alcohol is really just the starch. 
 
The starch is not a good food product for human consumption. It's been a very, very cheap product in 
Saskatchewan's market. So I think they have now taken care of the concern that we shouldn't be using food 
that was there for human use. If we can proceed with the development of plants to produce ethyl alcohol, we 
will start to see a manufacturing industry develop in our own province to process the grain grown here. It 
should produce a fair number of outside jobs that are of interest to Saskatchewan. 
 
The wheat produced on one acre of farmland when processed into alcohol will provide enough energy to 
farm that same acre for at least ten years. This is a step forward and I think a step in the right direction. There 
are a number of other benefits I think we should be looking at when we consider whether or not to move into 
the production of ethyl alcohol. First, the dollars from the processing would be kept in Saskatchewan. We'd 
be 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3227 

providing jobs. We'd be producing an energy source. It would cut down on the freight costs that 
Saskatchewan has long found to be a bit of a hindrance in its trade. We could, because of providing a 
cheaper energy source, lower the cost of food in Saskatchewan. 
 
The farm profit from the market of a bushel of grain could increase. The productivity of our land could also 
be increased. You know, here we summerfallow a fairly high portion of our farmlands; people sit back and 
do not use the amount of fertilizer that would benefit their land because they don't have a ready market for 
the quantities of grain they are now producing. But if the grain were in demand you would see production 
increase because people would indeed farm better, increase the use of fertilizers and crop more steadily than 
they are at the present time. So in that method it could increase the productivity in Saskatchewan. 
 
A manufacturing industry in the province would also strengthen the Canadian dollar and Canadian trade. I 
believe if we could cut back on the amount of fuel that had to be imported from other parts of the world, it 
would indeed improve the balance of trade for Canada as a nation. It would broaden Saskatchewan's tax base 
as we were able to set up further manufacturing. It could provide a very high quality livestock feed as an end 
product and in sufficient volume to make feeding of livestock in Saskatchewan more viable. I believe all of 
these things should be looked at when we consider whether or not to get into the manufacturing of ethyl 
alcohol from grain. 
 
The tests which have been done show wheat as one of the best grains to use for the production of ethyl 
alcohol. When it has been tried in comparison with corn or barley or other grains, wheat is indeed the one 
which has proven the best. If you are looking at Canadian gallons, we get about two and one-half gallons of 
ethyl alcohol per bushel of grain. We get eight pounds of gluten out of each bushel of grain. The remainder 
makes a very high protein livestock feed. We have a number of products which are useful. Coming out of the 
chimney on one of these plants is pretty straight carbon dioxide, a gas useful in the production of heavy oil. 
If readily available in the province, it could be transported and used within the province. It could help us in 
that area as well. 
 
I think the number of areas we are talking about are all beneficial to Saskatchewan generally, to 
Saskatchewan agriculture in particular and to Saskatchewan's livestock producers. In a year such as we are 
experiencing now, if we had a plant of this type, we would see that the feed product would be in very high 
demand by livestock men. I think it is time we start moving in this direction. I would encourage the 
Government of Saskatchewan to do something like the American government has done; they have placed an 
incentive program on their books in the past year and a half which is allowing a 5-cent a gallon premium to 
people producing ethyl alcohol. The idea is to encourage the manufacturer. As they encourage it, it is 
growing on the American scene. If we don't soon move in this direction we are going to find that the 
neighbouring states and the neighbouring provinces are going to move this way and our livestock producers 
are going to be at a disadvantage because they won't have that feed source. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, we should move that way and try as soon as possible to develop a program in 
Saskatchewan to encourage the production of ethyl alcohol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have other things I would like to say on this subject. I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3228 

PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Resolution No. 14 — Intervarsity Athletics 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Solomon (Regina North-West): 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to revise its recent decision to substantially 
reduce financial support for intervarsity athletic programs, operated co-operatively by 
western Canadian universities. 

 
MR. G. M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to this motion I would like to offer an 
amendment at the end of my remarks. 
 
As is the case with members on that side of the House, (and as is always the case it seems) while I agree with 
many of the things the member for Regina North-West said regarding intervarsity athletics and the 
importance of them to the province; and the importance of intervarsity athletics to western Canada as a 
whole; and also with regard to what the federal government's contribution to intervarsity athletics in western 
Canada could be; it grates me very much when members on that side of the House always turn to the federal 
government and condemn the federal government for its lack of attention. But there is never anything 
coming from the provincial government that professes to have an interest in whatever program it is, in this 
case intervarsity athletics. In this case the provincial government is not providing the support I believe it 
should be providing to intervarsity athletics in Saskatchewan. 
 
What I would like to propose is that the provincial government become involved in a program to provide for 
athletic scholarships as has been done by the province of British Columbia, because that province has 
recognized the importance of intervarsity athletics to students in their own province. Certainly I believe this 
province has not done that. I believe there is a move afoot in the province of Alberta as well to provide these 
scholarships on the basis of athletic excellence, tied of course to academic excellence in the universities. 
 
I would like to propose the following amendment. I will go a little further with this then. I notice the member 
for Regina North-West is very interested in these remarks and I believe and hope he will support me in this 
amendment, as will his colleagues because I believe it's one of importance to athletes in Saskatchewan. 
 
Athletic scholarships in the province would encourage our young athletes with promise and potential to 
remain in Saskatchewan. Far too many of our young athletes are leaving Saskatchewan because the 
opportunities just aren't here. They have chosen to go to universities in the United States which offer athletic 
scholarships. 
 
I will just leave this as a suggestion. Perhaps the Department of Culture and Youth, or the Department of 
Continuing Education, or the two of them in conjunction could stem that tide and establish a Saskatchewan 
youth athletic scholarship program. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, this program could be funded by money from the 
heritage fund and could make Saskatchewan a real leader in athletic programs in North America. 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3229 

We have heard comments and certainly well-founded ones regarding the success of some of our teams in this 
Celebrate Saskatchewan year, that is true; but we could become a leader in this area. 
 
In my opinion there is another key reason why Saskatchewan should provide athletic scholarships. I really 
believe our society has reached such a high standing of living today that recreation and leisure activities are, 
in the near future, going to be important to Saskatchewan residents, even more important than they are now. 
I believe we have the expertise and the competence to manage and develop the type of recreational and 
leisure activity that will come with more time involved in this area. 
 
In reviewing the whole matter of athletic scholarships I have noted that there is enabling legislation within 
the Canadian Intercollegiate Athletic Union for such sports awards, and I do believe the same legislation is 
there in GPAC (Great Plains Athletic Conference). It had been thought before that such sports awards 
couldn't be awarded in western Canada because of eligibility rules. However the Canadian Intercollegiate 
Athletic Union does allow awards for third-party representation, in this case, government representation. 
Their regulation 3 (c) says: 
 

A student shall not be eligible to compete in any union contest, who is receiving an athletic 
scholarship, or subsidy from the member he represents, or from any other organization under 
the jurisdiction of the said member. Students competing in activities leading to CIAU 
competition are eligible to receive third-party scholarships established by provincial and/or 
federal governments and those awards by any other agency approved by the board of 
directors of the union. These third-party scholarships or grants in aid must not specify a 
university of attendance. 

 
Mr. Speaker, other provinces have taken action in this regard, most notably British Columbia which just last 
year introduced a system of sports awards for its athletes attending universities and colleges in that province. 
The Government of British Columbia has recognized that there is a need to encourage and reward excellence 
in this field to help good athletes stay in the province. 
 
In that regard, Mr. Speaker, British Columbia has set up an athletic scholarship fund and awards have 
already been made for the last semester in their universities. They are providing 550 scholarships of $1,000 
each. To be eligible for one of these scholarships, the student must be in full-time attendance and must 
maintain passing grades at one of the three B.C. universities. Furthermore, recipients must be Canadian 
citizens or landed immigrants and must have been residents of British Columbia for at least one year. I 
would like to emphasize that. I believe that's a very important provision; they must be residents of the 
province (in this case of Saskatchewan) before they can be eligible for such an award. The final condition is 
that the award be made from the university to the student. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when one examine the calendars of the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 
Regina, one can find listed scholarships for various disciplines. But under the category of physical education, 
there are very few awards. Mr. Speaker, I believe that a Saskatchewan youth athletic scholarship program 
would be an excellent investment. In terms of the rewards from the participation of the athletes in sports in 
the province, the incentive they would provide for other youngsters to remain here and contribution they 
would make to athletes after they graduate in coaching and administration, organization and other things of 
that nature. I think it would be well 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3230 

worth the investment. 
 
I'd like to refer for a moment, Mr. Speaker, to the federal government's white paper entitled, Partners in 
Pursuit of Excellence put out a couple of years ago. It makes particular reference to the universities as a 
resource for sports policy and notes that Canadian universities can play a decisive part in the pursuit of 
academic and athletic excellence in our country. They have the capacity to relate advanced education to 
sports. Mr. Speaker, the point being that in a university like the University of Saskatchewan or the University 
of Regina, we can develop academic staff members who can coach athletes in the finer techniques of 
improving their performances and also relate that to the community as a whole for the benefit of the whole 
community and their development of coaching. 
 
I contend that we should be looking at the financing of sport not so much as a problem but rather as an 
opportunity. It's a growing industry. We can provide leadership here by combining academic excellence with 
athletic excellence. I think, Mr. Speaker, we have to recognize that the government has a responsibility to 
provide some leadership. In this, I'm speaking of both levels of government, federal and, in this case, 
especially the provincial government. That is why I'm advocating that we create a Saskatchewan youth 
athletic scholarship program to make Saskatchewan a leader in aid to athletes. 
 
With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I'd like to present the following amendment, moved by me and seconded 
by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter), to add after the word 'universities' the following: 
 

and recognizing the valuable contribution of intervarsity athletics and intervarsity athletes 
through our province, that this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to institute a 
program of athletic scholarships for intervarsity athletics at Saskatchewan's two universities. 

 
MR. R. A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, I just have a few words to say in support of this motion 
and amendment. I believe all of us in this House have different young athletes, whether they are boys or 
girls, who are exceptional in sports and excel in sports. At the present time, and it has been going this way 
for years, these young people have all had to take sports scholarships in the United States. I do believe we 
are losing a very valuable source for the future, one of our resources in Saskatchewan, when we lose those 
people to the United States. Some of them may or may not return. 
 
I believe with the resources the government professes we have in this province (and I believe they are fairly 
accurate) that we are in a far better position to offer these scholarships than we were formerly with the 
attitude we used to have toward sports scholarships. For this reason I think the government should change its 
attitude and not depend solely on the federal government to assist in these scholarships. If we truly are a 
resource province and we have the wealth, then I say let's help one of the most natural resources we have, the 
students of our province. Therefore, I would certainly support this amendment and I would urge all members 
to support this amendment on a youth athletic scholarship program. 
 
MR. W. C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I have some brief comments to this 
amendment which I would like to put before this Assembly. 
 
Many comments could be made, pro and con, on athletic scholarships. I would like to briefly tell you about 
some of my experiences with them. I went to school in the United 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3231 

States and was on an athletic scholarship down there. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, I did have an opportunity 
to observe a program first-hand because many of the people I lived with were involved with football and 
basketball, etc. We also had occasion to travel to a variety of campuses throughout the midwestern United 
States. 
 
There is no question about it. In the United States there is such a thing as the professional athlete. The people 
you see on many of the major football teams and in the bowl games, are professional athletes. But I don't 
think they are really the kind of people we are talking out here. Rightly, or wrongly, the athlete I just 
described is a source of revenue for the university involved. Their football program, for instance, will pay for 
all their athletic programs. Their basketball program and others are gravy. 
 
I don't think that is exactly what we are talking about, because in some areas the Americans have gone far 
overboard on it. Mind you, that is what they want. It saves the taxpayers a lot of money because the bulk of 
those big stadiums you see and many of the buildings down there are built with revenues derived from those 
80,000 or 90,000 people who watch those athletic events, particularly football games. I don't know how 
many basketball games are played by a college, but I think it is somewhere around 20 or 25, and when they 
start drawing in the neighbourhood of 25,000 to 30,000 people that generates a lot of dollars. 
 
But that is not what we are talking about here. I think this motion, Mr. Speaker, is aimed at the individual 
who is going to university and is an athlete who is maybe good enough to make the team. They may or may 
not have had the opportunity to go to university but because they have an athletic skill, they go to college 
when they may not have had an opportunity to do so. They become physical education instructors; they 
become education majors; they do a variety of things. 
 
Really, what is the whole thing all about? I don't think the intent of this motion is, if we are talking football, 
to provide a source of talent to the various professional football teams. I don't think it is that at all. 
 
I think attitudes toward athletics have changed. Maybe it took the Soviet Union to show us the respect some 
athletes should receive. I believe the attitude in this country toward athletes has certainly changed. While I 
don't believe anybody is suggesting we go into the high-powered recruiting or flamboyant bowl games, etc., 
prevalent in the United States, I think it is time for the people of this province and this country to take a 
cautious look at the inclusion of athletic scholarships along with those presently available in education. 
 
I don't think this necessarily means we are going to set up our own Rose Bowl and all that, not at all. But we 
should recognize and acknowledge somebody who has a skill and in some cases perhaps help to put him 
through university where he may not otherwise have an opportunity to go. 
 
I think this is a non-political issue and I hope all members in this Assembly can see it this way and hopefully 
will endorse this amendment. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3232 

MR. J. L. SOLOMON (Regina North-West): — Well, Mr. Speaker, the amendment put forward by the 
member for Meadow Lake is well-intentioned but I have to admit that he has missed the mark. He has 
missed the mark because if the member had looked at the resolution as it was originally proposed, he would 
clearly see the reason for the actual motion. And of course the reason for the motion is because we are 
talking about the lack of funding for intervarsity athletics. 
 
When we talk about intervarsity we talk about interprovincial. If we propose a scholarship situation, or we 
set one up as he is proposing . . . The one he described in B.C. is aimed very clearly at producing athletes in 
a university situation with obviously better skills because they are there on a scholarship basis. 
 
The problem we have in Canada is not that B.C. is not adequately funding their universities and scholarships. 
The problem we have is competing interprovincially through our universities. Therefore, if Saskatchewan 
was to provide scholarships to their athletes it wouldn't resolve the problem. The problem is that other 
provinces do not or would not have the same priority. Therefore all we would be doing is setting up 
scholarship situations for athletes with no competition. 
 
The only reason that athletes are given scholarships in the first place and athletes take scholarships, 
especially in the States, is to perfect their skills. They perfect their skills only through competition. A good 
athlete is only good when he is compared to his peers, and is as good or better than the best of his peers. A 
good athlete is not an athlete who is given a scholarship and does not participate in competitive events. 
 
So I say to the members opposite that their intentions are fairly well reasoned, but are not acceptable with 
regard to this motion, because it's aimed at interprovincial rather than one university. The member for 
Thunder Creek illustrated my point very clearly. He said he was on a scholarship and through that 
scholarship attended and travelled to very many different campuses in the United States; why did he travel? 
The member for Thunder Creek travelled from campus to campus in the States on a scholarship fund in 
search of competition, and other universities reciprocated. The universities he visited probably visited the 
university he was attending and representing. And so you see it's an intervarsity situation; it's not one 
university. 
 
If we go ahead with this program, we'll have a fine scholarship program. The only universities we'll be able 
to compete with are the ones B.C. competes with and those are in the United States. And I, as a member for 
Regina North-West and a member of the NDP in Saskatchewan, am more concerned in increasing the 
competitive levels and increasing the intervarsity competitions in Canada, not in the United States. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to reiterate that I am not in favour of this motion for those reasons. 
And I ask the member for Meadow Lake (I don't know if he'll be able to get up and respond to this) if he 
would permit a question. I would like to know what the B.C. scholarship program is costing the universities. 
I am sure that he'll probably get up and have the statistics for the House very shortly. Mr. Speaker, I'm not 
sure if my colleagues have any additional things to add on this motion, but I would like to just say I am 
opposed to the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3233 

Resolution No. 31 — Foreign Investment Review Agency 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution by Mr. Dyck (Saskatoon Mayfair): 
 

That this Assembly encourages the new federal government to act on their election promises 
to strengthen the role of the foreign investment review agency and urges the federal 
government to grant FIRA the power to reimpose heavy withholding taxes on the increasing 
outflow of interest and dividend payments and continue to expand Canadian ownership to 
serve Canadians, especially through Crown corporations and the Canadian Development 
Corporation. 

 
MR. J. G. LANE (Qu'Appelle): — I think, Mr. Speaker, that the government opposite was asleep when it 
brought in this particular motion. I would have thought the member who introduced the motion, and who sat 
as a member of the committee on business in 1972, would have remembered the position of this government 
as recently as 1974-75. 
 
The motion urges the federal government to act on election promises to strengthen the role of the foreign 
investment review agency. It does not in any way refer to actions the provincial government can take. I'm a 
little surprised at that oversight. 
 
Members opposite may feel that the provincial government can't take any action on non-Saskatchewan 
purchases of provincial industrial enterprises. They may believe that because they haven't seen any action 
from the government opposite. But as recently as 1974-75, in the annual report of the Department of Industry 
and Commerce, a section was established under the research and program development branch called foreign 
investment and intergovernmental affairs. To quote from the annual report in 1974-75: 
 

This section of the Department of Industry and Commerce of the province of Saskatchewan 
reviews non-Saskatchewan purchases of interprovincial industrial enterprises and advises the 
government on the position it should take with respect to each. These decisions are then 
passed on to the federal foreign investment review agency . . . 

 
Although, interestingly enough and I'm digressing from the text, the branch deals with non-Saskatchewan 
purchases, it advises FIRA, for some reason, of non-Saskatchewan purchases which may be in fact Canadian 
purchases of Saskatchewan provincial industrial enterprises. 
 

. . . and their recommendations form a part of the final federal decision of these transactions. 
The section also evaluates the effects in this province of the federal industrial and 
commercial development program, and suggests methods by which Saskatchewan may take 
greater advantage of it. 

 
Also known as being at the public trough and trying to get the maximum benefit. 
 

Suggestions may also be made to these programs so that they are more applicable to the 
province's commercial structure. 

 
The operative part of this branch and the headline in the annual report 1974-75 was 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3234 

the establishment of the foreign investment and intergovernmental affairs branch, Department of Industry 
and Commerce. 
 
It's very interesting to note that since 1974-75 this government has not referred to that branch again in any of 
the annual reports of the Department of Industry and Commerce. Where did it go? Did it disappear? I think 
we have to assume that it did. Why was it brought in for one short period? One can attribute nothing more 
than that the government opposite is playing fad politics with foreign investment in Canada. It can't say that 
it can't take any action because it in fact did once. It cannot say that there's no provincial government role 
because in 1974-75 there seemed to be one. 
 
I think it's rather surprising, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the government opposite, which under the direction of 
the Premier has made a great issue of foreign investment — how that's the sole reason for Quebec wanting to 
separate because it didn't have control of its economy — (that's a statement of the Premier) does not do 
anything until the public gets concerned. It thought the public was concerned in 1974-75 so it set up a 
branch. It thinks the public is concerned again in 1980 so it brings in a motion — nothing in between. I don't 
believe that the government opposite is the least bit sincere on its statements about foreign investment. I 
think that in fact its track record proves its insincerity. 
 
We had to ask in the past for the government to table the recommendations that it made. We couldn't get 
them. There was no really sincere effort, no real concern about the problem. That branch did nothing. That 
branch has withered and died because politically for four or five years the public wasn't concerned about 
foreign investment, so you didn't take any action. It is rather strange, Mr. Speaker, that five years later we see 
a motion on the order paper. I specifically call to the attention of the Assembly the fact that grant didn't just 
concern itself with non-Canadian takeover (so-called foreign takeover of Saskatchewan business), it was the 
non-Saskatchewan purchases of provincial industrial enterprises. Now we are going to ask the mover of the 
motion to table in this Assembly, (the expert on business, the member for Moose Jaw North the seconder of 
the motion) the report done by the Department of Industry and Commerce on Standard Brands acquisition of 
the Weyburn distillery. It may well be, and I will assume, it was to the advantage of the people of 
Saskatchewan, but I didn't hear any report from the government opposite. I didn't see any recommendations 
when I saw the press story that this government endorsed fully the acquisition by a non-Saskatchewan 
company of Weyburn distillers. I'm surprised, because if you were really sincere you could have tabled your 
recommendations, your support and your studies of the takeover at that time. Why didn't you? You didn't 
because the government opposite had no program to be able to make such recommendations. 
 
The branch which is supposed to review non-Saskatchewan purchases of provincial industrial enterprises, is 
non-existent if we go by five successive annual reports. Where did it go? Why did it disappear? Why did you 
let it wither and die? Don't you believe in the issue? What happened? 
 
It is a rather strange position you find yourself in, trying to say you are the advocates of Canadian control of 
the economy. But within the province of Saskatchewan, you take an artificial action in 1974-75 and you 
haven't taken one step since. It's rather strange. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that if the public decides to direct its attention to something other than foreign 
takeover of the Saskatchewan and Canadian economy, the government opposite wouldn't bother bringing a 
motion, wouldn't even consider the 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3235 

matter. 
 
That's what I mean by fad politics; either the government opposite is sincere about its concern for foreign 
investment and foreign control or it's really trying to tag onto a fad. I suggest the track record and evidence 
indicates without question that this government is not really concerned about the issue and is really, as I say, 
playing fad politics. 
 
The mover of the motion who sat on the business committee will support it. I know that the seconder of the 
motion, with his business expertise (the member for Moose Jaw North) is sincerely concerned about the 
actions of his own government. He will urge the Government of Saskatchewan to re-institute and re-establish 
the branch and give it the proper priority and proper position which the issue deserves. I am going to suggest 
there be an amendment to the motion, one which the members opposite will have no problem supporting. 
 
I move, seconded by the member for Regina South (Mr. Rousseau) that Resolution No. 31 be amended by 
adding thereto: 
 

And that this Assembly condemn the Government of Saskatchewan for its failure to take any 
action to protect Saskatchewan industries from non-Saskatchewan takeovers. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 

 
HON. D. W. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Mr. Speaker, I want to interrupt for a moment. I have a 
guest who I would like to introduce to the House and to you. The guest is in Saskatchewan for a period of 
time because he, just on Friday, had an honorary doctor of laws degree bestowed upon him for co-operative 
work he has done in the province of Saskatchewan and throughout this country. I speak of none other than 
Dr. Louis Lloyd who is seated in the Speaker's gallery. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CODY: — On behalf of the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development and the 
Government of Saskatchewan, we certainly congratulate you heartily for having this great honour bestowed 
upon you for the tremendous amount of good work you have done in the province and throughout Canada in 
the co-operative movement. 
 
With him today is a retired individual from the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development, 
Lloyd Lokken. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Debate continues on Resolution No. 31 
 
HON. R. J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I'm sure the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce will want to say quite a bit more at some other appropriate time with respect to the amendment. I 
simply want to indicate to the House, before I beg leave to adjourn the debate, that the amendment at first 
glance would be unacceptable 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3236 

to me because the provincial government continues its review of proposed takeovers within the Department 
of Industry and Commerce to this very day, notwithstanding the words by the hon. member for Qu'Appelle. I 
think the Minister of Industry and Commerce will elaborate on the erroneous direction of the words by the 
member for Qu'Appelle in that regard. 
 
But I think it should be kept in mind that the important thing about this, Mr. Speaker, is that the situation is 
such that this motion is prompted by the stated Conservative position, certainly federally and I can only 
suspect the same thing provincially, that FIRA the foreign investment review agency was getting too strong 
or at least words to the effect that it was becoming a bureaucratic jungle. The fact of the matter is that during 
the short tenure of Mr. Joe Clark as Prime Minister, there was, I think all members would agree, a very 
pronounced tendency toward dismantling the FIRA and doing away with that kind of review agency. 
 
Goodness only knows it is not nearly as strong as many of us would have or would want to have but at least 
it's an attempt. The new administration under Pierre Elliott Trudeau has been elected, among other things, on 
the promise to strengthen the foreign investment review agency, an objective with which we are very much 
in agreement. I think if the Conservatives really indicate that they are for foreign investment review, they 
have a chance to show their support when the main motion comes up for a vote. 
 
One final word: I ask the members of the House to note that the hon. member has criticized us for not having 
made a comment about the Standard Brands takeover of the Weyburn distillery. Nothing prevented the hon. 
member for Qu'Appelle or any member of the Conservative caucus from voicing his views or concerns in 
this matter. They apparently did not as well. I think one need not make too much of an issue on isolated 
cases or on individual cases in this area at all. So, Mr. Speaker, with those few words I beg leave to adjourn 
the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 24 — Churchill Port Development 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution by Mr. Kowalchuk (Melville): 
 

That this Assembly commend the Canadian Wheat Board for its continued use of the port of 
Churchill and encourage the development of the port as a full northern port, including the 
expansion of the port by movement of more grains through the port, the upgrading of the 
Herchmer subdivision, and the institution of the interchange agreement. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

Resolution No. 27 — Nursing Home Facilities 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution by Mr. Birkbeck (Moosomin): 
 

That this Assembly condemns the failure of the NDP government to provide adequate 
nursing home facilities to senior citizens of Saskatchewan and in particular condemns the 
unavailability of beds to administer levels 3 and 4 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3237 

care; the inordinate waiting list to be admitted; the lack of equipment and facilities for 
adequate care; the undue difficulty in placing level 3 patients whose condition has 
deteriorated into level 4; the inadequate number of basic facilities in rural communities for 
level 4 patients; the inconsistency of funding and social aid regulations based on level of care 
and not in consideration of financial burdens placed on individual families; the limited and 
disjointed scope of programs designed for mentally ill and the general understaffed and 
unco-ordinated atmosphere currently prevalent in nursing homes throughout Saskatchewan. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What's the point of order? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — My point of order is: on page 6, item 15 of the blues, it says the proposed resolution 
as amended. Didn't we vote the amendment down? Because the way the blues are written is the way the 
motion should read. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Attorney General has a good point of order. I failed to observe that the amendment 
had been carried to this motion and what we are voting on now is this motion as amended. Is it the please of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion as amended, which is: 
 

The this Assembly commends the Government of Saskatchewan for the positive steps taken 
to provide adequate special-care facilities for senior citizens in Saskatchewan; for increasing 
the number of special-care and level 4 beds, especially in rural communities; for the 
development of home care programs and co-ordinating them with other initiatives to assist 
all residents of Saskatchewan, not just the elderly, to continue to live with independence and 
dignity. 

 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Resolution No. 29 — Rural Natural Gas Distribution System 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed resolution by Mr. Muirhead (Arm River): 
 

That this Assembly recommends that the Government of Saskatchewan consider designing 
and implementing, as soon as possible, a rural natural gas distribution system to extend to all 
rural residents of Saskatchewan the opportunity to consume natural gas. 

 
And the proposed amendment thereto by Mr. White: 
 
That all the words after the word 'Assembly' be deleted and the following substituted therefore: 
 

commends the Government of Saskatchewan and the Saskatchewan Power Corporation for 
implementing and carrying out programs which have led to the extension of natural gas to 
serve all cities, numerous towns and villages and, where it has been found economically 
advantageous, to rural areas and Indian reserves as well. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3238 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 102 — An Act to amend The Lord's Day (Saskatchewan) Act 
 

Section 1 
 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Chairman, this Bill No. 102, which we discussed the other day in 
second reading, the Speaker decided that on a voice vote it was defeated, but for some reason, there was a 
change in that decision as there was a request for a standing vote. 
 
Mr. Chairman, as I indicated the other day when I spoke, my opinion is that because of the way this act is 
allowed, small communities will now be told that if they wish a particular midway or fair to come into their 
community, they will only come on the condition they can run on Sunday as well. It indicates that 
communities will be told — no, you can't have a fair, or midway I should say, unless you give us Sunday, 
even though we are having Friday and Saturday, you have to agree to Sunday or we won't come to you. So 
small communities which are on the fringe of getting a midway or not getting one will be forced into asking 
their municipality to approve Sunday, as this new bill allows. 
 
Therefore, even though they morally don't want it, they will be forced into it. That is what will happen and I 
have heard from one place within my constituency where this has already been suggested to a community. It 
has been suggested to this community — if you want a fair, we would normally come there but you don't run 
on Sunday; we want to run there Sunday if it is allowed and that bill passes in Regina. So obviously, the 
ramifications of this suggested bill was originally meant to allow horse racing, but as I indicated earlier when 
I spoke on this bill, horse racing is now allowed as long as there is no gambling; it happens with the old 
provisions, the horse shows and so forth. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, one of the first motions I am very compelled to raise is that this bill not be proceeded 
with for six months which would in effect kill the bill, hopefully. But before I move such a motion, I 
suppose I have to give the courtesy to the mover to rise to his feet once again, to have a chance to defend his 
arguments for moving this motion and let other people in on the debate. Before we move off this particular 
short title, I will probably be making an amendment but I will wait for others to allow them to speak first 
before I move such an amendment, if the mover wants to speak on this bill. 
 
MR. W. J. G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can only reply to the hon. member that 
I gave my longer version of the speech on Tuesday last dealing with the principle of the bill. Item 1, 
traditionally in committee of the whole, deals with the principle. The principle of the bill (as I stated earlier), 
I believe, comes from the fact that there is a law called the Lord's Day Canada Act. The Parliament of 
Canada has felt that people in the individual provinces were better able to deal with the mores of their 
provinces than the Parliament of Canada. They've passed the administration of that act to the province. We, 
in turn over the years, passed a number of provisions of the act over to local municipalities to make decisions 
in their own local communities. 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3239 

This particular bill extends those provisions in two areas: the first area being the holding of fairs and 
exhibitions on Sunday; the second area dealing with the holding of horse races on Sunday. The bill does not 
say that these activities will take place on Sunday. It merely says that municipalities, as in other cases, will 
make that local decision in their local municipality. I believe people in local municipalities are better able to 
judge the mores of their society than we are in this particular legislature. For that reason, I bring in the 
amendment. 
 
MR. J. A. PEPPER (Weyburn): — Mr. Chairman, I'm speaking in opposition to this bill because I 
personally believe it will be a move, if passed, in the erosion of the present day Lord's act. It just gives the 
power to municipalities, a sort of passing the buck as I would say. It gives them the power. We are shunning 
a duty that we as legislators should be doing. Having had amendments moved during the past several years 
to The Lord's Day Act, (I remember four or five different times) each time it leads to a greater weakening or 
loosening of that act. 
 
Since I spoke in opposition to this bill on second reading, CKCK radio invited me to participate in their 
morning program after which a phone-in poll was conducted. It ended up, I believe, 14 to 7 in support of the 
stand which I took, opposing the bill. As well as that, Mr. Chairman, I've had numerous phone calls, and 
letters on file. 
 
So Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier on second reading, I think we underestimate the thinking of many of our 
public when it comes to the moral issues on Sunday. For these reasons, Mr. Chairman, I will again be voting 
against Bill No. 102 on third reading. 
 
MR. J. L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North): — Mr. Chairman, I didn't have the opportunity last week of 
rising and indicating my position on this particular bill. I was unavoidably absent. I must say that since 
coming back to Moose Jaw, I too have had a number of phone calls. I too have visited a number of 
establishments, small restaurants, confectioneries and what not, and those people have urged me to support 
the bill. I originally intended to do so, had I been here last week and will continue to do at this particular 
time. 
 
I've had the opportunity of spending about six to eight years on municipal council and consistently we have 
urged that the municipal council be given the same rights as other levels of government. I don't consider 
municipal council to be a lesser level. I believe all three — federal, provincial and municipal — should be 
considered and recognized as the same level of government with certain jurisdictions. 
 
I certainly appreciate the comments made by my colleague, the member for Weyburn. There is no question 
about his position on this particular bill, but I don't believe it is passing the buck when we say the 
municipality should have a say as to whether or not it wants this particular legislation at that level. I think the 
right of the majority will prevail. I have heard many, many phone-in exercises, and those people who are, in 
the main, opposed to a particular piece of legislation are the ones who get on the telephone. Often the people 
who really want it aren't prepared to get out and let their voice be heard. I think, in this particular instance, 
the people of Saskatchewan, as in other provinces, do want the right to have that determination. But of equal 
importance is the fact that this is a major industry in our province. Reading Hansard I realize those points 
have been made, so I won't repeat them at this time. 
 
We are losing people, and they are going to other provinces. They have to go to other 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3240 

provinces; there is no other place to go because of the existing legislation. I am urging the members who are 
suggesting the right of the minority is not being looked after to realize they will have a say, when the time 
comes, at the municipal level. It is very, very permissive, the type of legislation which is being proposed at 
this time, and we in the areas involved are here to say that the municipalities will be able to give that right to 
the majority if they desire it. 
 
I am certainly in favour of the bill which is being introduced at this time. 
 
MR. P. PREBBLE (Saskatoon-Sutherland): — I would like to make a few brief remarks, Mr. Chairman, 
since I also was not here last Tuesday. 
 
I'm afraid I have to disagree with my friend and colleague, the member for Moose Jaw North. I am not going 
to be supporting this bill, Mr. Chairman. I don't think the economics of horse racing should dominate over 
the need to preserve the Lord's Day, and I think this act erodes the Lord's Day in a very real way. Quite 
simply, I don't agree with gambling on Sunday and betting on Sunday. I don't think it should be permitted in 
the province, and that is one of the reasons I disagree with this bill, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I think this is a matter for the province to decide, and not the municipality. It is my view that the bill is not in 
the best interests of the province, and I would urge all members not to support it. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I expressed a wrong thought earlier. The six-month hoist is 
only allowed in second reading in committee of the whole; therefore I will be moving a motion which in 
effect finishes this bill here and now. 
 
I move, seconded by the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan): 
 

That Bill No. 102 not be proceeded with. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. We have a motion by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman), seconded by 
the member for Rosetown-Elrose (Mr. Swan), that Bill No. 102 not be proceeded with. The motion is in 
order. Is there any debate on the motion? 
 
MR. H. J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Mr. Chairman, when the debate was on last Tuesday, I spoke in 
opposition to the amendment to The Lord's Day (Saskatchewan) Act. I feel this House would be doing a 
disservice to the people of Saskatchewan to approve that piece of legislation. I gave my thoughts at that time 
and they are still the same. 
 
Opening up the Lord's Day as a commercial day, a day of horse racing and gambling and working, is not 
really necessary in Saskatchewan. The people in this province need an opportunity to worship and to rest, 
which is what the Bible says we should do on the Lord's Day. I am pleased to second the motion put forward 
by the member for Rosthern and I would encourage all of you to vote in favour of this amendment that Bill 
No. 102 not be proceeded with. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — On a point of order, Mr. Chairman, kindly call the vote so we can understand what the 
vote is. You said those in favour say aye; those in favour say no. 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3241 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Pardon me, those against say no. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 20 
 
Blakeney Prebble Muirhead 
Pepper Long Katzman 
Bowerman Engel Andrew 
Baker Birkbeck McLeod 
MacMurchy Taylor Collver 
Kaeding Swan Ham 
Rolfes Garner  
 

NAYS — 21 
 
Allen Shillington Cowley 
Smishek Mostoway Cody 
Romanow Banda Lusney 
Messer Hammersmith Johnson 
Kramer Feschuk Nelson 
Skoberg Byers Poniatowski 
McArthur Vickar Solomon 
 

Section 1 
 
MR. L. W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Chairman, the bill that's before the House, though having 
passed second reading and therefore of course having passed in approval, does not necessarily have to pass 
third reading, and therefore does not necessarily have to be assented to and become law in this province. 
 
Certainly when you consider the vote at second reading which was reasonably close and the vote we have 
just had now, which is virtually the same kind of vote as we had at second reading, being only won by one 
vote, it seems reasonable, Mr. Chairman, that members of the Assembly who are in favour of this particular 
amendment to The Lord's Day Act need to consider very carefully the ramifications of the amendment. 
 
And if they are voting in accordance with their constituent's desires . . . In the case of the member for Moose 
Jaw North (whose views I respect) and the entrepreneurs — he is putting forth the views of his constituents 
in this particular case before his own principles. But not necessarily; I say it's a possibility that the principles 
of the entrepreneurs who want to make money on a Sunday are possibly the principles of the member for 
Moose Jaw North. But notwithstanding that, what I am attempting to say is this is the time in this Assembly 
when we do have a free vote, and one of the very few times, Mr. Chairman, when we as members of the 
Assembly have the opportunity to vote in a free fashion — a free vote. Therefore, Mr. Chairman, it gives us 
that opportunity to vote as we, as individuals, feel in accordance with our conscience, if you like. I 
emphasize, Mr. Chairman, the closeness of this vote. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3242 

I ask members who are in favour of the amendments to The Lord's Day Act to consider this scenario (if you 
like). I will tell you that when I began farming on my own I was 21 years old. During harvest and springtime 
seeding I used to work on Sunday because I thought that I had to. I had to get the crop in and I had to get it 
off. I thought I had to do that to make a living. But we had some neighbours who never ever worked on 
Sunday. They never ever did. And while I was working on Sunday they were visiting with their families, or 
enjoying some form of recreation, visiting the parks or what have you. The most interesting thing I noted as a 
young person just starting out in the agricultural business was that they always got their crop in, and they 
always got it off. They were able to do in six days what I thought required seven. 
 
Subsequently, Mr. Chairman, I adopted the philosophy of my neighbours. More importantly, I suppose, I 
adopted a philosophy that was set out a long time ago through the Scriptures: we can make a living in six 
days and keep that Sunday, keep the seventh day holy, and keep it for a day of rest. I suppose what each and 
every one of us requires is an example. I had that example in my own community whereby these neighbours 
were able to make out and do quite nicely, with regard to their work, in six days. So if that's the fundamental 
issue at stake here regarding the amendments to The Lord's Day Act, that we have to make provisions for 
horse racing on Sunday and subsequent gambling on Sunday, so that entrepreneurs may in fact make a 
living, I say that argument is without any foundation whatsoever, because it is not required, not in any sense 
of the word. So what we're basically looking for here is about only two or three votes to oppose this 
amendment, and it can be defeated at third reading . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It could be. Yes, it could 
be defeated right now. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I'm certainly attempting to plead with those who are voting in favour, and have had 
time to consider it further and to consider the fundamental issue that's at stake with regard to this 
amendment. It's not a question of whether we're legislating morality or what we're doing with this particular 
amendment. It seems to me that it's a matter of a particular segment of our society requiring Sunday to make 
a living. That seems to be the nuts and bolts of the amendment. And if that's the only issue then I don't know 
how we can support it, because as I have said, from real life experience I know it's not necessary. And I'll tell 
you this for those who have voted in favour of this amendment; you will have a far more difficult time in the 
long run defending your position if you vote in favour of this amendment than you will if you oppose it. I 
suppose that may be paralleled with the saying that honesty is good for the long run and deceit for the short. 
So, maybe it's something that we, as politicians should consider. At least once in a while we should consider 
things on the long run, such as honesty, and vote in accordance with our conscience and not necessarily in 
accordance with what some constituents (a few people who want to make some money on Sunday) are 
concerned about. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Chairman, I would just conclude by saying I find it rather unnecessary for us as members 
of the legislature to be attempting to, I suppose in a way, legislate morality. I would rather leave that to the 
individual. I believe that one's religion and one's faith in God, if you like, is a personal matter, a matter they 
as individuals will address themselves to without us as legislature telling them what they can and can't do on 
a Sunday. I would far rather leave that to the discretion of the individual. That, Mr. Chairman, would seem 
far more appropriate to me. 
 
I therefore, Mr. Chairman, will be opposing the bill at third reading. I didn't have the opportunity (I won't get 
into that; it was a misunderstanding, I believe, between two House leaders as to how proceedings are going 
to be) to speak at second reading so I 



 
May 20, 1980 

 

 
3243 

have made my brief comments now. I conclude by saying that those who have spoken opposing the 
amendment to The Lord's Day (Saskatchewan) Act pretty well echo my feelings. So, I thank you, Mr. 
Chairman, for the time of the House. I will be opposing the bill on the third reading. 
 

Section 1 
 
Section 1 negatived on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 20 
 
Allen Shillington Cowley 
Romanow Mostoway Cody 
Messer Banda Lusney 
Snyder Hammersmith Johnson 
Kramer Feschuk Nelson 
Skoberg Byers Solomon 
McArthur Vickar  
 

NAYS — 21 
 
Pepper Long Garner 
Bowerman Engel Muirhead 
Baker Thatcher Katzman 
MacMurchy Birkbeck Andrew 
Kaeding Taylor McLeod 
Rolfes Swan Collver 
Prebble Pickering Ham 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

That the committee report that Bill No. 102 was not agreed to by the committee and not be 
proceeded with at this session. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Bill No. 110 — An Act respecting the Funding of the Pension Plan for the City of Saskatoon Police. 
 

Section 1 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — I address this question to the member for Saskatoon Centre. Has this 
been approved or does the Clerk know if this has been approved by the legal counsel — the bill for powers 
and so forth? 
 
MR. P. P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre): — All I can say to the hon. member is it is all systems go; 
no obstacles. The police force of Saskatoon, city council — I have not run into any snags or at least none I 
know of legislatively speaking, provincially. 



 
May 20, 1980 
 

 
3244 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, that's basically my question. As long as the law clerks and delegated 
powers say this bill is proper, there is no problem. 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Sections 2 to 9 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Statement by Mr. Speaker 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have a statement with regard to Bill No. 63. On Thursday, May 13, 1980, a point of 
order was raised that Bill No. 63, An Act respecting the Provincial Auditor, was out of order on the ground 
that it was a money bill. The question to be determined here is whether the provisions for expenditures in 
Bill No. 63 were already covered by general powers conferred by an existing statute, and thus not requiring a 
new recommendation. (See Erskine May, Parliamentary Practice, 19th Edition, page 752.) Or, whether the 
expenses arising out of the bill are the result of new duties imposed on the existing authority which require 
authorization by a Crown recommendations. (See Erskine May, Parliamentary Practice, 19th Edition, page 
754.) 
 
A careful review of the bill shows that there are three sections which I believe impose new duties on the 
office of the provincial auditor and are not covered by existing legislation. Firstly, section 12(2) requires the 
provincial auditor to report on the results of a more comprehensive audit than is now the case; secondly, 
section 9(2) requires the provincial auditor to direct all audits, including those of Crown corporations, which 
is not required under the old act; and thirdly, section 17 requires the provincial auditor to carry out special 
assignments on behalf of the public accounts committee, or the Assembly, a duty not previously required in 
the old act. 
 
The other grounds raised in the point of order, I believe, do not constitute money provisions, according to 
Rule 30, because those sections are already authorized by general provisions in the old act. 
 
The existence of the three sections outlined earlier which impose new duties on the office of the provincial 
auditor make this a money bill and I, therefore, rule it out of order. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE — INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE — VOTE 19 
 

Item 1 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Chairman, may I introduce my 
officials, with your permission? To my left I have Jeff Bugera, the deputy minister. To my immediate front 
left, Bryce Baron, the executive director of business services division; back here, Wayne Lorch, executive 
director of trade and market development division; to my right, Dave Warren, executive director of the 
planning division; to my immediate front, Herb Scott, executive director of administration services. 
 
The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


