



















































Hansard: June 11, 1980


4375 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 

Wednesday, June 11, 1980. 
 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 

On the Orders of the Day 

 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

CLERK of the LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: — Under the reports, Mr. Skoberg from the select 

standing committee on private bills presents the second report of the said committee, which is as 

follows: 

 

Your committee has considered the following bill and agreed to report the same with 

amendment, Bill No. 04 – An Act to amend and consolidate an Act respecting 

Co-operative Superannuation Society. 

 

MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North) moved, seconded by Mr. R. Katzman (Rosthern): 

 

That the second report of the select standing committee on private bills be now concurred 

in. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

QUESTIONS 

Constitutional Reform 
 

MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Question to the Attorney General. Yesterday the Prime 

Minister, speaking on constitutional reform and the upcoming September meeting, indicated there would 

be dangerous repercussions and dire consequences if there were not success at the September 8, 1980 

meeting. I wonder if the Attorney General might advise the Assembly what his interpretation would be 

as to what constitutes success at the September meeting. 

 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not quite sure how I can 

answer the question, because obviously it involves a large degree of speculation and a large degree of 

second guessing. I think to be on the safe side I had better just tell the member that the Government of 

Saskatchewan will be approaching the discussions with as much flexibility and openness as we can, 

given the two or three items about which we have already indicated our concern and our highest interest. 

We’ll simply hope that the best results will come forward in September. I think we’ll judge in 

September whether or not there’s a minimum degree of success or not. These are very subjective 

standards. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary. The Prime Minister further indicated in the event of no success at 

the September meeting, that he would have to look at a new package for the people of Canada. I think 

many people would interpret that as the Prime Minister building towards a national referendum. Now 

would the Attorney General agree, given the voting majority of the people of central Canada, that the 

referendum scenario sitting over the constitutional debates would impede the progress of the debate 

rather than encourage it? 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4376 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the government’s position has been enunciated on a number 

of occasions. We believe that constitutional reform involves a reform of not only the institutions of 

Canada, but also reform related to the division of powers. We also hold the point of view that we ought 

not to be working to deadlines in the strict meaning of that word, deadline, but we ought to be adhering 

to timetables or targets if I can put it that way. There is a substantial difference. Quite obviously the 

suggestions of unilateral activity pose some concerns in the minds of some governments, but again a lot 

of this is speculative. I think we really ought to give the continuing committee of ministers a chance 

with all the governments to deal with the items which the first ministers have given to us and avoid any 

kind of language or talk which would make the negotiations more difficult. 

 

Feed Transportation Subsidy 
 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Question to the Minister of Agriculture and I 

thank him for the consolidation of his drought program to date. I’ve had several inquiries from 

individuals who have found feed in northern Ontario and northern Alberta. The inquiries are, since you 

have entered into this arrangement with Sask Wheat Pool to pay $25 per ton for a transportation subsidy 

to them, will individuals who have found feed in northern Alberta and northern Ontario be able to 

receive the same $25 or proportionately the same dollars as a transportation subsidy? 

 

HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, my apologies to the Hon. Leader 

of the Opposition for being so late in arriving and providing a statement to him. I just received it before 

coming to the Assembly. If the hon. member will turn to page 11 of the statement that I’ll be making to 

the stock growers this morning shortly after 11 o’clock he will see that they do in fact qualify for the 

assistance. The details of the fodder transportation are as follows: for hay 13 cents per ton mile, for 

pellets 6.5 cents per ton mile, for cubes 11 cents per ton mile to a maximum of $25 per ton. No 

assistance would be paid on the first 50 miles; the maximum payment will be $3,500 per applicant. I’m 

not sure about that maximum; we would have to review that as we look at the seriousness of the 

situation when we get to July 1 or the middle of July, in terms of the maximum. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, our information is that this program has not yet been brought 

before cabinet in Ottawa and therefore hasn’t had the approval of the federal government. Can we take it 

from your comments this morning that at least this part of the program is a commitment of your 

government and not contingent upon federal funding? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — That’s right. I’m trying to say to the hon. member we’re anticipating federal 

funding. Everything we hear is that it in fact will be there. The fact that cabinet hasn’t met, I suppose to 

dot all the i’s and cross all the t’s, is a subject of concern, I think, to all provinces. I say to the hon. 

member that feed is moving at the present time under this program, and we anticipate billing the federal 

government for 50 per cent of the cost of moving the feed that is already coming into Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, are we to take it then that all of the items of the program handed to 

me this morning are in fact a commitment to the farmers of Saskatchewan and not contingent upon 

federal funding? I say that quite simply because many, many farmers are in a bit of a quandary. They 

don’t know how to plan or which direction to go, because quite frankly they don’t know what is 

committed and what is not. Can I now tell them that everything you’ve mentioned in this statement is in 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4377 

fact a commitment by your government? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, everything that I’ll be stating today, and it’s part of the 

statement, is policy. It is a commitment. There are some weaknesses as I see the program at the present 

time, which need some clarifying, such as whom to phone. We have to do more advertising; that process 

is, as well, getting under way. Just to add further for the hon. member with respect to the situation, he 

will recall that about a month ago we pulled together representatives of the farm organizations, which 

really is the basis for the program we’re talking about now. And we’ll be pulling those people back 

together next week, hopefully, to update the situation. The situation is indeed very, very serious. 

 

Feedlot Operators 
 

MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — A question to the Provincial Secretary in the 

absence of the minister in charge of SEDCO. Mr. Secretary, you will know that the feedlot industry in 

Saskatchewan is a very important part of our economic activity with a spinoff opportunity for 

employment and a chance for farmers to get rid of a lot of feed grains, barley and oats, etc. You will 

realize that during the past year the feedlot industry has suffered due to the high price of feeder cattle. 

First of all, last fall they had to pay about $1.10 a pound. Secondly, their operations have been subject to 

high interest rates in the last year, and now there is a shortage of feed. I have been informed that feedlot 

operators in many cases are operating in the red and that they have gone to the government for 

assistance. They were told to go to SEDCO. The information given to them by SEDCO was that we 

cannot help you because you are an existing feedlot, but if you were starting a new one we would be 

able to give you some assistance. What kind of sense does that make not to help people who are in 

trouble while setting new people up in this business to go broke? 

 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary): — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that to be the 

general rule under which SEDCO operates. However, I will take notice and check into that. I will 

endeavor to have the answer or to have the Minister of Industry and Commerce have the answer for the 

member tomorrow. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Thank you. While you are taking notice will you also take into consideration the 

need of these feedlot operators, and consider the possibility of a low interest loan so that they can keep 

going over this very tough time, so we do not lose this important industry and all its benefits from this 

province? 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — I have a supplementary question to the 

minister in charge of co-operatives in the province of Saskatchewan. The minister will be aware that 

many of the organizations of these feedlots in the province of Saskatchewan are by way of corporations, 

but in effect the corporations are just groupings of farmers, each owning one share in the corporation. 

The minister will be aware that kind of organization could lend itself to a co-operative movement in the 

area. Would the Department of Co-operatives consider, for some of these feedlot operators in various 

communities, providing loan guarantees on behalf of the feedlot operators who come to you with a 

corporation similar to that, to switch it into a co-op? Would the department consider the loan guarantee 

program under The Co-operative Development Act? 

 

HON. D.W. CODY (Minister of Telephones): — Well, Mr. Speaker, we certainly do. There is no 

question that we always would consider trying to develop an organization such as 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4378 

you indicate, particularly those of whom you speak, the people who were in from Wynyard I guess. We 

certainly try to help them along as much as we can to get them into a co-operative because there are 

certain things they can do in a co-operative that they cannot do as a corporation. We would be more than 

happy to look at any particular group of people who wish to do that to become a co-operative because 

that’s the business of the department. 

 

Refund of Pasture Rent to Producers 
 

MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Are 

you aware that due to the serious drought in Saskatchewan pasture conditions are becoming most 

serious? There are many cattle producers who are getting into a predicament each day, Mr. Minister. 

They are being asked to remove their herds, that they have spent a lifetime building up, from the 

community pastures. And my question from these people and to you, Mr. Minister, is: what is your 

department going to do in regard to the refunding of pasture rent to these producers? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I’m not aware of any cattle being removed from the provincial community 

pastures. As a matter of fact the reports on the provincial community pastures are pretty good at this 

point in time. It may well be with a little break in the weather they can be carried right through. There is 

difficulty with respect to the co-operative pastures and I think in those cases, the cattle are being sent 

home. I think there is difficulty in some of the PFRA pastures. The reports are that PFRA will be 

attempting to allocate those cattle to the wildlife land. There is a large area on the north end of Last 

Mountain Lake, and there is some scattering of wildlife land throughout the province. That’s going to be 

the way in which this matter will be addressed. 

 

With respect to the pressures on the co-operative pastures and the private pastures, we are trying to find 

ways of relocating those cattle in various areas in northern Saskatchewan. If the hon. member will look 

at the statement (I’m sorry I don’t have copies for everyone) he will see there is assistance for moving 

those cattle. With respect to payment, I understand the payments are made on the basis of the days the 

cattle are in the pastures, and therefore I would assume that the farmers will pay for the time that the 

cattle are there, rather than on a full season. It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that is logical. 

 

MR. MUIRHEAD: — Supplementary to the minister. I am referring to two co-op pastures in my own 

constituency. Their president phoned your department, Mr. Minister and I would like this clarified. They 

asked what their rental will be and the rebate. One of the men from your department said that you have 

to take the good years with the bad; there will be no refund. Mr. Minister, I ask you if you will take a 

good look into this and check with your department. The name of the pasture is Willow Bluff pasture in 

Aylesbury community. They were told that by a man from your department; I will bring the name to 

you. Will you clarify this statement Mr. Minister? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Certainly. I will be glad to pursue the matter on behalf of the hon. member. I 

am pleased he raised this matter with me. I would assume the policy I announced in answer to his earlier 

question would be the logical way to deal with this issue. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary to the Minister. Was there an increase in the grazing fees and the 

breeding fees in the provincial pastures this year? 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4379 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Yes there was. I think that announcement went forward early in the season – 

March or April. Yes, there was an increase. 

 

MR. TAYLOR: — Supplemental. Surely, Mr. Minister, with the conditions the way they are for the 

cattlemen in this province, there should be no increase this year in pasture rents or breeding fees. Will 

you remove those increases immediately? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I announced to the hon. member for Arm River what approach is being taken 

at the present time with respect to the problems of fees for the pastures. I think the decisions on 

increases in fees were made relative to the operating costs of the pastures and they were in line with 

those operating costs. 

 

Fees on Wildlife Federation Land 
 

MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Agriculture in the 

absence of the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources. Mr. Minister, you are no doubt aware the 

Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources has not set its lease fees for provincial parks. We’ve 

asked the minister on previous occasions to state what the increase is going to be. Today you stated that 

cattle will be going onto the wildlife development fund land. Can you tell us what the pasture fees or 

rental will be on this land? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — I am sorry I cannot answer the hon. member. The wildlife land to which I was 

referring is administered by the Canadian Wildlife Federation. I guess it is a federal-provincial 

operation; I’m not clear in my mind about the operation. I don’t know what the fees will be. I’m aware 

of what’s transpiring with the large area of wildlife land in the north end of Last Mountain Lake because 

it’s very close to my constituency, and I’m following it pretty closely. It’s the intent, as I understand it, 

of PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Act) to move cattle that are under pressure on their pastures into 

that particular location. I would assume that the PFRA pasture fees would carry forward from their 

existing pastures into the wildlife pastures. 

 

With respect to the tourism land, we’re attempting to get some handle on the lands in parks – Duck 

Mountain and Wood Mountain and Meadow Lake and Nipawin – and I do not have the answer to the 

hon. member’s question with respect to what the fees would be. I’m sorry. 

 

MR. GARNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Minister, I think you can understand the 

concern that is there. After all, some of these cattle have been in the pastures for two months now, and 

the farmers and ranchers who have placed them there don’t know what it’s going to cost them for the 

season. I think it’s a very large concern to them. My question to you is, will you meet with the Minister 

of DTRR (Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources) and, as soon as possible, announce to this 

House and to the people of Saskatchewan what the fees are going to be for this season? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Yes, I’d be glad to do that for the hon. member. I think the fees for PFRA 

pastures and provincial community pastures and co-operative pastures are well known. They’ve been 

announced for some time. Outstanding are the fees for provincial parks and we will get an answer out as 

quickly as we possibly can. 

 

MR. MUIRHEAD: — Supplementary to the minister. Mr. Minister, are there any negotiations going on 

to perhaps use the Dundurn army camp for pasture land, which 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4380 

was used before as an emergency measure? 

 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t answer the hon. member specifically with respect to 

Dundurn. Every avenue is being pursued, including the avenue of Indian reserve lands. I don’t have a 

report as yet on where that kind of land is. But every avenue is being pursued. The situation is that 

serious. 

 

Decision re: Power Pole Formula 
 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of SPC. Mr. 

Minister, the farmers in the area all the way from Poplar River to Rouleau are concerned about the 

power pole formula which you have promised them – this is the 230 KV line that runs diagonally 

through their lands. They were promised a decision on the formula and the rates that were going to be 

paid on the easement settlements and annual rent by December, and by January, and now it’s June and 

June 26 is the expropriation two-year date. Could you tell me what has happened on that? 

 

HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): – Mr. Speaker, I believe the member may be 

alluding to two activities within the power corporation. One is in respect to the farmers who are involved 

in the right of way for the line under construction. The other is an internal review that was being done 

with the assistance of a committee appointed by me to make recommendations to the corporation 

regarding changes in rights of way that are needed by the corporation – not in particular for that right of 

way, but we think the review may be advantageous to us in coming to a conclusion on that right of way. 

I have received the report from that independent committee. It has gone to the Saskatchewan Power 

Corporation board. It is now being discussed by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation executive and this 

committee to see whether or not it will enhance our providing a better proposal to those farmers who are 

affected by this right of way, and that is mainly the reason for the delay. I would hope we would be able 

to bring this to a conclusion in the very near future so that we don’t keep these people in suspense for 

any further period of time than they already have been subjected to. 

 

MR. LARTER: — A supplementary. Mr. Minister, would you attempt to see that this is drawn to a 

conclusion before June 26, otherwise it means that some of these farmers who are in disagreement with 

your department are going to incur court costs. They are interested, as you know, in larger easement 

settlements to start with plus an annual rate, because in some cases where the fathers receive a large 

settlement, it means the sons of the farmers who have been farming that land for years have to work 

around these power poles. Would you attempt to see that this does come around before June 26? 

 

MR. MESSER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate the concern of the farmers and the concern the 

member is conveying to me in this Assembly. I will undertake to direct my officials to bring to a 

conclusion these deliberations as quickly as possible. I cannot give a guarantee it can be done by June 

26, but I will impress on them to try to meet that deadline. 

 

Weather Forecasting in the Province 
 

MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of the 

Environment. Mr. Minister, you will recall about a year ago, the weather office in Regina was closed 

and moved to Winnipeg. At the time, we asked you to intervene with the 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4381 

federal government, and of course at the time, you agreed with the federal government’s moving this 

office to Winnipeg. Now I’m informed that the weather office in Swift Current is being closed from 10 

o’clock in the evening until 6 o’clock in the morning. 

 

Will your government again intervene on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and ask the federal 

government to reconsider these closures of the weather stations and to provide better weather forecasting 

for the province of Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I might, with the consent of the House, answer the 

question on behalf of my colleague, the Minister of the Environment, because as Minister of 

Intergovernmental Affairs, I have been making some submissions. Frankly, I am somewhat surprised at 

the Swift Current situation. Perhaps this shows more than my usual amount of ignorance, but I was of 

the view that Regina, primarily, was the weather forecasting area for the southern region; but Swift 

Current may be affected. 

 

So I will undertake for the hon. member that we will in intergovernmental affairs, working with 

environment, get to the bottom of the Swift Current situation and will make a submission on 

intervention. We oppose, as a general principle, what seems to be happening – the centralization of some 

of the federal services in Winnipeg. The post office was an attempt which was effectively intercepted by 

the Minister of Urban Affairs and others. We will undertake, in the Swift Current case, to do the same. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Since you are ignorant of the Swift Current 

situation, are you also perhaps not aware of the fact that Kindersley is now only reporting every three 

hours, and the only weather reporting we are getting out of the province at the present time on a regular 

basis is Saskatoon, North Battleford and Regina. 

 

Perhaps you might look into the complete weather forecasting situation in the province, and see what 

improvements can be made with the federal government becoming involved. 

 

MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the short answer to the question is yes we will undertake 

this. We have been dealing with the federal government on an overall weather basis with respect to 

forecasting. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the member says they haven’t been listening to us. I 

want to say we didn’t have much success when the prime minister was Joe Clark, when we raised this at 

the time the matter became urgent. We are hopeful the new administration will listen to us. All I can say, 

on a serious basis, to the member – he raised the question seriously; it is a concern—working with 

environment, we will do everything we can to pursue it. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In reply to the Attorney General’s comment 

about the Joe Clark government, are you not aware, Mr. Attorney General, that it was under the Joe 

Clark government that we did get the radio improvement system for the weather station here in the city 

of Regina? 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Report on Constitutional Conference 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4382 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to report briefly to the House with 

respect to the constitutional conference on Monday. Mr. Speaker, the process for constitutional change 

established by Canada’s first ministers on Monday offers, I believe, our country’s best hope of achieving 

significant progress on a new constitution. Our 10 provinces and our federal government have 

committed themselves to a highly intensive series of meetings culminating in a first ministers’ 

conference in September. 

 

The schedule of meetings calls for an organizational meeting of the committee of ministers in charge of 

the constitution on June 17; some preparatory work in preparation for a lengthy, (that is three week long) 

series of meetings on July 7 to July 25; some more preparatory work to allow the premiers to meet at the 

annual meeting of premiers in Winnipeg on August 21 and 22; further meetings of the ministers in 

charge of the constitution on August 25 to 29 in preparation for the first ministers’ conference on 

September 8 to September 12. Now obviously those dates and that sequence of meetings may be subject 

to change, but all, I think, would agree that it represents a commitment to an intensive series of meetings 

in preparation for the September 1 ministers’ meeting. 

 

The objective of that conference will be to reach final agreement on a first list of constitutional items. 

The first list tentatively set out by the first ministers included the following items: a statement of 

principles; a charter of rights, including language rights; a commitment to equalization and sharing to 

reduce the regional disparities; patriation of the constitution; resource ownership, particularly with 

respect to indirect taxation and interprovincial trade aspects; offshore resources; fisheries; powers 

affecting the economy; communications, including broadcasting; family law; a new Upper House 

involving the provinces; and the supreme court. 

 

Many of the items on that list will require skilful negotiation and a flexibility on all sides if we are to 

conclude these talks successfully. I am confident that the spirit of co-operation which allowed first 

ministers to agree to this process will be maintained throughout these negotiations. Saskatchewan enters 

these discussions with firm objectives in mind. We believe this process will allow us to achieve those 

objectives, and at the same time satisfy the aspirations of other parts of the country. 

 

And I would interject that if we are to obtain some of the things we think are very important for 

Saskatchewan, and I would instance a clarification of our right to regulate the taxation and production of 

natural resources, then obviously we are going to have to agree to things which are not only, perhaps, of 

no particular interest to us, but may be of negative interest to us, if I may phrase it in that way. 

 

While uncertainty still clouds the ultimate outcome of our negotiations, I believe that patience and 

perseverance will produce in time a new constitution to which all jurisdictions can agree. I believe that 

until we achieve the acceptance of a new constitution by Canadians in all parts of the country, the work 

of renewing our federal system cannot be considered complete. With a detailed process now in place to 

guide our deliberations, the prospects for change are encouraging. I believe that now is the time to create 

for Canadians a new confederation bargain, a bargain which will ensure justice and meet the needs of 

Canadians generally. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — I believe all people of the province would certainly 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4383 

wish the premiers and the Prime minister well in their, what appears to be, extremely tight schedule to 

negotiate renewed federalism. This effort has been going on for some time – I suppose, in the last ten 

years, off and on two or three times a year. As I say, all people hope that we can find some solution to 

this problem. However, news reports coming out of the most recent meeting would indicate that, on a 

very wide range of the issues put down by the various people on the first list, there is a lot of ground 

between the various ministers and the federal government. I simply hope we do have progress, because 

without that progress what I see the Prime Minister coming down to ultimately is unilateral action by the 

federal government (whether it be in a referendum or some other form). I think it poses a danger to the 

fibre of Canadian federalism, if that is in fact the ultimate course which has to be taken. 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly 

comment on what the Premier has said this morning and, more importantly, what it implied about what 

went on at this meeting of first ministers to establish this timetable. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it was significant, in terms of the eventual outcome of the talks and the debates 

which are going to occur over the coming months, that the ministers and the Prime Minister were unable 

to agree on even a brief statement of the motherhood issue (if you like). They were unable to agree on 

that statement before they could go forward. They could agree on a timetable, but they couldn’t even 

agree on a statement of reasonable principles. 

 

I understand, Mr. Speaker, the difference was whether or not you would have, we, the people of Canada, 

or we, the founding peoples of Canada. I understand that that was the big dispute which occurred as a 

result of the initial talks at the conference. 

 

There are two things I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I also wish the premiers of Canada 

and the Prime Minister of Canada success in these negotiations. I hope they are successful. I believe, 

however, that it’s one thing to say you hope they are successful and it is another thing for a premier such 

as the Premier of Saskatchewan to hang his hat on only the resource-type issues and forget the more 

fundamental issue of compulsory bilingualism and the recognition of two founding peoples, two 

founding races. Mr. Speaker, I think it would be a complete sell-out of the spirit of the people of western 

Canada if the Premier of Saskatchewan accepts that principle, which will so negate the feelings of 

co-operation which have developed between peoples of Ukrainian descent, German descent, Italian 

descent and all of the other minority groups who have settled in western Canada and who feel so 

strongly that we shouldn’t recognize any one race or founding race above anyone else. I think it would 

be a sell-out of the interests of the people of the West if the Premier gave that away in order to get a 

financial return on resources. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope that is not true. I hope the Premier will come out foursquare in opposition to the 

kind of approach to Canada that would sell out the spirit of western Canadians in order to get a few extra 

dollars on oil. 

 

Mr. Speaker, one further comment I would make – I would hope and the Premier mentioned today, there 

were objectives that the Government of the Saskatchewan had in mind with reference to the forthcoming 

talks. May I say to the Premier of the province that it is incumbent upon him today to spell out in detail 

to the people of Saskatchewan what the objectives of the Government of Saskatchewan are in these 

talks. Without a knowledge, in advance, of what the Saskatchewan Premier’s objectives are in these 

talks, the people will not know what the Premier may have to give and what the Premier 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4384 

may get in return. So I suggest that before he goes on to say that we have objectives, as he has today, he 

should present those objectives to the people and let them decide whether they are appropriate objectives 

for the forthcoming round of talks. 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. F.J. THOMPSON (Athabasca): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you 

to this Assembly, a group of 16 Grade 9 students from St. Pascal School in Green Lake. They are 

accompanied by their teacher, Mike D’Andrea, and chaperone, Ann D’Andrea. Their bus driver is Leon 

Janvier from La Loche. They are touring southern Saskatchewan for four days and they will be leaving 

tomorrow to return to Green Lake. On behalf of all the members here, we sincerely hope that your trip 

will be both educational and enjoyable and we wish you all a safe journey home. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

Congratulations to Member 
 

HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — I wonder if I might remind the hon. members that on June 11, 

1952, there was a provincial election in this province wherein the member for the Battlefords (Mr. 

Kramer) was elected and he is now therefore celebrating the 28
th

 anniversary of his election to this 

legislature. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. BLAKENEY: — I am sure that all hon. members admire some things about the member for the 

Battlefords. He holds his opinions strongly and presents them with vigor. I am certain that all hon. 

members envy his capacity to survive for 28 years in the political life of this province as an elected 

member. This is a near record which very few in the history of this province have accomplished. We 

congratulate him and wish him well for the future. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — I would just like to join the Premier in 

congratulating the member for the Battlefords. Mr. Speaker, 28 years is a long time and I’ll be working 

very, very hard to see that the member for the Battlefords in fact celebrates his last anniversary in this 

House at 30. In the meantime, I hope he does enjoy his stay here. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. R.L. COLLVER (Leader of the Unionest Party): — Yes, Mr. Speaker, until the passage of Bill 

No. 105 I do have the opportunity to respond to this kind of suggestion. I won’t join with the Premier, 

but I would like to congratulate the member for the Battlefords in his longevity and nothing else. 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE – URBAN AFFAIRS – VOTE 24 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. We are dealing with the Department of Urban Affairs and I 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4385 

call on the minister to introduce his officials. 

 

HON. W.E. SMISHEK (Minister of Municipal Affairs (Urban)): — Mr. Chairman, to my immediate 

left is the deputy minister of the Department of Urban Affairs, Don Moroz. To the back is Peggy Clark, 

the senior planner and Laura Joorisity, the accountant. To my immediate right is Don Koop, the special 

assistant to the deputy. There may be other people we will call on later. 

 

Item 1 
 

MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — Initially, just a brief question, Mr. Minister. It deals with the 

question that has been in the media of recent and which has been a long-standing problem in 

Saskatchewan for the last 40 or 50 years. It is the whole question of rural depopulation. The small towns 

of under 5,000 people in Saskatchewan seem to be losing population. That trend seems to have been 

turned around in some of the other provinces, particularly our neighboring provinces of Alberta and 

Manitoba. With regard to the whole problem of depopulation of our small towns of under 5,000 people, 

what is your department’s assessment as to the long run reason for that? What are the future prospects 

and the basis of your future prospects for any growth or are our rural areas going to continue to decrease 

and to depopulate? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, to start with the hon. member may be interested in knowing that 

Saskatchewan, in the total North American context, has more of its population (in terms of the 

percentage) living in smaller communities in rural Saskatchewan than anywhere else in North America. 

It is true that perhaps in the last while, in a province like Alberta, there has been more stabilization in 

terms of the movement of people from smaller rural communities to larger centres, but that appears to be 

the only place. There might be some communities where that may be true in Manitoba, but not of any 

significance. Part of our problem as the hon. member is aware, is with the mechanization that has taken 

place in the agricultural industry in the province, and because of changes in road patterns and road 

improvements, the farmers probably travel to larger communities, and the smaller centres which used to 

provide agricultural services are not called upon. Indeed the member, I am sure, will be aware that the 

rail line abandonment that has taken place over the years has had an effect on the deterioration of 

smaller communities. 

 

We, as a government, have introduced a number of programs to help smaller communities stabilize and 

become more attractive communities to live in. Let me give the hon. member a few examples. 

 

Revenue sharing has indeed helped the smaller communities, just as it has helped the larger 

communities. Our community capital fund has helped the smaller communities, as well as the larger 

communities. We have programs like the business improvement district program to revitalize the 

downtown areas. We have had, as the hon. member is aware, the water assistance program (several of 

them) to help the smaller communities. We have the main street program in which we work with the 

small businessmen and with the town councils. 

 

The program has been in effect, as a business improvement district program and a main street program, 

for only two years, and by now 100 communities have taken advantage of these programs to help 

revitalize their downtowns. We have had a very active program in both senior citizen housing and 

low-income housing, and I think it is fair to say that in the last six or seven years there has been a 

dramatic improvement in 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4386 

the quality of housing for our people in smaller communities. I think all of this is helping to stabilize the 

communities. There still will be some movement, but as the hon. member knows, our population in total 

has grown and it has grown also in some of the smaller communities, though not all of them. But I think 

there is a sign of stability. Some communities will have some difficulties, but I think the future looks 

indeed bright for not only smaller communities, but all of the communities in Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, I wasn’t particularly questioning you on the programs. My question 

was to do with the manner in which you are going to address the problem of rural depopulation. Now, 

you indicated that part of it is the mechanization coming into agriculture. I take it that was one of the 

reasons. The other reason you mentioned was rail line abandonment. In the province of Alberta, I 

believe, 90 per cent of the communities are growing. I think Manitoba has shown something like 80 per 

cent growing, while on the other hand, I think 54 per cent of our communities are in fact decreasing. It 

strikes me that the province of Alberta and the province of Manitoba also face, as rural communities, the 

problem of mechanization in agriculture and the problem of rail line abandonment every bit as much as 

we do. They have, perhaps not quite to the same extent, an agriculture base, but they have turned it 

around and their communities are growing. What the minister doesn’t seem to want to address is that in 

order to turn that corner we must be providing an economic base in rural Saskatchewan and that in fact 

is not happening. It is all well and good to say, O.K., we need some better housing, or we have to 

revitalize the downtowns. Nobody is denying that doesn’t have to happen. But it seems to me what we 

have to address is that if you are simply saying that you are not going to approach the question of 

economic revitalization in rural Saskatchewan, then that trend is going to continue over the next 10 

years. Would the minister agree that we are in for perhaps another 10 years of decline in population and 

the majority of our small towns are going to decline over the next 10 years? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I suppose this question received some publicity in the last few days 

as a result of the conference which was just held here – the statement made by Dr. Tracie of the 

University of Saskatchewan. I can tell the hon. member he made no effort to talk to the Department of 

Urban Affairs. We do not know the basis of his research and his analysis upon which he came up with 

the conclusions which he has. At times this is regrettable because I think researchers or speakers of this 

nature, particularly those who are living in Saskatchewan, might make an effort to contact the 

Department of Urban Affairs and other government departments to see what information we have. We 

have no knowledge of the methodology he used. We propose to contact the gentleman and get the 

methodology to find out whether his information and our information are parallel in any way. 

 

I say to the hon. member if he looks at Alberta and Manitoba, both of those provinces have gone through 

a major depopulation in their rural communities in the last few years. Perhaps they have reached some 

point of stability at this time. We are as yet not in that stabilized period. 

 

He might also take into account the percentages of the population living in large communities in relation 

to the smaller communities in those two provinces. For example, in the province of Manitoba, over 50 

per cent of Manitoba’s population lives in the city of Winnipeg. More than 50 per cent of Alberta’s 

population lives in Calgary and Edmonton. We have larger proportions of our population living in 

smaller communities. When he talks about our taking measures to develop an economic base to stabilize 

the smaller communities, I think the record will show that in the last few 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4387 

years we, as a government, have worked with the smaller communities and have certainly taken steps to 

help. In the areas where our resources are developing, for example, in communities where we have 

potash mines located nearby, there has been indeed not only stability but very significant and dramatic 

growth in the last few years. 

 

The hon. member lives in a part of Saskatchewan where there is a fair bit of activity. For example, in the 

Lloydminster area we find many communities are growing at a rapid rate as a result of the activities in 

the oil fields. I have met with representatives from those communities and we will be meeting again to 

see what we can do to help them out because of very significant drought. 

 

There is every indication that in the southern part of Saskatchewan there will be development of coal 

and generation of electricity through the use of coal. I invite the hon. member to take a look at some of 

the communities where new and innovative approaches have been used, particularly in agricultural 

machinery. There are quite a number of communities in Saskatchewan where agricultural implement 

manufacturing has developed, and not only has it created employment and added to the growth and 

stability of the community, but it has done a great deal to establish new manufacturing and new pride in 

the communities. So things are happening and we, as a government, are helping those communities. And 

as I say, we would like to see not only stability but significant growth. But you just can’t develop it out 

of thin air. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — You indicated Mr. Minister, that you questioned the methodology of Dr. Tracie. I 

would take it that your department, with its projections as to costs, etc. over the next five or ten years, 

would as well have to have projections as to populations of the various towns and villages in the 

province of Saskatchewan. Do you in fact have projected growths, or projected depopulations in the 

various areas of rural. Saskatchewan? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, first on the question of Dr. Tracie, we don’t question his 

methodology. Our problem is that we don’t know his methodology. This is what I might comment first 

of all. In the case of community growth, of having a particular analysis community by community, we 

do not have that kind of information, Mr. Chairman. We do have, for example, the information on the 

latest census which was taken by a majority of communities in relation to revenue sharing in 1979. 

Particularly in areas where there is resource activity, like in the Lloydminster area and in some of the 

potash areas, we do work with the Department of Mineral Resources and exchange information. But in 

terms of taking every community, analysing and projecting growth (there are 495 urban communities in 

Saskatchewan), we do not have that kind of information to be making assumptions about what is going 

to be happening in every one of the 495 communities. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, what you’re indicating to us is that in the area of non-renewable 

resource development, we have the growth factor, but by and large in the other areas, other than towns 

over 5,000, there’s probably not a great deal of hope for too much expansion. In fact, we’re going to 

continue to see a decline in the population of those areas. Would that be a fair statement? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — No, Mr. Chairman, I wouldn’t say that is necessarily a fair statement. I think we 

are reaching a point of fairly good stability in agriculture. As the hon. member knows, through programs 

like FarmStart and land bank in the agricultural area, we have helped to keep young people and young 

farmers on the land. That is one program of 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4388 

stability in the area of agriculture and therefore helps the smaller communities. It is just not possible to 

establish new industries, manufacturing or resource development in every one of the 495 communities. 

It hasn’t happened anywhere else in North America and it’s not going to happen here. 

 

We also know that because of some of the service features of the communities such as better 

transportation, better roads, people are travelling. I think there is also, when you look at many of our 

communities, an indication that the movement of people is not perhaps as dramatic as it was a few years 

ago. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Maybe this is unfair to the minister because it’s perhaps an agriculture related 

question. Would you agree that the question of population has probably relevance to agriculture and to 

the development of agriculture processing or what we have in Saskatchewan is that the size of the farm 

is growing larger? That puts the pressure on the rural communities, of course. Unless we move into a 

field of agriculture processing, whether it be processing our cattle and hogs in Saskatchewan or 

developing other processing mechanisms, whether it be inland terminals or whatever, it becomes an 

agriculture problem and you are, I suppose, the benefactor of that depopulation. 

 

With regard to the estimates, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could provide, out of the total urban affairs 

budget and that also includes your grants to Sask Housing, could you provide me with a breakdown of 

the money that you receive from federal cost sharing programs as it relates to your budget? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have that information at hand. We would be prepared to 

break it down for the hon. member and provide him with that information. I can tell him that in the case 

of housing, certainly there are a fair number of cost sharing housing programs. In the case of urban 

affairs, there isn’t very much federal money that comes our way. For example, the community services 

program is about $7.7 million, but that doesn’t go through these estimates because it is really handled 

directly through the federal government. I’ll be glad to have our officials work at it because there is 

some DREE money that does come in, but it’s not very large in the case of urban affairs. We’d be glad 

to provide him with that information. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Could you provide me with the percentage of the total budget of your department 

relating to Sask Housing that is received from federal cost sharing programs? Do you have a total 

percentage figure? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, what is here in the estimates is really provincial; there’s no federal. 

If the hon. member looks at the annual report of the housing corporation, he will see that federal money 

is separate, but I’ll be glad to . . . You know that has to be added to what is here in the estimates and 

we’ll get to the items on housing. The money that is being spent here on housing is really the provincial 

portion of housing programs. 

 

MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Minister, I was pleased to hear you say that your department 

was helping in the growth of some communities and you particularly mentioned some of our Crown 

corporations and how they had become good corporate citizens, such as PCS Rocanville. I agree they 

have taken on a new formula, more closely adapted to the private sector, where they will assist in 

communities such as IMC has done at Esterhazy in the recreation program. 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4389 

This is one of our large Crown corporations – PCS. We have another Crown corporation, SPC, which is 

involved population-wise and growth-wise in the city of Estevan. We see two different circumstances 

where PCS is contributing, I should say, as a good corporate citizen; whereas in Estevan there are some 

300 employees and there have been, over the years, as many as 700 employees with construction and 

permanent staff. Yet the people of Estevan, the mayor and council of Estevan, have to be content with 

grants in lieu of taxes. I have brought this up many times with SPC. I have heard that they are reviewing 

it. But the city is still faced with the growth factor, the schools, the police services they’ve had to supply 

over the years. They have had to supply extra policemen and recreational facilities in particular have 

been taxed to the limit. I’m not arguing. The SPC people are very good corporate citizens. They are 

some of the leading people in our communities. They are on city councils and are on the school boards. 

 

But we are still faced with your help to the communities as urban affairs. You’re trying to help the 

communities. But in the case of Estevan, which is probably the only city in Saskatchewan which has a 

Crown corporation of that magnitude, I wonder what your department is doing with SPC in trying to 

draw up new formulas so we can draw a tax base for a city such as Estevan? 

 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Saskatoon Riversdale): — Mr. Chairman, I wonder, while the minister is 

getting his answer ready, if I might be permitted the privilege to introduce some students. I’d like to 

introduce to you, Mr. Chairman, and to the members of the committee (I hope I have the right group) 

students from Montgomery School who are in the Speaker’s gallery. Montgomery School is in the west 

end of Saskatoon Riversdale constituency. I’m very pleased to welcome about 30 Grade 8 students who 

are here with their teacher, Mr. Kerry Tranborg. They have arrived this morning to tour the Legislative 

Building and the Regina area. I hope to meet with them at 11:30 for a few moments to answer some 

questions. I would ask members to welcome them to the House. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that the hon. member had the opportunity to discuss this 

matter with the minister in charge of Sask Power from time to time. Really SPC, like other corporations 

that pay grants in lieu of taxes on a similar basis . . . The Saskatchewan Power Corporation, in many 

respects, is perhaps even more generous. For example, they pay to communities up to 10 per cent in 

electricity for the surcharges that are made and in the case of natural gas, 5 per cent. Communities enter 

into agreements for distribution and this produces a good deal of revenue to the communities and 

certainly they pay grants in lieu of taxes. The people who are living in those communities pay property 

taxes and contribute to the overall well-being and economy of a community like Estevan. I can tell the 

hon. member that I have met with the Mayor of Estevan. I’m aware that they have some peculiar 

problems, not necessarily because of SPC. I think it would be conceded that SPC helps out a great deal 

while they add to the growth, I think, in total, that the city of Estevan is the beneficiary as a result of 

having the SPC. I wonder whether the hon. member isn’t posing the question in a polite way, and what 

he would like to see is some special consideration given over and above what is being done. At times 

there is a problem in creating precedents as to whether you can do things for one community which you 

are not able thereafter to do for other communities. Also in my discussions with the mayor, some of the 

council members and 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4390 

the administration, they concede that the SPC has done a good deal for your community. As well as 

being helpful with employment, there are certain added costs of schools, policing and so on. But in total, 

I think your community is the beneficiary because SPC is there. 

 

MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think the mayor and council of Estevan are asking for any 

special treatment. They are asking for a change in the formula. You might consider it special treatment, 

but they want a change in formula. They feel it is a legitimate cost which should be built into power bills 

– what it costs to keep a corporation such as SPC in Estevan. You must remember, a lot of this grant 

goes to R.M. No. 5. They are situated in the R.M. instead of in the city. If this grant is so good, why 

don’t you pay taxes in lieu of grants in these communities? In that case there would be no discrimination 

against any community. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I think that would be a question better directed to the minister in 

charge of the SPC. It is my understanding that grants in lieu of taxes go to the city as well. Because of 

growth, I know that our communities would like to have more money. Perhaps the time has come to 

look at a different formula. I think in fairness, Mr. Chairman, those are questions which should be more 

properly directed to the minister in charge of SPC. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — A question, Mr. Minister, with regard to the Emma Lake and Christopher Lake 

problem. I have a letter dated March 25, 1980, addressed to a Mr. Patterson of the R.M. of Lakeland, 

from Mr. Moroz, and I’ll read it in part: 

 

After careful review of Mr. Crozier’s recommendations, a decision has been made to alter 

the boundaries of the R.M. of Paddockwood No. 520 and the R.M. of Lakeland No. 521 

(and he enclosed the initial annexation order). The department has made this boundary 

alteration as an attempt to resolve the lake-oriented development problem which has been 

experienced in the area. 

 

I take it that prior to this particular matter being handed over to rural affairs, it was the position of the 

Department of Urban Affairs that the annexation should in fact take place, based on the Crozier report 

and the hearings of the provincial appeals board. It seemed to me like a reasonable position to take. 

Would you agree, Mr. Minister, that as of March 25, that was in fact the rationale as to why you 

proposed that annexation, and proceeded with the annexation? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member may or may not be aware, there has been a 

long-standing problem under the LID (local improvement district) structure because Lakeland had 

development control and Paddockwood did not. That was a conclusion we reached after studies, after 

analysis, after our officials were involved (Mr. Rosenberg’s trying to bring about an agreement between 

the two parties), and the Crozier report. The decision of March 25 and the order appeared to be the way 

to go to bring the matter to a head. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Part of the Crozier report (and I simply have a brief on it) would indicate a question 

of the status of the R.M. of Lakeland, being primarily an urban-oriented community, or municipality if 

you like. Has the department made any recommendations? Is it under consideration at this point in time 

that the R.M. of Lakeland will become an urban rather than a rural municipality? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member is aware, the Lakeland area is a 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4391 

resort area. They have contacted the officials of the department with the possibility of becoming a resort 

village, or perhaps two or three distinct resort villages. The matter is under consideration, and will be 

discussed with the R.M. At this stage, no decision or conclusion has been reached. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Would you agree, Mr. Minister, that if the case is as stated and it is basically an 

urban municipality, that when major development affects an urban municipality, that urban municipality 

should be the body which makes the overall planning just as any city or major town would, and that the 

planning should be centralized in the urban centre as opposed to, let’s say, dislocated planning in one 

area versus the other area? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, we do not agree that in a situation of this nature the largest urban 

setting should dictate to everybody else. What the department is posing as a possibility is the 

establishment of a district planning commission where the urban portions of that area, as well as the 

rural municipalities, would have representation and input, and collectively they would reach conclusions 

and decisions. We believe this is the route to take rather than have the largest urban part of that resort 

area make the decisions, keeping in mind also, many of the residents in the area are there for the summer 

period. The hon. member will be interested in knowing that all cities are working out that kind of a 

system. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — You are saying, Mr. Minister, that before you can have any development, you must 

have a working agreement between the two R.M.s. That’s fundamental toward any further development 

of your plan or proposal. Would that be a fair statement? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, what I posed is a general concept and perhaps a long-term solution 

to the problem. There are some immediate problems which have to be attended to. I mentioned to the 

hon. member that Lakeland, for quite a number of years, had a development control plan; Paddockwood 

did not. But Paddockwood, as I understand it, has now agreed to a development plan. Hopefully the two 

will be working together solving some of the problems on an immediate basis and that on a long-term 

basis they consider the establishment of a district planning commission. 

 

Whether it is Lakeland and Paddockwood having some differences at the moment, or other communities 

which from time to time will have differences, we are trying to resolve them in the best possible way. 

Perhaps some of the most current activities, and what has been happening, might be discussed when the 

estimates of the Department of Rural Affairs come up. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — One further question, Mr. Minister. I understand that the present proposal of your 

government (and I am not sure whether your department is even involved anymore) is simply that you 

will look at developing a plan with one proviso or one condition and that is that certain property, in 

particular the Karasiuk property, must proceed with development. Following that, we can look at an 

overall plan. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, as far as I know, no final decisions have been made to this date. But 

I know that meetings have taken place as late as last night, and I think that this particular question might 

be better directed to the Minister of Rural Affairs. Hopefully we will be able to expedite the business of 

this House so that later today the Department of Rural Affairs may have its estimates considered. 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4392 

MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Minister, I have a series of questions to which I hope you 

will be able to give me the answers today. If not, I’ll accept them at a later date. But I’ll go on with them 

and just make a note so that we don’t waste any time with them. You have two programs in the urban 

areas, one is, I believe, called the native housing program, and the other one is the rehabilitation 

program which you have recently announced. Could you supply us with the civic addresses of these 

homes that you’ve bought so far, and where you intend to buy the others? How many have you bought 

this year? I’ll start with those two. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — I gather there are two questions. One is about urban native housing and units that 

have been purchased in the city of Regina. My information is that last year 18 properties were 

purchased. The hon. member also asked about the infill program; in the cathedral area and the 

north-central area I believe approximately 160 lots have been purchased. The member is asking for 

particular addresses of each of the properties. I don’t know what his purpose would be in getting the 

addresses of the properties. I don’t think that it has been a practice of this government to provide that 

kind of information. I will take it under advisement, because I don’t know at the moment what 

commitments have been made, if any and what the implications are of giving the names and addresses of 

people. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, I didn’t ask for the names of the people. I asked for the civic 

addresses. I don’t know why that couldn’t be provided to us. The owner will be definitely the 

government. So if the government is the owner, we would like to know where you own these houses. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — As I have indicated to the hon. member, I will take it under advisement and if there 

are no problems we will provide the information. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — That’s fine. Are you contemplating the building, on any of these lots that you 

have purchased, houses or apartment blocks? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, first of all with units that can be repaired, we will repair them. 

There are, as far as I know, not that many of them that are in a good state of repair. Then we will be 

building new units. In most cases they will be probably fourplexes and eightplexes. In the cathedral area 

it is intended to have an apartment which will be for senior citizens’ housing. That’s the only apartment 

that is being considered at the moment. 

 

Incidentally, for the information of the hon. member, I did say that in both areas we have acquired about 

160 properties. Those are basically 25-foot lots. I think the largest number is in the north-central area, or 

is it about 50-50? I’m told it’s close to 50-50 but probably the north-central is a little higher. Those are, 

as I said, 25-foot lots, and we think in total we have acquired about two-thirds of the units that we plan 

to at this stage. Another one-third or perhaps less is yet to be acquired. And for the information of the 

hon. member, much of that housing was in bad shape, a lot of it was not lived in and was boarded up. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I’m aware of the condition of the houses; you were buying but (correct me 

if I’m wrong) it seems to me you had indicated earlier 1,000 units or am I thinking of another program? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — No, that’s an entirely different program. The hon. member might be 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4393 

thinking of the urban native pilot project which is provincial in nature, and that’s an unrelated program. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — I wonder if the minister might indicate to this Assembly whether the purchases 

of these properties are from realtors or individuals? Is there any speculation going on in this particular 

area at this point in time? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, most of the property was acquired through real estate agents. There 

have been a few properties acquired directly from people who wanted to sell. The reason we haven’t 

been saying very much about the program, even though we have been working with the city, has been 

very deliberate; it is to prevent speculation. Remember we have a pretty good idea of the value of the 

property. I think we paid fair market value but we, I’m quite sure, haven’t paid through the nose and 

nobody made any big gains. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — I wonder if the minister might want to tell this Assembly how many you 

purchased from one Mr. Tony Merchant? Before you get carried away with your reply on that one, you 

are probably aware that I happen to be the owner of one which I am selling to the government. I’m 

going through the proper channels I might add, not on a speculative basis. I happen to own it and the 

realtor who brought me an offer did not indicate at that time who was buying but at a later date I found 

out who was buying it. So I am asking the question, how many have you bought from Mr. Tony 

Merchant? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, I am not aware of any, but we’ll check that and provide the 

information to the member. As the member knows, we use real estate people and obviously we knew in 

the final analysis who owned the property, but I’ll check it and I’ll be glad to provide the information to 

the hon. member. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — I’m surprised you would know that I was selling you one. Yes, I would 

appreciate that information as soon as possible, Mr. Minister. 

 

I would like to shift now from that area to one of my favorite subjects and that is the Cornwall Centre. 

You recently announced a second phase to that program and as I recall, the amount was around $13 

million of $15 million additional financing. The series of questions on that of course would be: (1) who 

handled the bridge financing? (2) what kind of mortgage have you arranged on that? (3) what kind of a 

deal did you work out with the firm from Toronto, Chartwood Developments? (4) what inquiries or 

offers were made to local contractors or business people from within the province to be involved in that 

particular second phase of the program? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is raising a question about the addition. You are 

talking about the west side of the Hamilton Street area, the addition where Sears is going to be coming 

in and the additional new parkade; that’s the particular area. For the information of the hon. member, as 

he probably is aware, we were asked by the city of Regina to support the idea of that extension. He is 

probably aware that the city of Regina has property in that area. In terms of land that is there and site 

acquisition, the province will contribute 60 per cent of the cost of the site acquisition and the city will 

contribute 40 per cent of the site acquisition. Revenues generated through the lease of the property, and 

the province’s contribution will increase as he knows, will be shared in that area on the same basis. The 

province will provide long-term financing. I am not aware that there is any bridge financing for that 

particular aspect of it but there is long-term financing that we agreed to, to a maximum 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4394 

of $8.3 million at a maximum rate of 11.625 per cent. The arrangements, which are known to the hon. 

member and which we have described in the past, will be the ground lease rental arrangements plus 51 

per cent of net cash flow arrangements. 

 

Because figures have changed a little bit and because of the city’s participation, I think the city in terms 

of the land and their equity will have about 8.8 per cent of the land equity in the total project. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — You’ll recall, Mr. Minister, that on several occasions in this Assembly I’ve 

called the deal you’ve made with Chartwood a sweetheart deal and I stand by that statement today. This 

is further confirmation that that’s exactly what it is. 

 

There are several questions arising from your answers. First of all, you indicated a $8.3 million 

mortgage and a maximum of 11.625 per cent. First of all, where is the rest of the money coming from? 

Secondly, what do you mean by maximum? A mortgage is usually a mortgage and usually at a fixed 

rate. What’s this maximum rate for the mortgage and what’s the minimum? If the maximum is 11.625 

per cent, what’s the average and what’s the minimum? You’ve indicated again 51 per cent of net cash 

flow, and I would presume (you can correct me again if I’m wrong) that would be after mortgage 

payments are made by Chartwood. So that certainly is not a net 51 per cent of profit but a 51 per cent of 

nothing, especially when you consider the fact that the total cost of the project will be paid to the 

advantage of Chartwood and it’s money in their pocket before you get a red nickel out of it. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve gone through this discussion before on the hon. 

member’s allegations. I disagree with him very strongly because there is no basis of fact whatsoever. It 

is pretty obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member is opposed to the Cornwall project. I can tell the 

hon. member and this Assembly that we have the support of the city. We have the support of the 

downtown merchants. We have the support of the Chamber of Commerce. I can also tell the hon. 

member that just Monday I was on the open line show where the infill program and the Cornwall project 

were discussed. I didn’t receive a single negative phone call from the public. I think that there is a great 

deal of interest, and a great deal of excitement. I think the financial arrangements we have made are 

aboveboard, and in the long term the province will make money. We’ve had to put some money up in 

order to help revitalize the city of Regina. I hope that the hon. member changes his attitudes and gets 

with the people of Regina in saying, here is an example that we in Regina, all of us, can be proud of. 

 

I can tell the hon. member that we now see the great success story of Weyburn where people from the 

Alberta government and the Ontario government are coming to see it. The Cornwall Centre will be that 

kind of a project and will help our city. It’s a project that will provide jobs during a period of 

construction. It will provide badly needed restoration to the city. It will bring revenue to the city of 

Regina. I do not have the exact figures at the moment but my understanding is that in the total complex, 

in that total area between Lorne and Hamilton, the city taxes were something like $200,000 and once the 

project is completed they will probably be closer to $1 million a year. 

 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — In the interests of winding this up by noon, Mr. Minister, I will only say this. It is 

typical of you, instead of answering the questions I asked to stand up and make a political speech trying 

to draw me into a corner on the basis of opposition to the Cornwall Centre. 

 

Mr. Minister, I’m going to tell you this and I’m going to tell it to you once and for all. We 



 

June 11, 1980 

 

 

4395 

on this side have always favored the development of the Cornwall Centre, or any other development of 

its kind. The only thing I will say is that you are about 10 years late in getting started on it. Also as I 

have indicated to you many times in this House before, you made the sweetheart deals with Toronto 

firms, Toronto contractors and finance. You had no interest whatever in the people of Saskatchewan, the 

businessmen of this province who pay taxes to the province of Saskatchewan. Rather, you went out of 

the province and made a sweetheart deal with those people in Ontario. 

 

You did the same thing with the Weyburn Centre, when you bring up the Weyburn Centre. And who did 

you give that business to? An Alberta firm! What’s wrong with the people of the province of 

Saskatchewan who are quite capable of handling projects of this size? 

 

We’re not the ones who are opposed to the development of this province, Mr. Minister. It is you who are 

opposed to the development of this province. You’ve been delaying it for years and years and years. 

And furthermore when you do come forward with it, instead of giving it to the people, or offering it to 

the people of the province, you take it out of the province where you can get deals made, probably 

because of political support to your party. 

 

Mr. Minister, let’s get off the nonsense that we are opposed to the Cornwall Centre. We are certainly not 

opposed to the Cornwall Centre. We totally agree with it. We do disagree with the kind of deal you’ve 

made because, again, the deal that was made is not going to be for money in the pockets of the citizens 

of the province of Saskatchewan, but it will enrich that firm in Ontario by at least $50 million. By the 

time that mortgage is finished the value of that property will probably be closer to $100 million. And 

that’s the deal you gave them when all they had to put up was $2 million. You haven’t answered my 

questions. I’m going to go over them because you have them on record, and you can supply them at a 

later date. Time is now running out for me to ask you any further questions. 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Just three or four short questions, Mr. Minister, going down the list. Then we can 

vote the thing off in order. On item 4 the implementation of the Qu’Appelle agreement, I would like to 

know if you could provide me with the details of the federal funding to that program? With regard to 

item 7, emergency measures organization, I would like to know why it has been substantially reduced 

from $112,000 to $55,000? And if you could on item 10, provide me with an explanation of the social 

planning secretariat which was funded before and is now in there. Those are the three questions. 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Chairman, does the hon. member want me to provide that information to him 

later or . . . 

 

MR. ANDREW: — Why is EMO down so far? 

 

MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, in case of Qu’Appelle implementation, it’s 50 per cent sharing. In 

case of the Emergency Measures Organization, we are presently reviewing EMO. Instead of working 

with communities in developing their training programs and getting directly involved, the program now 

is one of co-ordination, working with communities rather than providing the services directly because 

they have a lot of people who are trained and can do the job. Our staff has been small but I can tell the 

hon. member that the whole program is under review because new things are coming to light that all of 

us have to become concerned about. Some of the provinces regrettably have had some unfortunate 

experiences, like the Mississauga area, and we 



 

June 11, 1980 
 

 

4396 

are examining all of that. 

 

In the case of the social planning secretariat, the hon. member notes the money that is here and what was 

budgeted last year; there’s also a supplementary estimate. We did not know precisely our needs last 

year. The figure is much more accurate, combined really between the supplementary and last year’s 

estimate in the Department of Finance. Because of some of the work that has already been completed 

and work which does not have to be completed, there is less money provided this year for the social 

planning secretariat. There might be some further details the hon. member wants to have that I would be 

glad to discuss with him. 

 

Item 1 agreed. 

 

Items 2 to 34 agreed. 

 

Urban Affairs Vote 24 agreed. 

 

DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AFFAIRS – SASKATCHEWAN HOUSING CORPORATION – 

Vote 49 
 

Urban Affairs – Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Vote 49 agreed. 

 

DEPARTMENT OF URBAN AFFAIRS — Vote 62 
 

Items 1 to 3 agreed. 

 

Urban Affairs Vote 62 agreed. 

 

URBAN AFFAIRS – PROVINCIAL DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE – VOTE 24 
 

Urban Affairs Vote 24 agreed. 

 

LOCAL GOVERNMENT BOARD – ORDINARY EXPENDITURE – VOTE 22 

 

Local Government Board Vote 22 agreed. 

 

MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS – ORDINARY EXPENDITURE – VOTE 24 
 

Items 1 and 2 agreed. 

 

Municipal Affairs Vote 24 agreed. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 


