






















































Hansard: April 08, 1980


1473 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 8, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 
FIRST ASSISTANT CLERK: — Mr. White, from the select standing committee on Crown 
corporations, presents the first report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee met for organization and elected Mr. White as Chairman and Mr. Banda as 
Vice-chairman. 
 
This committee recommends to the Legislative Assembly that the matter of video and audio 
taping of the proceedings of the Crown corporations committee be referred to the special 
committee on rules and procedures for a report thereon with all convenient speed. 

 
MR. C.O. WHITE (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, I will be moving a motion, respecting the 
matter referred to in the report and I will take only a minute to introduce it. The subject referred to in the 
report has been discussed extensively in Crown corporations committee. The recommendation of this 
committee is incorporated in the report you have just heard. 
 
An intersessional committee on rules and procedures is presently examining the subject. I will later be 
moving that the matter be referred to that committee. I therefore urge the House to adopt the following 
motion: 
 

That the first report of the select standing committee on Crown corporations be now concurred 
in. 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Who seconds the motion? 
 
MR. ALLEN: — I second the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 35 
 
Pepper 
Allen 
Bowerman 
Smishek 
Romanow 
Snyder 
Kramer 
Robbins 
Baker 
Skoberg 
 

MacMurchy 
Mostoway 
Banda 
Kaeding 
Hammersmith 
Kowalchuk 
McAuley 
Feschuk 
Byers 
Vickar 
 

Cody 
Koskie 
Matsalla 
Lusney 
Prebble 
Long 
Johnson 
Engel 
Poniatowski 
White

 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1474 

 
McArthur 
Shillington 

Rolfes 
Tchorzewski 

Solomon

 
Nays — 14 

 
Berntson 
Birkbeck 
Larter 
Lane 
Taylor 

Rousseau 
Swan 
Pickering 
Garner 
Muirhead 

Katzman 
Duncan 
Andrew 
McLeod 

 
MR. C.O. WHITE (Regina Wascana): — Mr. Speaker, in introducing this motion, I’d like to point out 
one thing: one committee cannot refer a matter to another committee. The House must do that. However, 
as Chairman of the Crown corporations committee, I wish to urge the rules and procedures committee to 
make a prompt recommendation particularly on the use of tape recorders as aids to reporters in preparing 
accurate accounts, as opposed to taping for broadcasting. Having said that, I want to move, seconded by 
the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the matter of video and audio taping of the proceedings of the Crown corporations 
committee be referred to the special committee on rules and procedures for a report thereon, with 
all convenient speed. 

 
Leave not granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. A.S. MATSALLA (Canora): — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and 
to the members of the house on behalf of the hon. member for Yorkton, Mr. Randy Nelson, a very 
special group in the legislature. Seventeen young men and women of Yorkton from ages 13 to 18 are 
seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They are members of the Canadian Ukrainian Youth Association known 
as Sumk in Ukrainian. The president of the group is Lorne Derenowski and he’s present with the group. 
Accompanying the group are four advisors: George Skwarchuk, Jim Belan, Iris Derenowski and Phyllis 
Stanicky. Earlier this day they visited Northern Telecom as well as the RCMP Museum and following 
the visit here, they will visit the Museum of Natural History. I would ask with your permission, Mr. 
Speaker, to have the group stand in the Speaker’s gallery so that we might be able to greet them and 
recognize them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MATSALLA: — I’d ask the members of the House to join with me in greeting this fine group and 
extending a very warm welcome from the legislature in the tradition of Ukrainian culture. This is 
through the display of braided bread, known as Kolach in Ukrainian, and salt. Both of these represent 
the staff of life as you are all aware. The braiding in the bread, which has been very finely done, 
represents dignity, love and charity and those together represent togetherness. Hopefully here this 
afternoon we may be able to work together in trying to move the business of this House. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1475 

Inadequate Sentences in Saskatchewan for Rapists 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. On two 
previous occasions I have raised with you the issue of the inadequate sentences in Saskatchewan for 
rapes and the issuing of personal passes to convicted rapists. In light of the recent two rapes which 
occurred in he North Battleford area by a paroled rapist, will you now make representation — and strong 
representation — to the federal authorities for the removal of the right to parole and the issuing of passes 
to convicted rapists? 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I cannot make that undertaking for the 
hon. member because I would hope that she and her caucus would subscribe to the view that parole, if 
properly used and properly administered is a very valuable tool for the rehabilitation of offenders — be 
they assault offenders or rape offenders. In the particular instance I am advised that the person involved 
had just finished service (I believe) eight years of a term of imprisonment with respect to certain 
offences when the alleged incident took place and the balance on parole was cancelled forthwith. I want 
finally to stress that the matter of parole is exclusively a federal responsibility and the decisions taken 
here throughout the piece were by federal officials. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Well obviously Mr. Attorney General, in these 
instances the rehabilitative process of issuing passes and granting of parole is perhaps not working and 
as chief law officer for the province is not your duty to inform your federal counterpart that the whole 
scope of rape in Canada has to be looked into? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, I think again, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is trying to divorce the 
general principle of parole with respect to a particular offence, the offence of rape. I think that is the 
wrong way to approach this. The issue should not be whether parole for rape is or isn’t working. The 
issue would be (in my respectful submission) whether or not parole generally is working, be it for a rape 
offence or an assault offence, a theft offence or a fraud offence or whatever. From my point of view, if 
the hon. member has any information or concrete evidence which would indicate it is not working on a 
systematic basis then I think that would be something which would be subject and worthy of 
presentation to federal authorities. This is a very unfortunate circumstance which if the facts are true, 
apparently took place but I d not know whether it justifies the cancellation of the parole program. I think 
we would have to look at al the facts and circumstances over al little longer period of time. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Final supplementary. I think your answer is rather wishy-washy as the chief law 
officer. I am not asking for the removal of parole or issuing of passes in the whole penal system. What I 
am asking is that you make representation with regard to the issuing of passes and paroles in the 
instances of rape. You must admit that in cases like this, one last spring and one now, a one week 
sentencing not too long ago, the whole process is just not working. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would only say to the hon. member again that in my 
judgment the question of parole as isolated to a particular offence is not the correct way to approach this. 
I don’t think it can be argued that rape, as serious and heinous a crime as it is, should someone be 
singled out and made more special or more important than say the crime of assault, manslaughter, fraud 
or break and entry 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1476 

all of which are also subject to parole because the victims there are equally offended and hurt by a 
parole system which doesn’t work. Surely the law must not pick and choose; the lawyer must see 
whether or not it works fairly throughout the piece. 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, I have veterinary 
equipment out at the ranch. You could handle these fellows very nicely with little expense. 
 

Dismissal of Employees re SGEA Strike 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — A question for the minister responsible for the public service. Has 
the SGEA (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Association) asked for the dismissal of certain 
employees re the SGEA strike, those who attended work? 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any such 
request. No such request has come to me. Whether or not such request has come to the public service 
commission, I would have to inquire with the public service commission and as a result of that I will 
take notice of the question and get back to the member. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — While the minister is taking notice, would he also like to answer this? There are 
several hundred letters SGEA has prepared information employees that they are about to be removed 
from their union membership. What action will you take when you are presented with copies of these 
letters where they are moving union membership from SGEA employees? 
 
MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, that is a hypothetical question. I have not received such letters 
and until I do, I will not be able to make comment. 
 

Removal of PCBs from Federal Pioneer Site 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of the Environment. 
In light of your recent announcement that PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) from Federal Pioneer could 
very well be removed to a cement pit for storage and your convenient suggestion that they be located 
somewhere in the south part of the province neatly avoiding Kelvington, Wadena and Shellbrook, I 
should like to ask the minister, on what grounds can you justify this? 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I am not in any way 
attempting to justify anything. We have a report of the National Research Council which says that the 
contaminated soils at Federal Pioneer should be removed and that they should be disposed of. We have a 
subsequent report from Reid Crowther which says that there are a number of possible locations within a 
50-mile radius of Regina. I have made no case either for or against the recommendations of Reid 
Crowther. 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Has the minister 
given any consideration to locating the PCBs in the area around Quill Lake which was used as a 
bombing site during World War II, and if he hasn’t would he assure the Assembly he will take this under 
consideration? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I have advised this Assembly on other occasions earlier under 
questions that we would review the advice which we have received by way of consultants’ reports and 
we will review the considerations and recommendations of 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1477 

the action committee with respect thereto. 
 

Indian Land Entitlements 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Minister of Environment. A stated policy of 
your government is to settle some of the Indian land claims with resource properties in the North and as 
I understand, perhaps uranium mines or some such thing. Can you advise the House whether or not 
those negotiations have commenced either with the province of Saskatchewan or some Crown 
corporation and if so what’s the progress of same? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, we have not said that we would resolve the issue of Indian land 
entitlements with uranium properties or any other mining properties. What we have said is that we will 
place on the table unoccupied and occupied Crown lands for selection purposes. Selection does not 
necessarily mean automatic transfer — that we have said — and if there has been a selection of lands 
that do have mineral depositions on them (I believe that there are some lands that have mineral 
depositions on them), that they have been transferred or if they have not been transferred, that they are in 
the process of being transferred. 
 

Cold Lake Heavy Oil Project 
 
MR. G.M. McLEOD (Meadow Lake): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Environment. Mr. 
Minister, the Premier took notice of this question on your behalf—I believe it was March 10. Are you 
now prepared to state to the House your government’s position regarding the disposal of the massive 
amounts of surface waste water at the Cold Lake heavy oil project that’s proposed in Alberta? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I’m not sure if I have the question clearly, Mr. Speaker. The answer to the way 
I interpret the question is no, we have not arrived at a conclusion as to how or in what way this issue will 
be resolved, primarily because the project hasn’t advanced that far. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Supplementary. Surely, Mr. Minister, when you say to me that the project hasn’t 
advanced that far, the approval for the project is pending. Now will you tell me, have you entered into 
discussions with the Government of Alberta in view of the fact that the decision is now pending? Have 
you entered into discussions to give your government’s position in view of the proximity of that project 
to the Saskatchewan border and the proposal that the waste water will either go into the Beaver River 
system and subsequently the Churchill River system or the North Saskatchewan — one or the other? 
What I am asking you is what your view is and which do you favor? I want to know, have you made any 
representations to the Government of Alberta other than the paper that you presented to the Alberta 
Energy Conservation Board — any representations recently? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, the member, as he kept on asking his question and talking, obviously 
knows that we have made representations to the Alberta hearing board. He really answered his own 
question. Yes, we have made representations both to the Alberta government and to the hearing study. 
We’ve made interventions there. But as he also indicated, the decision has not finally been made. The 
decision is pending. Therefore, the ultimate decisions with regard to the disposal of waste water from the 
project will have to await the final decisions in relationship to the proposals that will 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1478 

finally be made with respect to the project. But I can say, Mr. Speaker, yes, the Department of the 
Environment has made representation to both the Alberta government and to the study board set up for 
hearing purposes. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Final supplementary. Mr. Minister, very simply, will you tell this House today, the 
people in that area and especially the people of Saskatchewan, which waste disposal area proposal you 
favor as the Government of Saskatchewan and as the Department of Environment? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not prepared to answer that, simply because it’s a 
hypothetical question at this point in time. The decision is still pending. The matter is under constant 
review by the Department of the Environment and by this government. We are in regular 
communications with and observation of what is taking place in the Cold Lake area. We will certainly, 
when the time is appropriate, make not only our stand known (which has been done already), but we will 
take whatever actions and whatever course is available to us to object or to see that proper mitigation 
measures are enforced. 
 

Position Paper Relative to Delivery Quotas 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. Your marketing and economics branch has spent some considerable time and money 
putting together a position paper relative to proposed changes for the review committee on Canadian 
Wheat board delivery quotas. I’m sure you’ll agree this information is of great interest to the farming 
community of Saskatchewan. I wonder if you’ll indicate to this House when you will be tabling that 
report. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — The hon. member has caught me off guard 
with respect to when. I think I can say it will be tabled in due course. I can’t respond to the member as to 
the exact time. It may well be convenient to table the documentation prior to agricultural estimates so 
that there will be an opportunity to debate the issue at that time. 
 

Interior Terminal Elevators 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — While the minister is tabling that document prior to the agricultural estimates, I 
wonder if he would also table the report that relates to the role of interior terminal elevators — 
obviously for the same reasons. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not familiar in my mind with a report on interior terminals. 
I’ll do some research on that and consider the hon. member’s suggestion after having reviewed the 
report itself. 
 

Mining Industry Concerns 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. Mr. Minister, in the 
March 29 issue of the Financial Post mining companies voiced some concern that the confrontation of 
oil pricing between Ottawa and the provinces could very well spread to the mining industry. Do you 
believe in fact this is going to happen? 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is, I think, 
alluding to what may very well be a hypothetical circumstance. Although we 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1479 

do consider the discussion between the provinces and the federal government in respect to pricing of 
energy a very serious one, we hope those deliberations will not be protracted so as to have negative or 
detrimental effects on the resource development activities Canada should be enjoying at this time. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, would you not agree that the 
Government of Canada should not be singling out, for instance, gas and oil. Why shouldn’t they be 
going after hydro-power, iron ore mining? Why would you not stand firm now in the West, both on oil 
as well as the other resources, with Alberta on this and really make a good deal for western Canada? 
You still haven’t said you’re going to stand up for western Canada? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, the member tempts a speech, one that has been given by a good many 
members of this side of the Legislative Assembly on a number of occasions beginning with the Premier 
of this province. We have consistently suggested to the federal government, as we have to other 
provinces, that we cannot expect to resolve the energy pricing question for any length of time or in a 
proper manner unless we look at energy in total, including not only oil and natural gas but hydro-electric 
power and other sources of energy which we rely on and which may well be exported south of the 
Canada-U.S. border or exported from this country. It’s a matter of record. Our position is very clear in 
that respect. 
 
The member also asks whether or not we should be looking at other resources as well. I think that a 
simple look through the Debates and Proceedings of this House, and again, transcripts of the first 
ministers’ conferences and other ministers’ conferences, would show we have said that it is improper to 
allow Tory governments such as the one now in power in the province of Ontario to develop resources 
with a tax base that brings no real revenues to the general public of that province and expect us then to 
subsidize the energy consumption of that province. It’s a matter of record where we stand on this. We do 
very much support western Canada and the development of its resources. We cannot force on other 
provinces in western Canada our position but I think the people in Saskatchewan as in other parts of 
western Canada and, indeed, in Canada, look to Saskatchewan for leadership in resource development. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Amendment of The Trade Union Act 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Labour. The Minister 
of Labour has reported that at the annual convention of the Moose Jaw and District Labour Council that, 
in fact, The Trade Union Act was going to be amended notwithstanding the supreme court decision. The 
quote runs, I believe: 
 

A Court of Queen’s Bench decision which found the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Association strike last fall illegal will be reversed one way or another, Labour Minister Gordon 
Snyder said Saturday. 
 

I have before me a letter from one Larry Brown, at the time executive secretary to the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour, wherein he refers to section 11(2)(d) of The Trade Union Act and he, if I can 
quote: 
 

It has come to our attention the provincial Department of Labour is giving out, when requested, 
an interpretation of section 11(2)(d) of The Trade 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1480 

Union Act dealing with a strike vote that we have some real problems with. The department’s 
interpretations . . . 

 
And these are the important words. 
 

. . . is that in order for there to be a proper strike vote, a majority of the members in the local 
affected have to vote in favor of a strike by secret ballot. 

 
Would the minister not admit that the rather inconsistent approach he is taking, on the one hand saying 
he’s going to change, and the department’s interpretation which follows the court’s interpretation, is not 
helping the strike situation at this time and, in fact, is causing confusion and disruption? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — In answer to the hon. member’s question, Mr. Speaker, 
here has been nothing inconsistent in my remarks with respect to 11(2)(d) since the question was 
initially raised and a judgment was rendered by two courts in Saskatchewan and has since that time been 
appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada. My indication from the earlier point was (it was my 
impression that 11(2)(d) provided for a majority of those who actually cast their ballot to make the 
decision as to whether a strike would be validated or not. 
 
I think the hon. member will also agree that something less than a year ago in this House, section 19 of 
The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act spelled out in a very precise way, the manner in which 
a strike vote would be validated. There is nothing inconsistent in what I have said over a period of time 
since the 11(2)(d) section of The Trade Union Act was originally challenged. My position has been that 
I cannot be placed in a position where a section dealing with identical circumstances in two provincial 
statutes are at variance, one with the other. 
 
My indication was that after the supreme court’s decision was rendered, the department would then 
make its judgment with respect to the need for any necessary amendments to The Trade Union Act. 
 
MR. LANE: — By way of a supplementary, is the minister then recanting the press statement that in 
fact the department was going to make amendment to The Trade Union Act, no matter the judgment? 
And would the minister justify to this Assembly his commenting on cases before the courts, which this 
government has held up as a reason for not commenting on other matters before the Assembly? Would 
you indicate why it is right for you to comment on court cases but not for the minister responsible for 
DNS? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Well, I would think the member for Qu’Appelle would be the last person to be 
raising that question in light of his performance and the performance of his colleagues over a period of 
time in this House. 
 
My only comment has been with respect to proposed action by the Department of Labour in the event 
that the supreme court decision upholds the lower court decisions. In that event I believe I will have two 
pieces of legislation for which I am responsible that are not consistent, one with the other. That has been 
my only comment and I don’t believe in any way this can be seen to prejudice any action that is being 
taken, or the case being taken to the Supreme Court of Canada. I see that would in no way prejudice the 
position of that body. 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1481 

Review of Claims by SGI 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — My question is to the minister responsible for SGI. Mr. 
Minister, in light of your reply last Thursday that the 400 per cent limitation had been removed from the 
total replacement cost insurance, will you or your officials review any claims made prior to that date to 
correct any unsatisfactory settlements by SGI, since SGI was in fact in contravention of The Combines 
Investigation Act, by virtue of the advertising of your policy? 
 
HON. W.A. ROBBINS (Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services): — As I said before, Mr. 
Speaker, other insurance companies also had the 400 per cent clause, and some of them still do. The fact 
of the matter is that we have never had a claim where we have had a depreciation allowance in excess of 
70 per cent. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, the other insurance companies weren’t advertising as you were the 
total replacement cost, when you were, in fact, limiting. I’m asking you again if you had claims prior to 
the date of March 8, when the endorsement called for a 400 per cent limitation and you were, in fact, 
advertising total cost replacement? Will those claims be reviewed to pay the proper amount that you 
were advertising as such? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I repeat, Mr. Speaker, we have never had a claim that ran into that clause at all. 
 

Supply of Treated Water — North Saskatoon 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — A question to the minister responsible for the water supply board, because you 
missed it last time and you still haven’t brought it back. As you are aware, the city of Saskatoon is 
having problems supplying the total needs of treated water to the people on the north Saskatoon treated 
line. Is your department now negotiating with the city of Saskatoon to either assist them in enlarging 
their facilities so they can handle the extra load, or are you still planning to build your own water 
treatment plant, as you have indicated you are considering in water supply, Crown corporations? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — I don’t have the answer to the hon. member’s question; I will take it under 
advisement and report back, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Health Food Outlets 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday, I believe, or Wednesday, 
April 2, I took notice of question from the member for Maple Creek as to whether or not we investigated 
and had control over health food stores. The answers to her question are no, and no. 
 
MR. LANE: — A supplementary to the minister. Is the minister saying that he is retracting his 
statement that they were reviewing these health food stores to ensure that the public was protected? Is he 
now saying that no such review is taking place, and the government is not taking any action? 
 
MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I did not say that. She asked me specifically if I was investigating and I 
said no to that. Are we studying it. the answer is yes. 
 

Air Service 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1482 

MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of transportation 
in Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, about a year ago (we have discussed this before and it has to do with the 
air service between Saskatoon and Regina) you told me I think at that time that it was going to be under 
review. Still we have no air service on the weekends between Saskatoon and Regina. My question to 
you is when is this government going to start doing its job and accept the responsibility to provide air 
traffic between the two major cities in this province on the weekends? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I can check into the files for the hon. member on any 
representation that the Government of Saskatchewan has made to (and it’s the carrier that’s involved) 
Norcanair and provide him with that information. I will forward it to him so he can get a picture of the 
provincial government’s involvement in this area. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, while you are looking into that, I think maybe it should be looked into 
with a little more depth. Last spring or last summer, I don’t remember exactly when, Norcan said they 
were starting up an air-bus service between the two major cities. With that new air-bus service one flight 
per day was added on Wednesday. Now this isn’t air service in the province so we really don’t have 
good air service during the week and we haven one on the weekend. I think it needs to be reviewed and 
there has to be something done about this. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I will, as I indicated, provide information to the hon. member. I 
think that the hon. member would be wise to direct some of his arguments to the carrier itself, which is a 
private carrier operating within the province. A representation came from him on behalf of his 
constituent in the northwest corner of the province along with the provincial government’s position and 
it may assist in providing better service to the province. 
 

Price of Oil 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Many people are calling now, in the name of oil and gas conservation, that the 
Government of Canada raise the price of oil to the world level or a component of that world level. Now 
your government has sort of skirted that issue. Could you advise the Assembly as to a time frame, 
whether it is 1982 or 1986 or anything from that, that you would advocate we move the price of oil 
toward, in the sense of conservation? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has answered similar questions on numerous occasions in 
this House. I’ve talked to the press and I believe our position is known and that is, there has to be 
adjustment upward for the price of oil, primarily to turn on new Canadian production not only in the 
province of Saskatchewan but in the province of Alberta and other areas as well. It would also 
encourage development and research into other resources of energy, be they non-renewable or 
renewable. We will await some further response from the federal government as to what kind of time 
frame it is proposing (and that is not dissimilar to the position the province of Alberta is taking) before 
we talk to them precisely about time frames and the kind of adjustments we believe are practical and 
realistic. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, can you tell this Assembly, have you taken on any new policies 
regarding uncapping Saskatchewan gas or Saskatchewan oil? As you know, there are many gas wells 
owned by Saskatchewan producers in the western part of the province or do you still have that 
philosophy of leave it in the ground, it won’t spoil? 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1483 

MR. MESSER: — The answer to the member’s question is no, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have a statement. On April 2, 1980 the member for Qu’Appelle raised a matter he 
referred to as “privilege.” 
 

Parliamentary privilege is the sum of the peculiar rights enjoyed by each House collectively as a 
constituent part of the High Court of Parliament, and by Members of each House individually, 
without which they could not discharge their functions and which exceed those possessed by 
other bodies or individuals. 
 

Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, citation 16. 
 
I have examined pages 1345 and 1346 of Debates and Proceedings, April 1, 1980. On page 1345 the 
member for Thunder Creek made the following comment: 
 

It’s wonderful how you choose to inject yourself into the question period, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, citation 68, says in part: 
 

Reflections upon the character or actions of the Speaker may be punished as breaches of 
privilege. His actions cannot be criticized incidentally in debate, or upon any form of proceeding 
except by way of a substantive motion. 

 
While I judge the comment of the member for Thunder Creek to be a damaging impression against the 
Chair, I did not judge it to be evidence of privilege. Members will note the record on page 1345 and 
1346 shows that I was unable to obtain a retraction and apology for the Chair, which was free from 
argument or qualification. Having requested retraction four times, which I consider to be generous 
opportunity for the member for Thunder Creek, I proceeded to name him. At this point I cited rule 25(2) 
of the Legislative Assembly. Citation 134(1) of Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth 
Edition, outlines the practice of naming in some further detail. I can find no prima facie evidence of 
privilege. I regret having to review this matter since I said previously I assumed the matter was closed 
and should not be resurrected. 
 
On April 2, 1980, the member for Qu’Appelle asked me to have a look at the answer that was given by 
the Minister of Social Services to a question raised by the member for Rosetown-Elrose. I’ve examined 
the record and I find two paragraphs of answer to the question placed by the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose. I do find that the first paragraph is indulging in debate which is contrary to the rules 
of the Assembly, and I would caution the Minister of Social Services against that in the future, as I 
would caution all members who are answering question or placing questions. The matter must not be put 
forward as debate. I find the latter half of the submission at that time made by the Minister of Social 
Services was quite in order and in answer to the question placed by the member for Rosetown-Elrose. 
 
MR. LANE: — Today in question period we had a rather lengthy response from the Minister of Mineral 
Resources which I would consider verging on debate, Mr. Speaker, but that’s your ruling. My question 
is, would Mr. Speaker advise this Assembly why or 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1484 

how the rule has developed that a member questioning a minister in question period can have a 
peremptory ruling that it’s not in order, or that it’s verging on debate, but that we’re not finding out until 
well after the response of the cabinet minister — very lengthy ones — that in hindsight it’s a matter of 
debate. I’m wondering if Mr. Speaker would clarify, certainly for my edification, how the rule has 
developed that the opposition has their question ruled immediately, and the government not until 
sometime after. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I listened very carefully to the response provided by the Minister of Mineral 
Resources to the question that was asked him earlier in the question period. While I found the answer to 
be extensive as was warranted by the question as I judged it. I found the Minster of Mineral Resources 
did utter one word which I found questionable in debate. Now it was impossible for me to intervene at 
that moment because in a fleeting moment the word was gone. However, I do take the opportunity to 
interrupt ministers, as I have today, and call them to order. I do take the opportunity when members of 
the opposition are out of order in asking questions to call them to order. I’ve repeated time after time the 
rules which govern the question period. I have not only interrupted members who place questions, I have 
interrupted ministers who answer questions. 
 
I think the members, in the future, can only raise matters with regard to whether subjects were debatable 
or not. We will deal with it at the time and hope that no rule develops as the member for Qu’Appelle 
says. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, on further point of order referring to your answer to the question of 
privilege and your response thereto, I believe I asked at that time if Mr. Speaker, in his response to the 
Assembly, would consider the words of the member for Thunder Creek, on April 1, 1980, when he 
specifically states: 
 

I am quite prepared to withdraw any aspersions against the Chair, and I am not aware of having 
made any. If you view them as being aspersions, which I don’t, I will withdraw them in an 
unqualified . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker did not refer to those words and I am wondering why he did not take those as an 
unqualified withdrawal? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think my ruling is . . . order . . . I gave my ruling. My ruling is now in the records. 
The member for Qu’Appelle can avail himself of the record tomorrow. He will see that I dealt with the 
charges which were made and the retraction (so-called) and I don’t intend to indulge in discussion of the 
ruling any further at this time. In support of that, I want to cite Beauchesne's Rules and Forms, Fourth 
Edition, 1958, citation 68: 
 

He takes no part (and this is referring to the Speaker and his position) in debate and must be 
careful not to indulge in arguments with members on the soundness of his rulings. 

 
Point of Order on Question Period 

 
MR. J.W.A. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, a point of order before orders of the day, and I refer 
you to page 1453 of Hansard, April 3, 1980. There you state on the second line: 
 

. . . questions must be stated without preamble or speech or be in the nature of a debate . . . 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1485 

I refer you back to page 1450, April 3, 1980 to my own remarks, going in on a supplementary where we 
crossed up: “Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Premier.” Then I went to a new question because I 
thought you had called order, order: ‘New question, Mr. Premier, do you not agree” (Mr. Speaker, in my 
own estimation I deemed that a question —I didn’t have a preamble before it) “that in this time of 
astronomical interest rates . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! What is your point of order? 
 
MR. GARNER: — My point of order is, Mr. Speaker, that I am questioning your decision regarding 
my point of order last Thursday. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I read the citation to the member. If he wants we can obtain a copy of 
Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fourth Edition, and refer him to citation 68. He can read 
it himself. He doesn’t have to depend on me. 
 
Now if the member is referring to something which happened on April 3, I will remind him this is April 
8. If he raised it on April 3, I suggest he check the records and see what kind of response he got from me 
with regard to whether it was in order or out of order. I cannot deal with the matter now because the 
rules prohibit me from dealing with points of order which occurred at some other time. 
 
MR. LANE: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. Would Mr. Speaker advise this Assembly why there was 
no comment from the Chair as to the interruptions of the Minister of Highways, the member for The 
Battlefords today? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! If the member for Qu’Appelle had been listening, and the record will 
clearly show, the Speaker said order, order. Thereupon the member for Qu’Appelle was out of order and 
I said order to him. 
 
Now I am attempting to keep order on both sides of the House. The member for The Battlefords was out 
of order. He at least was on his feet. The member for Qu’Appelle was out of order and he was in his 
seat! 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

High Interest Rates 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Before the orders of the day, I rise in 
accordance with Rule 17, for which notice has been filed and acknowledgement received. 
 
I hereby give notice of our intention to move that a matter be given priority of debate for the purpose of 
discussing an urgent matter of public importance. I state the matter to be: 
 

1. Many farmers in Saskatchewan as result of poor markets for beef, hogs and other livestock, as 
a result of poor crops last year, and as a result of the current high interest rates, find themselves 
in a financially untenable position. 
 
2. Many homeowners in Saskatchewan as a result of the current high



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1486 

interest rates now suffer an unbearable financial burden. 
 

3. Many small businesses in Saskatchewan are unable to carry on a viable business operation 
because of the effect of the current high interest rates on overhead costs. 

 
4. As a result, there is an urgent and compelling need for his Assembly to debate the methods of 
providing economic relief for the farmer, homeowner and small businessmen of Saskatchewan. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — A notice regarding this matter proposed for priority of debate was received in the 
Clerk’s office at 11:40 a.m. today, for which I thank the hon. member. 
 
I refer all hon. members to a ruling of the Chair on February 23, 1971. I quote a section of that ruling as 
follows: 
 

The fundamental principle underlying Rule 17 was to provide an opportunity within a proper 
framework of parliamentary procedure where none otherwise existed for the immediate 
discussion of any matter deemed to be of such urgency and importance that all of the normal or 
special business of the Assembly should be put to one side in order to provide the complete 
right-of-way to a discussion of one specific, particular subject. 
 
The subject matter of a debate under Rule 17 must not be of a continuing nature and must be so 
pressing that public interest will suffer if it is not given immediate attention. 

 
I refer all hon. members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, paragraph 286, 
page 92: 
 

The fact that a grievance is continuing is not sufficient if it is not of recent occurrence. 
 

Erskine May’s Parliamentary Procedure, 17th Edition, page 365: 
 

Although the matter raised is of great public importance, it is not of sufficient urgency that all 
normal business of the Assembly should be put to one side. 

 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, in listening to your comments, you 
point out that there has to be no other means by which this problem could be addressed, that this is a 
very important problem, a very important situation facing the people of this province, that it is of a 
pressing nature. I think the conditions outlined in the motion by the member certainly must fit all those 
criteria, Mr. Speaker. Therefore, I would urge you to allow us to debate this most important topic facing 
the people . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think my ruling was very clear. The member will have access to it when the 
record comes out. I am not going to repeat my ruling. I carefully considered the matter from the time it 
was brought to my attention and it is based on sound parliamentary precedent. 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1487 

MR. LANE: — Speaking to your ruling, if I may . . . Speaking to the point of order . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! Just in case I heard the member correctly when he said he was 
speaking to my ruling. Of course, I will check the record to make sure he said that. Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Rules and Forms, (which I have just finished referring to) Fourth Edition, cites section no. 
68, and it’s referring to the chief characteristics attached to the office of the Speaker. It says: 
 

He takes no part in debate and must be careful not to indulge in any argument with members on 
the soundness of his rulings. 

 
I repeat that for the benefit of all members who were unfortunate in not to be able to hear that before, 
and just in case someone is concerned about that particular point. 
 
MR. LANE: — A further point of order is that the opposition has attempted in question period on three 
different occasions this session to raise the matter of high interest rates — at least three times and at all 
times there’s been no response from the government. We haven’t . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! That’s not a point of order. It’s quite clear it’s not a point of order. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — On the point of order, Mr. Speaker. Your ruling indicated that public interest 
would have to suffer, that the issue would have to be of recent occurrence. I don’t’ know how recent it 
should be. The interest rate rises every week and I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order, order! I listen to what the member says. If the member is rising on a 
point of order, which he started to do correctly, he then began debating the issue about interest rates 
rising; that’s the issue the member thinks is important and he wants to debate that. Unfortunately my 
ruling prevents that and as I said, it’s based on sound parliamentary precedent, which I took the trouble 
to cite in the ruling and which I considered for some time before I entered the Chamber. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I challenge your ruling. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — There’s no provision for the member to challenge the Speaker’s ruling. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I had indicated to the hon. members of 
the House that we would have immediately on the orders of the day a few moments of condolences for 
one of our members, Alexander Hamilton McDonald, and I will have at the conclusion of my remarks 
tow resolutions to present. One is the traditional one expressing sorrow and regret at the passing of a 
former member. On passage of that resolution, there will be then a second motion with respect to 
transcripts of oral tributes which I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to indeed second for me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are here today to pay a few moments of tribute to Alexander Hamilton McDonald, 
more popularly known by all of us as Hammy McDonald. 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1488 

Hammy McDonald was a man whose life was dedicated to public service. I think this is generally 
understood by all people who knew him and people who followed the daily press journals. Throughout 
his public career Hammy McDonald, I say, earned the respect and admiration of all who knew him. He 
was the son of a Saskatchewan farm family and was the third generation of his family to farm in the 
Fleming area. He entered provincial politics in the general election of 1948 running as a Liberal 
Progressive Conservative candidate, having been nominated by a joint constituency convention of the 
two parties. Soon after he took his seat in the Assembly, he devoted his political career solely to the 
Liberal Party and ran successfully as a Liberal candidate for the constituency of Moosomin in the 
general elections of 1952, 1956, 1960, and 1964. Indeed, as one will readily recognize, Mr. Speaker, he 
went through five general provincial elections successfully. That is quite an accomplishment in itself 
given the high rate of turnover that unfortunately or fortunately, depending upon your point of view, all 
of us politicians face. 
 
During his career in provincial politics, Hammy McDonald rose rapidly in prominence in public life and 
particularly rose rapidly to positions of importance within the Liberal Party. In 1954, he became the 
leader of the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan, a position which he held for five years until 1959. One of 
the articles which I ran across in preparing for my remarks this afternoon, described the career of Mr. 
McDonald in this context: 
 

The swift and dazzling rise of 37-year-old Alexander Hamilton McDonald to the leadership of 
the Liberal Party in Saskatchewan has no parallel in Canadian political history. 

 
It certainly indicates how dramatic and how important his contribution was. During this five-year period, 
he was an effective and hard-working leader of the opposition and brought a great deal of energy and 
dedication to his work in the Assembly. Unfortunately, I never served in the House at the same time as 
Hammy McDonald. I entered in 1967 and at that time his political career had moved him on to other 
public circles. But those who did serve with him confirm the observation I have made that he was a very 
effective and hard-working leader of the opposition and brought a great deal of energy, dedication and 
high principle to his work in the Assembly. 
 
Hammy McDonald continued to hold responsible positions within the Liberal Party after his tenure as 
leader of the party. For the last year of his career in this Assembly after the late former premier, W. Ross 
Thatcher, was elected to government, Hammy served as his minister of agriculture and deputy premier. 
Hammy McDonald then resigned as an MLA. After his resignation, he was summoned to the Senate and 
remained a very active member of that body until his death on Monday past. 
 
His contributions to the Senate were varied and the list of his activities ranged from being a Canadian 
observer at the United Nation as General Assembly in 1966 to chief whip and assistant leader of the 
government in the Senate in 1969. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members of this House, we cannot survey Hammy McDonald’s life without admiring 
his dedication, his courage, and his commitment to principle and philosophy. Whether we consider his 
service as a Spitfire pilot during World War 11, his background and career as a farmer, or his 
hard-fought and hard-won political endeavors, in the end I think we can conclude that we see here a man 
who had clearly defined ideals and goals and who pursued them with intelligence, honesty, and 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1489 

sincerity. On behalf of Premier Blakeney, who is out of the province on government business, and 
members of this side of the House and on behalf of all members of the House. I’m sure that they will 
share with me when I extend to his wife and family and to all of those who knew him, our most sincere 
condolences on this occasion of his passing. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Leader of the Opposition (Mr. Berntson): 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former member of this 
Assembly and expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he made to his community, 
his constituency and to his province. 

 
Alexander Hamilton McDonald who died on March 31, 1980, was a member of this Assembly for the 
constituency of Moosomin from 1948 to 1965. He was born at Fleming, Saskatchewan, in 1919, 
attended school in Moosomin and later farmed in that area. During World War II he served overseas as a 
flight lieutenant in the RCAF. From 1955 to 1960 he served as leader of the opposition, and in the years 
1964 to 1965 he was the minister of agriculture and deputy premier. He resigned his seat in this 
Assembly in 1965 and later that year was appointed to the Senate where he ultimately served as assistant 
leader of the government and chief whip. Throughout his parliamentary career he was active in the 
affairs of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. He took part in community activities as a 
member of the Royal Canadian Legion, the United Services Institute and the Elks Lodge. In recording 
its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, just a few remarks to join the 
Attorney General. Although I did not know Mr. McDonald, the pilot, nor Mr. McDonald, the MLA, nor 
Mr. McDonald, the senator, his record shows that he served his community, his constituency and his 
province and indeed his country well. On behalf of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, I join the 
Attorney General and I am sure all members of the Legislative Assembly in offering our condolences to 
the bereaved family. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I would join with members of the Assembly in expressing 
condolences to the family of the late Alexander Hammy McDonald. The motion before the floor is 
certainly an appropriate motion. The former member of the Moosomin constituency was a man, a 
politician, whom I as member for the Moosomin constituency now hear many things about and they are 
good things; they are ideals; they are standards; they are good principles that I as a member for 
Moosomin would attain to set as a standard for myself. 
 
I did know him very briefly. I did not have the fortunate opportunity of spending a considerable length 
of time with him but I did meet him on a number of occasions. I think that his record is certainly most 
admirable — born in a small town in Saskatchewan, Fleming, and attending school in Moosomin which 
is quite a renowned school. It is very a very strong farming area. Hammy McDonald was a farmer as 
well. That particular area produced many veterans of World Wars I and II. Hammy McDonald was one 
of those veterans, having served overseas as a flight lieutenant in the RCAF. 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1490 

Mr. Speaker, in joining with the members and the Attorney General and Leader of the Opposition, in 
just looking at the record that has been well laid out on this particular motion, it certainly is a record that 
all members of this Assembly should consider as they look forward in their political careers. Therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, I would just express my personal sympathies along with the other members in expressing 
our condolences to the family of the late Senator Hammy McDonald. 
 
HON. E. KRAMER (Minister of Highways and Transportation): — Mr. Speaker, it is with some 
sadness and nostalgia that I rise to speak to this motion. 
 
When I first entered this House in 1952 Hammy McDonald was already a four year veteran. I had the 
opportunity to watch his career first-hand. I say, with some nostalgia, because I saw him rise to the 
leadership of the Liberal Party and saw his performance in this House as leader, as a member, and as a 
cabinet minister for a year during the Thatcher government, Mr. McDonald’s behaviour in this House 
was always circumspect. He bore himself honourably and I believe those of us who remember him can 
only remember him and his name with respect. The career is undoubtedly one of the star careers in 
Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan’s sons. I would like to add my few words of condolence to his family. 
He will long be remembered and recognized as a true son of Saskatchewan who served his province, his 
country, well. 
 
HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Culture and Youth): — Mr. Speaker, very briefly, I never 
had the opportunity to meet Alexander Hamilton McDonald. I did come to know of him, having lived 
for some years in Moosomin and having run there once. I suppose we shared one thing in common — he 
was never defeated in Moosomin and I was never elected in Moosomin. I’m not sure how much that is 
in common, but that’s about as close as our political careers ever got. I did come to know him second 
hand. Though he had left the community some ten years before I arrived, he was very well liked. One 
couldn’t live in Moosomin without coming to know the name of Hammy McDonald. I left Moosomin 
before I knew his full name. He was called everywhere, Hammy McDonald. Indeed, that was evident at 
the funeral. The church in Moosomin was overflowing with dignitaries from Ottawa and other 
provinces, but a lot of common folk in Moosomin will remember with real affection the service he 
provided. He had always been able to communicate with the people of that constituency and they 
remembered it and enjoyed it. 
 
One other thing that hasn’t been mentioned extensively and perhaps it should, is his very distinguished 
war record. Hammy McDonald came back from the war a genuine war hero and genuinely earned it. He 
was shot down several times. He flew a Spitfire. He had learned to fly before the war. Apparently a 
doctor in the community in which he grew up had a plane and taught him and several other boys how to 
fly. So he knew how to fly when war was declared. He was thus one of the very earliest pilots in the 
RCAF, having joined in 1939. Until 1944 he flew a Spitfire with real distinction. He was shot down 
several times, more than once in Europe and made his way back through enemy territory to fly again. He 
was shot down once in the English Channel. He spent several hours in his Mae West and by sheer luck 
was picked up by an English fishing boat. He was flying again in Europe a week later. He came back 
with several medals; the Distinguished Flying Cross was one. He came back a genuine war hero and I 
gather he earned it. His war record was, as everyone has said, equalled by his service to the province as 
a coalition member, Conservative-Liberal, for Moosomin, and then as leader of the opposition for some 
years later. 
 
One of the things that interested me when I was in Moosomin on Saturday for the 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1491 

funeral — I noted in reading a book written by Chris Higginbotham, The CCF Record, the comment that 
Hammy McDonald was genuinely liked by both sides of the House and genuinely liked by the CCF 
although they respected his effectiveness. I think that it’s true from the comments my colleagues have 
made — something not every leader of the opposition manages to achieve: an affection on this side of 
the House. But he seems to have been well liked by everyone. 
 
It was appropriate therefore that at the funeral in Moosomin two members elected under the NDP 
banner, myself and my colleague for Regina West (Les Benjamin), were honorary pallbearers. I had an 
opportunity when I was in Moosomin to extend my condolences to the family. I do so again in this more 
formal way and I’m sure all members will want to join us. 
 
MR. N.E. BYERS (Kelvington-Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I rise to join other members of this 
Assembly in paying tribute to Hammy McDonald. I did not serve in this legislature with Hammy 
McDonald but Knew him in perhaps two capacities. I knew him as the member of the legislature for 
Moosomin, where my wife and I lived for some five years while he was the member of the legislature, 
and I knew him as the leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, particularly during the 1956 election 
campaign. 
 
As the member for the constituency of Moosomin he was certainly held in very high regard by his 
constituents. He came from an established farm family and had a very illustrious war record in the air 
force. These were qualities which I am sure had a large bearing on his being selected by his constituents 
as their candidate by two parties and to have ultimately served them in the legislature for some five 
terms. 
 
I remember him as an opposition MLA, as a youngster listening to the debates from this Chamber 
broadcast over the radio. As an opposition member he had the somewhat difficult task of criticizing the 
policies of offering constructive criticism as the government of the day undertook a number of 
reconstruction policies in the post World War II era. And I can vividly recall Hammy McDonald 
pleading the plight of the farmers of Smokey Bern where the provincial government assisted some vets 
after the war to start a co-op farming arrangement. Hammy, while not opposed to the idea, was 
somewhat critical of how things were handled there. I remember him offering constructive criticism 
when the power grid was put in and when the grid road system was built. I say this only to illustrate that 
I believe his criticism reflected the true concern Hammy McDonald had for the well-being of the 
farming population in particular. 
 
A lot of people have referred to him as Mr. McDonald. His political opponents, I know, tried to refer to 
him always as Mr. McDonald, but the name Hammy stuck and could not be erased. He was Hammy 
McDonald to all who met him. 
 
I came to know Hammy best perhaps I the 1956 election campaign in Moosomin. He was the Liberal 
candidate and the leader of the Liberal Party for the province of Saskatchewan in that election campaign. 
I was the campaign manager for the CCF candidate. Hammy was a tough campaigner on the provincial 
hustings and in his own riding. I can attest that within his own riding he had the loyalty of a great many 
who showed their loyalty to him in a very impressive way. 
 
Hammy McDonald, in my opinion, exemplifies the self-made man, a person who upon graduating from 
high school served in the services overseas, then returned home to a very long and colourful career in 
the legislature of this province, later in the Senate. I think the passing of Hammy McDonald means that 
another self-made man who 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1492 

contributed a great deal to the vitality of the political process in this province and in this country has 
departed from the political stage. I offer sincere condolence sand sympathy to the members of his 
family. 
 
Motion agreed. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 
deceased member, be communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURN 
 

Return No. 259 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 259 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the highway traffic board spent on printing with 
printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, amount of 
money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I will be introducing an amendment for this, 
as I have for the previous ones last Tuesday. Before I do so I would simply make a suggestion to the 
opposition. We have on the blues 307 motions for returns (debatable) which stand in the name of the 
individual opposition members and according to the rules of the House we must follow the order. If the 
opposition members in whose resolutions these motions for returns stand are willing to stand the items, 
I’m sure that when we get to page 51 motions, Mr. Prebble would be prepared to stand his item, and this 
would allow us to get into a resolution by Mr. Engel on high interest rates which was the subject matter 
of an earlier emergency debate effort by the PCs. We could then debate the whole interest rate operation. 
I think this would then give everybody a chance to debate interest rates. Unfortunately it would mean we 
stand on the blues but that is the one offer I could make to the hon. members. 
 
On this particular item I have to move an amendment. I simply draw that to the challenge. I would 
move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all words after the word “showing” be 
deleted and the following be substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980 the name and address of each private printing or 
publishing firm to whom the highway traffic board made payments for printing: (1) the number 
of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, and (3) the amount of each payment. 

 
I will leave it up to the opposition whether they will take up our suggestion that we get right to the 
debating of Mr. Engel’s motion. 
 
Amendment agreed. 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1493 

Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 260 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 260 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Department of Industry and Commerce spent 
on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I will only do it one more time. I hereby again offer our 
co-operation if the opposition will stand all the motions in their name given the urgency of interest rates 
to get to debate motion no. 2. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I think the Attorney General is getting into a political debate here whether 
he knows it or not. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Presumably the opposition will stand if they want the 
urgency to debate the interest rates and accordingly, I move . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Never mind the show. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — The hon. member talks about a show — I didn’t move the special motion today. 
I’m now giving you the chance to debate interest rates and you don’t want to do it. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the Minster of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980 the name and address of each private printing or 
publishing firm to whom the Department of Industry and Commerce made payments for 
printing: (1) the number payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, and (3) the 
amount of each payment. 
 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 261 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 261 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs 
spent on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address 
of the firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all 
the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1494 

substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs made payments for 
printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the 
amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 262 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 262 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Department of Labour spent on printing with 
printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, amount of 
money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all 
the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Department of Labour made payments for printing: (1) the 
number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 263 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 263 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the liquor board spent on printing with printing 
and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, amount of money 
spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, again with respect to this particular proposed Return No. 263, I 
move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word 
“showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the liquor board made payments for printing: (1) the number of 
payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each payment. 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1495 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 264 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Estevan (Mr. Larter) that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 264 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the liquor licensing commission spent on 
printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 264, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the liquor licensing commission made payments for printing: (1) the 
number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 265 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 265 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the local government board spent on printing 
with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, 
amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 265, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefore: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the local government board made payments for printing: (1) the 
number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 266 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1496 

MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 266 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the milk control board spent on printing with 
printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, amount of 
money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With respect to the proposed order for Return No. 266, 
I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be 
deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the milk control board made payments for printing: (1) the number 
of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 267 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 267 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Department of Mineral Resources spent on 
printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed Return No. 267, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Department of Mineral Resources made payments for printing: 
(1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 268 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 268 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the minimum wage board spent on printing with 
printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, amount of 
money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1497 

MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all 
the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period of March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private 
printing or publishing firm to whom the minimum wage board made payments for printing: (1) 
the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 269 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 269 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the municipal employees’ superannuation 
commission spent on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name 
and address of the firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed Return No. 269, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the municipal employees’ superannuation commission made 
payments for printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, 
(c) the amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 270 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 270 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the municipal water assistance board spent on 
printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that with 
respect to order for Return No. 270 that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1498 

each private printing or publishing firm to whom the municipal water assistance board made 
payments for printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, 
(3) the amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 271 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 271 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Office of the Ombudsman spent on printing 
with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, 
amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 271, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Office of the Ombudsman made payments for printing: (1) the 
number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 272 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 272 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Office of the Rentalsman spent on printing 
with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, 
amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 272, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Office of the Rentalsman made payments for printing: (1) the 
number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1499 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 274 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 274 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the provincial auditor spent on printing with 
printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, amount of 
money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Item 16, 273, what happened to that? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It was dropped. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed Return No. 274, I move, seconded 
by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the provincial auditor made payments for printing: (1) the number of 
payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 275 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 275 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the provincial library spent on printing with 
printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, amount of 
money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 275, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the provincial library made payments for printing: (1) the number of 
payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each payment. 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1500 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 276 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 276 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the provincial mediation board spent on printing 
with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, 
amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all 
the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the provincial mediation board made payments for printing: (1) the 
number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 277 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 277 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the provincial planning appeals board spent on 
printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed Return No. 277, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the provincial planning appeals board made payments for printing: 
(1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 278 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr.  



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1501 

Katzman) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 278 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Provincial Secretary spent on printing with 
printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, amount of 
money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) with 
respect to proposed order for Return No. 278 that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and 
the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Provincial Secretary made payments for printing: (1) the number 
of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I might say to the House that there is an occasional time that a date is wrong or a 
signature is omitted and I’ve been asking the appropriate side of the House to correct this minor 
technical difficult with the motion. Otherwise, they’re in order. 
 

Return No. 279 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 279 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the public and private rights board spent on 
printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) with 
respect to the proposed order for Return No. 279 that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the public and private rights board made payments for printing: (1) 
the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 280 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 280 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the public employees 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1502 

superannuation plan spent on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance 
the name and address of the firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) with 
respect to proposed Return No. 280, that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the public employees superannuation board made payments for 
printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the 
amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 281 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 281 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the public service commission spent on printing 
with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, 
amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 281, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the public service commission made payments for printing: (1) the 
number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 282 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 282 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the public service superannuation board spent on 
printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 282, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1503 

“showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the public service superannuation board made payments for printing: 
(1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 283 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 283 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Department of Revenue, Supply and 
Services spent on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and 
address of the firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — With respect to proposed order for Return No. 283, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services made payments for 
printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the 
amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 284 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 284 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Department of Rural Affairs spent on 
printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all 
of the words “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period of March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private 
printing of publishing firm to whom the Department of Rural  



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1504 

Affairs made payments for printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for 
each payment, (3) the amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Debate continues on the motion as amended. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note we have a strange situation 
here. The Department of Rural Affairs is not even created yet, yet the Attorney General has amended the 
motion to go back to March 1, 1979, before the minister was appointed and before the department has 
been approved by this House. At this point it is still not approved. So I am assuming the government is 
going to have a retroactive date on rural affairs back to March 1, 1979. Or what is the Attorney General 
going to do, pull it through municipal affairs, or where? Rural affairs doesn’t exit, but we had to put the 
question on because they have a habit of backdating legislation. For that reason we had to put it on. We 
notice now he is going to use March 1, 1979 for that department. Mr. Attorney General, would you care 
to comment? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. The comments of the member for Rosthern has precipitated what I believe 
to be a point of order. I wonder if any members wish to comment on the point of order before such time 
as I make a ruling on it? 
 
The point of order was essentially a point raised by the member for Rosthern with regard to the 
existence or non-existence of the Department of Rural Affairs. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — On a point of order, as you are indicating it is, I think the Attorney General has 
indicated across the floor, the department will be retroactive to November something when the 
announcement was made, when the bill is passed. Therefore it isn’t out of order on this motion. We may 
have to amend to that date but otherwise the motion isn’t out of order. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — My ruling is that the original notice of motion, order for Return No. 284 is out of 
order. Consequently, the amendment is out of order. 
 

Return No. 285 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 285 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Archives Board spent on 
printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that 
with respect to proposed order Return No. 285, that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period of March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private 
printing or publishing firm to whom the Saskatchewan Archives Board made payments for 
printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the 
amount of each payment. 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1505 

Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 286 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 286 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Arts Board spent on printing 
with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, 
amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the proposed order for Return No. 286, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Saskatchewan Arts Board made payments for printing: (1) the 
number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 287 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 287 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission 
spent on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address 
of the firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that all 
the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Saskatchewan Assessment Commission made payments for 
printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the 
amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 289 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1506 

MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 289 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Community Legal Services 
Commission spent on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name 
and address of the firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder) with 
respect to proposed Return No. 289, that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted and the 
following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Saskatchewan Community Legal Services Commission made 
payments for printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, 
(3) the amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 290 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 290 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service spent 
on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 290, I will be 
introducing an amendment. The amendment, Mr. Speaker, is one which is slightly different from the 
amendments which we have been dealing with up to now. The amendments we’ve been dealing with up 
to now have related primarily to the line departments and agencies. We are now dealing with the 
Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service, a Crown corporation. Since there is a different mechanism which 
is in place there, the amendment is required in order to make it answerable for a Crown corporation. I’ll 
be doing the same standard amendment when we get to the Crown corporations later on . Essentially the 
same information should be forthcoming, if my information is correct, as we are providing with the 
amendments to the departments. So with that brief explanation, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Minster of Labour (Mr. Snyder) that with respect to order for Return No. 290 the following amendment: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service: (1) 
spent on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address 
of the firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose, (2) in each instance whether 
this printing was tendered or whether the contracts were awarded in another manner other than 
tenders, and if so the method used to determine who should receive printing business. 



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1507 

MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to seek the guidance of the mover of the motion on the matter. The 
original motion starts out: “Since March 1, 1979” and I’m not sure when the Attorney General was 
moving his amendment he said to delete all the words after “showing.” I don’t believe he did, and his 
amendment reads: “Since March 1, 1979.” Now, I don’t know what I’m to do with the words that he 
brought forward as an amendment. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I had indicated that we delete all the words after the 
word “showing” but if I didn’t I’ll try it now and if that’s out of order then I guess the only option is to 
adjourn the debate on this. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think it’s in order because I’ m not sure whether I heard it or not. I was listening 
to the Attorney General’s explanation. Is that acceptable? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We’ll accept it. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Delete all the words after “showing” and substitute therefor. 
 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 291 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 291 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission 
spent on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address 
of the firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 291, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission made payments for 
printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the 
amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 292 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 292 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Commission spent on printing with printing and publishing 



 
April 8, 1980 
 

 
1508 

firms, and in each instance the name and address of the firm, amount of money spent with each 
firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the proposed order for Return No. 292, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Commission made 
payments for printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, 
(3) the amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 293 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 293 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the department of Saskatchewan minerals spent 
on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — A point or order, Mr. Speaker. My point of order here is that the proposed return 
asks for an amount related to the department of Saskatchewan minerals. I could be in error, but my 
record is that we have already passed such an order. I suppose there is nothing that says we can’t do it 
twice; but my point of order is that we have covered the Saskatchewan department of minerals, unless 
the questioner is after something else. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — From the point of order raised by the Attorney General, it is clear there is no 
department of Saskatchewan minerals which is embodied in this notice of motion, order for return, and 
since I don’t think it is possible to make a change, I would have to declare the motion out of order. 
 
Perhaps the hon. member can review the matter and come back at a later time with something that would 
be in order because it appears it could be one of two things. 
 

Return No. 294 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. 
McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 294 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Police Commission spent on 
printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr.  



 
April 8, 1980 

 
 

 
1509 

Snyder) with respect to proposed Return No. 294, that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
or publishing firm to whom the Saskatchewan Police Commission made payments for printing: 
(1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the amount of each 
payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 295 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Rosthern (Mr. Katzman) 
that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 295 showing: 
 

Since March 1, 1979 the total amount of money the Saskatchewan Securities Commission spent 
on printing with printing and publishing firms, and in each instance the name and address of the 
firm, amount of money spent with each firm, and the purpose. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to proposed order for Return No. 295, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Labour (Mr. Snyder), that all the words after the word “showing” be deleted 
and the following substituted therefor: 
 

For the period March 1, 1979 to March 31, 1980, the name and address of each private printing 
of publishing firm to whom the Saskatchewan Securities Commission made payments for 
printing: (1) the number of payments to each firm, (2) the reason for each payment, (3) the 
amount of each payment. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if you might call it 5 o’clock? 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	REPORTS OF COMMITTEES
	Yeas — 35
	Nays — 14

	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	MR. MATSALLA: — I’d ask the members of the House to join with me in greeting this fine group and extending a very warm welcome from the legislature in the tradition of Ukrainian culture. This is through the display of braided bread, known as Kolach in...
	QUESTIONS
	Inadequate Sentences in Saskatchewan for Rapists
	Dismissal of Employees re SGEA Strike
	Removal of PCBs from Federal Pioneer Site
	Indian Land Entitlements
	Cold Lake Heavy Oil Project
	Position Paper Relative to Delivery Quotas
	Interior Terminal Elevators
	Mining Industry Concerns
	Amendment of The Trade Union Act
	CONDOLENCES
	MOTIONS FOR RETURN
	Return No. 259
	Return No. 260
	Return No. 261
	Return No. 262
	Return No. 263
	Return No. 264
	Return No. 265
	Return No. 266
	MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek) moved, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake (Mr. McLeod) that an order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 266 showing:
	Return No. 267
	Return No. 268


