






















































Hansard: December 08, 1980


247 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 8, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure on behalf of my colleague, the member 
for Prince Albert and me to introduce to you and to the members of the Assembly, some 37 Air Cadets from 
Prince Albert Squadron No. 38. They are accompanied by Captain McKay, Captain Barber and Lieutenant 
Nordall. It’s a particular pleasure to introduce the group as I am a former Air Cadet from 171 Squadron 
Melfort and a former member of the Royal Canadian Air Force. The group ranges in age from 13 to 18. 
Some are in their fifth year of training. I inform the Assembly that last year this squadron won the northern 
drill competition. I’m sure that members of the Assembly join in congratulating you and in welcoming you 
to this Assembly and express the hope that you will enjoy the proceedings here and find them informative. I 
will be meeting with the group in the rotunda at 2:30 and later for refreshments. Welcome to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
HON. MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a real pleasure for me today to have the opportunity to introduce to 
you and to members of the Assembly, 29 grade 12 students from the Kinistino High School. They are here 
today on a cop-op sponsored tour. They are with their principal, Peter Woje. They are also with Mr. and Mrs. 
Gerald and Faye Boyle, their worthy bus driver, Bob Granrude, and with an employee from the Department 
of Co-operation and Co-operative Development, Neil Burns. They will be visiting various co-operative areas 
today, such as the Credit Union Central, Co-op Refinery, and Federated Co-operatives. 
 
It’s very interesting that on Thursday we had the opportunity to be in Kinistino to help these people, and in 
particular their principal, open up a new school — a very beautiful school in which these folks will have the 
opportunity to learn. 
 
We are very happy to have you here today. I will meet with you a little later on for a picture, and I guess, a 
little drinks of some kind — maybe of a different variety than one would want in the middle of the afternoon. 
However, this is the kind which we get from the cafeteria. I want to say that we welcome you here and I hope 
you have a safe journey home to Kinistino. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS: 
 

Taxation of Payments Through Options North Program 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Question to the minister responsible for northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that under the Options North program various people from the North, mostly natives, are hired at 
a certain job classification and then to upgrade them so that so they fully qualify for that job, they are sent to 
university. I don’t object to that but 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
248 

it has come to my attention the Department of Northern Saskatchewan is not deducting income tax and other 
deductions. My question to you is this: first of all are you aware of it? And secondly, do you condone what 
appears to be actions by the provincial government to actively participate in what I think is a tax evasion 
scheme? 
 
HON. MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I again request from the hon. member at the end of the 
question period the alleged evidence that he draws our attention to. I think it is important to point out that 
there is more than one program supporting students from northern Saskatchewan in post-secondary 
education. One is the Options North program which is geared for employees. It’s necessary, on order to 
answer the particular question, to establish whether or not salary or a student allowance is being paid and 
what the particular circumstances are of each of the students. Certainly there are differences between 
approaches in the different programs, but I assure the hon. member that there is no intention on the part of 
the department nor on the part of the government to participate in any real or alleged tax evasion. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary question. Is the minister aware of an investigation presently under way 
by Revenue Canada into that very question. And secondly, is the minister aware of an opinion by (as I 
understand) the provincial auditor’s office that the money has been taxable and it has been illegally 
distributed to the recipients without tax being withheld? 
 
HON. MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of that. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The serious part of the question becomes a matter of 
what happens if this is true? When the various people in the education program graduate from school they 
could be facing a $25,000 or $30,000 tax liability and they have been advised by the department that it’s not 
taxable, as I understand. So they could be facing a $25,000 to $3,000 tax liability. Is that any way to bring 
these people into the work force, to have that type of liability fact them when they leave university? 
 
HON. MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not clear to me at this point that the facts are as the 
hon. member alleges. I will take notice and report back to him in the House. 
 

Increased Profits by Grain Companies 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, I’m sure you are 
aware that grain tariffs since 1961 have gone from 3.75 cents to 17.7 cents for a bushel of grain. I’m sure that 
the minister is also aware that the latest increases in tariffs took place in the 1979-80 crop year and that 
virtually all of our grain companies have announced record profits. I point to the wheat pool at $54 million, 
an increase of about 90 per cent over the previous year. UGG (United Grain Growers) at $20 million, Cargill 
at $15 million, and so the list goes of record profits. In light of the fact that at the hearings of the Canadian 
Grain Commission, when this increase in tariffs was allowed, all of these companies that have just 
announced a record profit pleaded poverty, increased and whatever else, my question is this: does your 
department intend to protest? Does your department intend to investigate what appears to be a gigantic 
rip-off, on the part of all the grain companies, of the farmers of Saskatchewan? 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
249 

HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — The department, at the present time, has no plans for dealing with this issue 
in a direct way. I assume that when the board of grain commissioners looks at further increases, as requested 
by the elevator companies, we will give the matter at that time some significant consideration. 
 
I point out to the hon. member that the major companies in the area are co-operatives. They are 
membership-owned and membership-controlled. Therefore, I’m sure the members will deal with the elevator 
tariffs as well as calling upon the Government of Saskatchewan to deal with it, as the hon. member is doing. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question to the minister. Mr. Minister, would you agree that his 
situation, with record profits in the first year of these new tariff rates, clearly demonstrates a total lack of 
competition among the existing elevator companies? And would the minister agree with and his department 
support a proposal for deregulation, which would encourage competition among the various elevator 
companies, whether they be co-op or private — which would effect a sure competition? Let them charge 
what they want but get them back to where they are competing with one another instead of being in this 
position where they can act like a group of robber barons to every farmer. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — No, we would not be in favour of deregulation. I think if you ask the 
producers of the province of Saskatchewan, and if you ask the companies which are working with the 
producers, they would be opposed to deregulation. I think the hon. member would find himself standing very 
lonesome on the issue of deregulation. That regulation is essential; it was found to be essential a long time 
ago. Therefore, I think it must continue. The issue of elevator rates is an issue that the memberships of the 
co-operatives will deal with. The hon. member has asked the Government of Saskatchewan to look at this 
issue. I have responded in a positive way in terms of when we should look at it, and that is at the time when 
increases are forthcoming before the board of grain commissioners. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in light of your answer, in light of 
the existing situation, would you agree that it would be totally inappropriate for the wheat board to make the 
loan suggested in some circles interest-free to the grain consortium, which consists of all of these grains 
companies, to build the Prince Rupert terminal? In other words, my question is simply this: in light of this 
situation of the wheat board, would you approve lending these robber barons $100 million of our farmers’ 
money interest-free over 30 years? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, the question of the loan, or proposed loan, by the Canadian 
Wheat Board for the development of the terminals at Churchill is a question that was raised in the assembly 
last week. I report to the hon. member that I have telexed the minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat 
Board to get the position of the Government of Canada and of the Canadian Wheat Board with respect to this 
issue. 
 
I point out to the hon. member that the $100 million loan, as announced by the assistant chief commission of 
the wheat board, was an announcement made around one year ago relative to the development at Prince 
Rupert. The offer at that time was made by the Canadian Wheat Board to stimulate the development at 
Rupert. It did have a stimulation factor. We have a development taking place at Rupert. What relationship 
the latest announcement has relative to that development, I do not know. I am trying to 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
250 

find out from the minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board. As soon as I find out I will provide the 
information to all members opposite. 
 

Demand Meters for Electricity 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — Several days ago I took notice of a question from the hon. member for Bengough 
-Milestone with respect to the use of demand meters. The short answer to the hon. member’s question is that 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation does not have any plans to decrease the number or to discontinue the 
use of demand meters from facilities. The reason is that demand meters are only allocated to industrial, large 
commercial and large farm-class customers. I want to stress particularly that no residential or small 
commercial customers have demand meters. It’s also interesting to note that of the 340,000 customers served 
by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, only 6,700 are billed by the demand meter system. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, question to the minister responsible for SPC (Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation). In your answer, you completely evaded the question that I asked. I referred specifically to the 
recreation centres throughout rural Saskatchewan and it would appear to me that members opposite don’t 
know the difference between a demand meter attached to a regular meter and just a regular meter in any 
system. Will you remove them now, realizing that you are depriving rural Saskatchewan of winter 
recreation? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — The member indicates that we don’t know the purpose or the use of a demand 
meter. I think the member should know that demand meters are a fair and equitable means of charging major 
energy users for the demands which they place on the Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s distribution 
system. These meters measure the energy used by the customer and the energy charged reflects the amount of 
fuel that generating station uses in order to produce that amount of energy. I think it’s only fair and right that 
these types of customers pay for the energy which they use. There’s no magic about it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Perhaps the hon. member suggests these charges should be passed on to residential customers. If that’s what 
he’s saying, I don’t think, that seems to be fair or proper either. There’s another device which can be used by 
people who use demand meters and that is the levelling out of the demand in order that their costs may be 
levelled out, avoiding the high peak levels, the high demand periods. This has been done very successfully 
by a large number of people using the meters in question. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think the minister knows the difference 
between the demand meter attached to a regular meter, because you’re evading my question completely. You 
are referring to businesses; I’m not referring to businesses. I’m referring to recreation facilities in rural 
Saskatchewan such as curling rinks and skating rinks. There is no way that you can regulate the amount of 
power you use at one time in a curling facility attached to a skating facility, so take them out. Will you or 
won’t you? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — I guess, for about the third time, I’ll have to indicate to the hon. member that I 
think it has been shown that the demand meters are fair and equitable in terms of charging for the cost of the 
production of that kind of energy for curling rinks and elsewhere. The fact of the matter is that there is no 
magic about it. In the event that it is not charged to larger industrial and commercial and recreational 
consumers, then I 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
251 

presume that the hon. member is suggesting that the additional charges be charged to residential consumers 
and others. 
 

Alternative to Demand Meters for Recreational Centres 
 
MR. LANE: — Will the minister be prepared to accept an alternative? Take the demand meters away, 
reduce the charges for that community recreational centres around the province and put them against the 
heavy industrial users as opposed to the residential users. 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — That seems to strike at the very heart of the position which members opposite 
have taken on a number of other occasions when they have indicated the heavy charges being levied against 
some of their industrial and commercial friends. I really don’t believe that the member is being very 
consistent in his approach with respect to the levying of charges. Obviously it’s not a new matter. It has been 
examined in some detail on many other occasions. As I’ve indicated, there are opportunities to level out the 
demand, in some instances, if customers apply themselves in that way. Charges, I think have to be regarded 
as not being excessive when compared to curling rinks in other provinces which provide services to facilities 
of that nature. 
 

Minister’s Support of Lewvan Rail Line Relocation 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. Mr. Minister, 
recently you officiated at, or at least participated in, the official opening of the Lewvan rail line. I’m not sure 
what you call it, relocation or by-pass of the city. If the members will keep a little quiet for a minute maybe 
I’ll get my question out. Was the participation in that official opening perhaps a showing or an indication of 
your support of the Regina rail line relocation? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, in the case of our support of the Regina rail line relocation, it has 
been stated a long time ago that we do support the principle of rail line relocation. In the case of my 
participation, I was invited by the city and I participated. I think the hon. member was also involved in at 
least part of the program in the Lewvan line opening. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Actually, I didn’t attend the official opening in the 
afternoon; I attended the refreshments later on. That was the interesting part of it. However, not having 
attended the official opening, I’m advised that at that time you indicated your approval and pleasure that the 
removal of the Lewvan tracks within the city would provide a corridor to access to our airport for the 
residents of southwestern Saskatchewan, is that correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that during the course of the remarks I did indicate that 
this would help remove the line which will make the access a little better at some future date when the lines 
are removed. Now that the trains are not running there, certainly that’s an improvement. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You said “a future date,” and I’m curious about that 
particular aspect of your reply. However, that being the case, why would your government now refuse to pay 
for the cost of the construction of the Pasqua-Lewvan expressway from Regina Avenue south to Highway 
No. 1, following the commitment that was made by the provincial government in 1969? 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
252 

HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not aware that we are refusing to pay, and of the commitments 
that have been made. Perhaps the hon. member could give me the details. I would be glad to check it out. I 
don’t have the specific details. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the very same question to the Minister of Highways. 
I’m not sure who that is any more. Perhaps the Premier would like to answer the question. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would be happy to take notice of the question and ask the 
appropriate colleague to answer. 
 

Appointment of Acting Deputy Provincial Secretary 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Provincial Secretary. I asked the minister on Friday if 
it were true that Philip Flory has been appointed as acting deputy provincial secretary. The minister 
answered, and I quote from Hansard: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I am unaware of any appointment or proposed appointment of Mr. Flory as deputy 
provincial secretary. 

 
On Friday morning last I was in Mr. Beaudry’s office asking for an appointment with him. Why, Mr. 
Minister, did his office girls inform me that Mr. Beaudry was in New York, and ask if I would like to have 
an appointment with the acting deputy minister, Mr. Philip Flory? Why, after some further conversation, did 
they inform me that Mr. Beaudry had retired and Mr. Flory had taken his place? Now who is telling the truth, 
you or Mr. Beaudry’s office staff? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there are several questions there. First of all, I indicated that 
there was no decision made to appoint Mr. Flory as deputy provincial secretary, and that was correct. The 
member asked whether or not he had been appointed a few days before as acting deputy provincial secretary 
and I don’t believe that was the case. The member wants to know why the staff said Mr. Beaudry was in 
New York. They said he was in New York because he was in New York. 
 
With respect to the question of Mr. Beaudry’s retirement, he will be retiring effective December 31 of this 
year and any changes in position, any promotions, anyone who will be appointed to take his place will be 
announced in due course, but there have been no decisions made with respect to the appointment of a new 
deputy provincial secretary. I might also say to the member that the person who acts in Mr. Beaudry’s stead 
when he is away is either Mr. Earl Saunderson, the superintendent of insurance or Mr. Flory — one of them; 
;they’re the two senior people in the department. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I see Friday that you have answers today but you didn’t 
have them the other day. Mr. Minister, is it true that the ex- or present deputy provincial secretary spent last 
week in New York? If so, under what capacity was he there? At whose expense was he there — the 
taxpayers or his own? Was he on his retirement holiday? Did he have a government credit card? Come on, 
come clean, tell us the whole story here. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that last week Mr. Beaudry was in New York and I 
believe it was at government expense, but I certainly wouldn’t want to mislead the member in any way, and 
so I will take notice of that question and provide 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
253 

him with all the details of Mr. Beaudry’s trip to New York if indeed, as I believe it was, it was a trip 
involving government business. 
 

Filling of Cabinet Posts 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, today’s question period, I think, exemplified or provided another 
example of the problems and difficulties facing an opposition when a premier reneges his responsibility and 
leaves two . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a question? I want to hear it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that I am allotted a brief statement before my first 
question. My question to the Premier is this: why, Mr. Premier, since you have that bevy of talent across the 
way, have you not yet chosen a new minister of mineral resources and a new minister of highways? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the question answers itself. It’s because there is such a bevy of 
talent that I have great difficulty making the choices. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Since the Premier is having difficulty in making up his mind, perhaps he would allow 
us in the opposition to make up our minds as to which of the members opposite might be the best minister of 
highways and minister of mineral resources. Would you allow me the opportunity to choose from that bevy 
of talent? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I know that they hon. member for Nipawin has been promising 
cabinet posts to a very large number of people (two or three as the minister of agriculture, as I recall it, in 
1978), but I certainly would be happy to have his suggestions and he can certainly pass them on to me and I 
will add them to the very extensive list I already have. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Nelson for an address in reply. 
 
MR. BAKER: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to take part in the throne speech debate. I would first 
of all like to congratulate my colleague, the member for Yorkton, who made skilled and thoughtful remarks 
in moving the address in reply. The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg also demonstrated his personal 
competence and the strong record of this government in seconding the address. I would like to extend a 
warm welcome to the fine people in my Regina Victoria constituency and extend also an especially warm 
welcome to those recently added to my constituency through redistribution. The new polls in my 
constituency return the privilege of serving most of the people who were in my constituency after the 1964 
election and consequently I regard them as old friends. 
 
It is also a pleasure for me to welcome the three new members elected during our recent by-elections. I am 
confident that all three will serve their constituency to the best of their abilities. 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
254 

In my remarks today, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize the responsibility of democratic and parliamentary 
governments and of highly developed and industrialized countries, not only in the role they must play at 
home but also in the role which humanity requires they play with regard to the Commonwealth countries and 
other undeveloped peoples and nations. When I look at the Speech from the Throne, I see how truly fortunate 
we are in this province. We are blessed with abundant natural resources and a government which has 
developed these resources for the benefit of the people. 
 
I have recently returned from a worldwide conference in Lusaka, Zambia, sponsored by the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association, which has given me the opportunity to view our achievements in Saskatchewan 
from a broader perspective. I thank this legislature for affording me the opportunity to attend the 
commonwealth parliamentary conference for Saskatchewan. I may also report that Mr. Gordon Barnhart 
attended as Clerk of the Assembly. He made a fine contribution to the conference and is held in high regard. 
 
The purpose of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is to promote knowledge and education about 
the constitutional, legislative, economic, social and cultural systems within a parliamentary-democratic 
framework with particular reference to the countries of the Commonwealth of Nations and to other countries 
having close historical and parliamentary associations with it. The conference I attended involved 44 
countries, taking in a third of the world’s population — well over a billion people. The most significant thing 
about such a gathering is that no translations were required and that we were able to speak our common 
language, namely English. While many dialects were recognizable, the fact remained that we were under one 
tongue, with the majority of delegates and guests being of a different colour from white. Being side by side 
with people of different races, colours and creeds for over two weeks indicates to me that co-existence is not 
only a must, but that all barriers can be eliminated if people and nations show tolerance. 
 
In my remarks today I will try to outline some of the outstanding happenings in the Commonwealth and 
reflect on the needs of the third world or undeveloped countries which in many ways can be found in the 
country we visited, namely Zambia. 
 
With regard to agriculture, many things were revealed to us in our tour. In conversations with several white 
and black farmers, we found the agricultural potential in Zambia is great. They claim Zambia could produce 
enough food to feed at least 150 million people, and that 80 per cent of the land could be used to produce 
almost any cereal, vegetable or fruit crop. At present only about 4 per cent of the arable land is in use. The 
Canadian delegation spent time with the Canadian wheat specialist working in Zambia, Dr. Hurd from 
Regina and Swift Current, who introduced many of our western wheat varieties. Many experiments have 
been undertaken and are continuing. It appears now that the resistant varieties known as rain-fed wheat will 
be suited for the many rainy seasons where plant diseases are severe. Other varieties have been produced for 
dry-land farming and irrigation projects. The present food grown and used as a flour base in Zambia is maize 
which looks like white corn. It is high in protein and when mixed with Canadian wheat produces an 
excellent type of flour. 
 
Canada has given considerable financial input by setting up unit farms for training native farmers who will 
learn to set up independent farming operations. 
 
It is important that the native people be trained to help themselves. There are many 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
255 

small-scale farming schemes in most parts of Zambia promoted by countries like Canada under the Canadian 
International Development Agency known as CIDA, and this is one of several programs they promote. These 
small-scale schemes are important as a development tool to improve the living standards for a large number 
of people. Irrigations schemes have great potential for large-scale production of wheat and would move 
Zambia toward self-sufficiency in wheat. Most of the management for large-scale farms is white, but 
Zambians are learning. It will likely be 15 years before Zambians are experienced enough to take over all 
production. However, with outside help Zambia will probably be growing all of its own wheat in eight years 
time. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, Zambia received its full independence as a parliamentary democratic nation in 
19864. Dr. Kenneth Kaunda became president at that time and still holds office. He is a very capable, highly 
intelligent leader trying to steer his country along democratic lines even though they use the one-party 
parliamentary system. They claim a one-party system is needed to meld all the tribal groups together to avoid 
revolutionary tendencies that could destroy their progress. While I do not agree with their one-party system, 
perhaps it has merit until the country becomes more self-sufficient and stable. However, I still think a two- 
or three party system could achieve the goals desired with complete freedom. 
 
Zambia is a country of six million people. We were told over 2.5 million people still live in the primitive 
villages, some of which we visited. There you see, in terms of our lifestyle, great poverty and backwardness. 
However the Zambian government is trying to educate Zambia’s youth and the Zambian people fully support 
the education of their youth and adults too. 
 
On our week’s tour we visited a good part of the country. Our flights took us to the northern part of the 
country in the highly developed copper-belt area. We visited their strip mines, their underground mines, and 
saw the industrialized and technical way they have of producing a very high grade of copper. Thousands of 
people are engaged directly and indirectly in copper production. Copper is their main mineral resource and is 
the largest source of the country’s wealth. It is so important to develop agriculture there because Zambia 
could become the main food basket of Africa with foodstuffs as their largest export. This could take a severe 
load off the developed countries by providing food when drought and starvation strikes other African 
countries. 
 
We were told that in the neighboring country of Mozambique there has been three years of drought which 
would cause 1.5 million people to suffer from malnutrition or starvation next year. The threat of drought 
means that one of the immediate needs for countries like Zambia is the development of safe water supplies. 
Many deaths and illnesses are caused by blackwater fever or other related illnesses caused by river water. It 
would seem to me a province like Saskatchewan could undertake a project of this type on its own by drilling 
wells for consumption and in places for irrigation. This would speed up food production and get rid of many 
health hazards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the conference discussions took place surrounding the Brandt report and its 
recommendation which were a plea for change, for peace, justice and jobs for developing countries. Brandt’s 
report divides the work into a north-south perspective, depicting most of the North as the highly developed 
economic and industrialized world versus the South, while most countries and nations are underdeveloped or 
developing. I am unable to cover the full commission report, which is voluminous, so I will give you a 
summary with certain recommendations that they provide. They claim an action program must be launched 
comprising both emergency 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
256 

and long-term measures to assist the poverty belts of Africa and Asia. Such measures would include large 
regional projects of water and soil management, the provision of health care and the eradication of such 
diseases as river blindness, malaria, sleeping sickness and other fevers and plagues from which we witnesses 
many people suffering. 
 
Solar energy development, mineral and petroleum exploration, reforestation, support for industrialization,. 
agriculture and transportation are other areas which need attention. The report suggests that plans would 
require additional financial assistance from the developed countries of at least $4 billion per year for the next 
two decades. 
 
Population growth, movement and environment. In view of the vicious circle between poverty and high-birth 
rates, the rapid population growth in developing countries gives added urgency to the need to fight hunger, 
disease, malnutrition and illiteracy. 
 
The Brandt report recommends that development policies should include national population programs 
aiming at a satisfactory balance between population and resources, and making family planning freely 
available. Migrant workers throughout the world should be assured fair treatment. The rights of refugees to 
asylum and legal protection should be strengthened. 
 
Disarmament and development. The public must be made aware of the terrible danger to world stability 
caused by the arms race. They must be made aware of the burden it imposes on national economies and the 
resources it diverts from peaceful development. 
 
Every effort must be made to secure international agreements preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. More research is necessary on the means of converting arms production to civilian production 
which could make use of the highly skilled scientific and technical manpower currently employed in the 
arms industries. 
 
Industrialization and world trade. The industrialization of developing countries as a means of their overall 
development efforts must also be seen as important by developed countries. It will provide increasing 
opportunities for world trade and should be facilitated as a matter of international policy. 
 
Fair labor standards should be internationally agreed in order to prevent unfair competition and to facilitate 
trade interchange. 
 
It was also suggested by the conference, Mr. Speaker, that mechanisms should be agreed for creating and 
distributing an international currency to be used for clearing and settling outstanding balances between 
central banks. Such a currency would replace the use of the national currencies as international reserves. 
 
The conference recommended that timetables be adopted to increase official development assistance from 
industrialized countries to the level of 0.7 per cent of the gross national products by 1985 and to 1 per cent 
before the end of the century. Canada is now at 0,.43 per cent. 
 
There must be effective utilization of the increased borrowing capacity of the World Bank resulting from the 
decision to double its capital to $80 billion. 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
257 

Discussions indicated that consideration be given to the creation of a new international financial institution, 
a world development fund, with universal membership and in which decision-making is more evenly shared 
between lenders and borrowers. 
 
The conference recommendations stated that there must be a substantial increase in the transfer of resources 
to developing countries in order to finance programs to alleviate poverty, to expand food production and to 
explore and develop energy and mineral resources. It was indicated to the developing countries at the 
convention that there would be a tightening of the International Monetary Fund (the MF) policies. This 
brought out a hew and cry against the industrialized West, which said it was necessary for world economic 
recovery. Third world countries criticized the International Monetary Fund for demanding purse tightening 
policies. This, in my opinion, Mr. Speaker, would set back programs for the underdeveloped countries 
needed so desperately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe increased attention should be paid to educating public opinion and the younger 
generation about the importance of international co-operation. More limited Commonwealth summit 
meetings of our leaders should be considered to advance the cause of consensus and change. 
 
What a blessing for us to be able to live in a land of plenty, a land of the free, among a compassionate people 
in Saskatchewan who, I believe, do think of the needs of others. Yes, let’s look beyond our borders and also 
do more for that hungry world in sharing some of our blessings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — Mr. Speaker, to begin I would like to extend my congratulations to the mover and 
seconder of the address in reply to the Speech from the Throne, the member for Yorkton and the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. It is indeed an honor to move or second such an address, both for the hon. members 
and the constituents they represent. That honor was bestowed upon the member for Regina North-West and 
the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster last year. 
 
I am glad of this opportunity to speak in support of this government’s Speech from the Throne. The Speech 
from the Throne says very important things about our government. It is a government with strong morale, a 
government with steadfastness, courage and hope, a government with confidence, zeal and loyalty to our 
country, a government with a spirit of courage and determination. 
 
The policy of this government, as shown in this throne speech, is not directed against the rest of this country 
or against any political doctrine, but against desperation and chaos. Its purpose is the building and 
maintenance of a working Saskatchewan economy in Canada so as to permit the emergence of political and 
social conditions in which we can continue to live in dignity and independence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that morale and that spirit of Saskatchewan were never more evidence than during this past 
year, a year marked by celebrations, a year when we looked backward to our roots to recapture the elusive 
past as we look confidently toward the future. Saskatchewan sparkled with verve and vitality as people drew 
on their imaginations 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
258 

and memories to create special events. This last year was a milestone in Saskatchewan history. It was more 
than a birthday. It was a clear sign of the calm confidence of Saskatchewan people in their ability to forge 
ahead into the next 75 years of our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the enthusiasm we all shared was in some measure due to a people who are able to look back 
on a decade of sustained growth and prosperity for Saskatchewan. While we took part in special events and 
activities, Celebrate Saskatchewan was essentially about people — people working co-operatively, people 
trusting in their own good judgment, people seeking and finding solutions to how best to work and live 
together. The people of Saskatchewan made our celebrations this year a gigantic success. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — Today I would also like to pay tribute to three of our members who have retired this 
year — the former members for The Battlefords, Kelsey-Tisdale, and Estevan. Each of them in their own 
way personified some of those things about Saskatchewan I have mentioned. 
 
Eiling Kramer, with 26 years of service to the people of North Battleford and Saskatchewan, was a man who 
demonstrated rugged strength and character in the way he fought for the things in which he believed. His 
contribution to the lives of Saskatchewan people will be long remembered. 
 
Jack Messer, first elected in 1967, was a pillar of strength in this government for a decade, possessing that 
rare combination of determination and endurance so necessary to this government as it introduced new 
programs and policies for people. 
 
And Bob Larter, the member for Estevan — though he was not a member on this side of the House, he 
exemplified the best qualities in a representative and a person. 
 
I salute these men, Mr. Speaker. While their abilities are lost to this House, I am certain they will continue to 
be active in their respective communities. 
 
Our province has a wealth of talent to draw from. Not only is it blessed with able people, but it is equally 
blessed with committed people who take matters of government seriously. Last November 26, three 
members were elected to replace those who retired. I congratulate and welcome the new members for 
Estevan, The Battlefords, and Kelsey-Tisdale, and I look forward to working with them over the months 
ahead. 
 
Our celebration year is coming to a close. As it does, we see new and disturbing challenges ahead for 
Saskatchewan and Canada. In the light of these new challenges, Mr. Speaker, I think it right and proper to 
take a look at some of the things the New Democratic Party government of Allan Blakeney has been able to 
achieve, not simply as a record, but so the strengths of this government can be viewed in the context of the 
new challenges facing our people. 
 
Saskatchewan is an important supplier of many primary products. We produce 60 per cent of Canada’s 
wheat, one-third of its oats and barley, and 30 per cent of its oil seeds; Saskatchewan is the second largest 
supplier of potash in the world and the nation’s second largest producer of oil, to mention only a few of the 
products. This range of productive activity represents a major departure from Saskatchewan’s historical 
dependence on one export commodity, namely wheat. Near-exclusive reliance on a single crop, however, 
brought large and abrupt fluctuations in output and income, 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
259 

variable revenues and periodic population declines. This was true, Mr. Speaker, until the decade of the 
1970s, the decade the government of Allan Blakeney came to power, the decade when our Saskatchewan 
economy was transformed from a narrow to a broadly based export economy. During this past decade the 
conscious efforts of this government in promoting an aggressive policy of diversification to promote 
stability, to produce jobs and income opportunities, and to gain benefits for Saskatchewan people from 
resource development, have resulted in even greater promise for the future than our forefathers could have 
envisioned. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SOLOMON: — Our population has risen to its highest level ever, to an estimated 970,000 people on 
July 1, 1980. Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate has consistently been ranked among the lowest in Canada. 
Natural resource revenues accruing to the province have risen nineteenfold since 1970. Today, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan is one of Canada’s growth centres, and that growth is in large measure due to this 
government’s aggressive development of Saskatchewan natural assets. This, combined with careful fiscal 
management and progressive social initiatives, provides a sound basis for confidence in the future of our 
province through the 1980s. 
 
This past year alone saw a continuation of good government in Saskatchewan. Our recent provincial budget 
reflected good government. There were tax cuts adjusting the income tax rates payable for inflation, which 
meant $26 million in income tax savings. Increasing the tax reduction for senior citizens from $160 
maximum to $210 resulted in a $50 tax cut, which meant savings for our senior citizens. The maximum 
Saskatchewan mortgage-interest tax credit was continued, giving some relief to an estimated 100,000 
home-owners by approximately $18 million. The renters property tax rebate program was expanded. This 
year our government continued its commitment to health care. We chose not to desert our commitment like 
provincial Conservative governments. This year SHSP funding was increased by almost 14 per cent. There 
was almost $18 million for the Regina hospitals regeneration program. Fourteen-year-olds were added to the 
Saskatchewan dental plan. Funding for the cancer foundation was increased to $7.8 million. These were just 
a few of the measures in this crucial area. 
 
Added to these were such useful and important programs as the community schools program and the native 
training and employment program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list goes on, a list of positive moves on the part of this government during our celebration 
year to keep Saskatchewan in the forefront of economic and social progress in Canada. If any one thing has 
marked this government’s approach to people, it has been a positive response to the need of local 
communities. The people of Regina have reason to be pleased with that response. It is, as the throne speech 
so aptly point out, a positive response to realities. Although time doesn’t permit me to list them all, I would 
just like to mention a few of the ways the city of Regina has benefited over the past year from a government 
which cares, the government of Allan Blakeney. 
 
Grants to urban affairs, including revenue sharing, water pollution, neighborhood improvement, ambulance 
and fire, will total some $16 million for Regina, almost 19 per cent over the previous year. In fact, grants to 
the municipality were up to $21.8 million, a 25 per cent increase over the previous year. that’s not all. Local 
authorities and organizations also received increases in their funding. Public and separate schools in Regina 
received a 10.7 per cent increase, a total of $35.6 million for operating and 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
260 

capital costs. Continuing education — our universities, community colleges and institutes — received grants 
totalling $34.5 million in Regina, up by almost 8 per cent over the previous year. Operating grants to 
hospitals and other related grants for health services to Regina were increased to $87 million in this fiscal 
year. Cultural activities in Regina received a total of $2.8 million. Operating grants for libraries were up. 
Grants for government services were up. Grants for social services were up. This government believes in 
supporting local communities, Mr. Speaker. Total provincial government expenditures in Regina in the 
current fiscal year are forecast to be over $202 million. That is over $1,275 for every man, woman and child 
in Regina. That is what I call a clear example of commitment to community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a resident of Regina I’m pleased my provincial government sees fit to support local 
communities. As a representative of this government I’m proud to have been a part of that commitment. 
 
I would like to turn now to my constituency of Regina North-West and report on the progress over the past 
year. 
 
On November 18, the CN Lewvan subdivision from Highway No. 1 south to the CNR yard, which marks the 
south boundary of my constituency, was officially closed due to the completion of project 4 of the Lewvan 
subdivision. This subdivision now takes rail traffic to and from the subdivision around the east side of 
Regina instead of through the city. The relocation of this line will make it easier to build a north-south 
arterial — a much-needed transportation link from the northwest part of Regina to downtown. I’m proud to 
see our NDP government taking part in this worthy project to the extent of sharing 50 per cent of the costs. 
 
Over the past year, I’ve also worked to encourage our provincial government to become more involved with 
meeting the recreation needs of the families of northwest Regina. My efforts, together with those of many 
people in the community, have been successful. I’m pleased to see the provincial government has been able 
to give a total of $223,000 to assist in the cost of renovating the Pasqua School into the Pasqua 
Neighborhood Recreation Centre which was officially opened on October 4 last. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan believes n supporting communities. When community groups have good 
ideas, they find the government of Allan Blakeney responds to their needs. I would like to express my 
appreciation, at this time, to Hon. Ned Shillington, who was then minister of culture and youth, who 
authorized the grant for the centre. 
 
Another significant development in recreation in northwest Regina was announced just recently, Mr. 
Speaker. On October 22, it was announced that $2.3 million plus land will be given by this government to 
the city of Regina to build a multipurpose recreation complex in northwest Regina. The complex will be 
built in Sherwood Estates. This grant, composed of $2 million from the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
and $300,000 from the Department of Culture and Youth, will make it possible for the community centre to 
be built in 1981. This is a much-needed facility for the people of northwest Regina, including the people who 
live in the neighborhoods of Walsh Acres, Sherwood Estates, McCarthy Park, Normanview, Normanview 
West, Argyle Park, and Prairieview West. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to have been involved with getting this development on the road. I’d like to take the 
opportunity to express my appreciation on behalf of the 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
261 

residents of Regina North-West to the provincial government for once again helping to fulfil the needs of our 
family-oriented community of northwest Regina. 
 
I was also pleased to assist in providing a $250,000 provincial government capital facilities grant which has 
gone toward the construction of a new library for northwest Regina on Rochdale Boulevard. This library will 
be open shortly. 
 
In 1978, the government of Allan Blakeney was once again elected by the people of Saskatchewan. I was 
pleased at that time, to play a small part in the victory. In that campaign, the New Democratic government 
had a slogan. The slogan was: A Record of Success — Great Promise for the Future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I view the record of this government, a record which I have briefly alluded to during my 
remarks, it’s obvious that the slogan was not empty rhetoric. It was a slogan rooted in the reality of what this 
government has done. It’s a good record and one to be proud of. As this throne speech shows, there is great 
promise for the future. 
 
Most important, this throne speech clearly lays out the ground rules for Saskatchewan’s participation in 
confederation. Unlike Conservative governments which choose to ride with the tide of separatism, this 
government chooses to press for needed changes in our new constitutional relationship. At the same time, 
this government intends to fight the absolutist position of the federal Liberal stand on the constitution. This 
government, Mr. Speaker, chooses to make its decisions with its head, not its feet. Unlike Conservative 
forces of reaction we will not break ranks, as the opposite members do, at the first sign of difficulty. This is a 
strong government, a stable government, not a Conservative government. 
 
Nor will the government of Allan Blakeney back down from the federal Liberal government, a government 
which takes away our ability to benefit from our resources through a national energy policy which 
discriminates against producing provinces with the one hand and cuts on transfer payments to our province 
with the other, as they did with the federal budget of last October. 
 
This government will continue its work and support on behalf of working people in Saskatchewan. I am 
pleased to see there will be amendments to The Trade Union Act to clarify procedures to be followed in 
conducting strike votes. The speech also provides for an increased minimum age to be raised to $3.85 on 
January 1, 1981 and to $4 on July 1, 1981 to help those earning minimum wage to cope better with inflation. 
 
New and improved deliver of day care services and care of the elderly, a new department of consumer and 
commercial affairs and many other measures will together ensure there is indeed a great promise for the 
future in Saskatchewan. 
 
Earlier I spoke about this government being a government with clarity of purpose and strong morale, a 
government with the will and the ability to build and maintain a working economy in Saskatchewan. And as 
we near the end of our celebration year I am glad we have been able to reflect on how that purpose has been 
realized by this government. We do have a proud history and a bright future in Saskatchewan and therefore 
I’ll be supporting this motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to rise in the debate to the 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
262 

Speech from the Throne this afternoon, representing the constituency of Melfort. First of all, I’d like to 
congratulate the mover and the seconder of the address in reply to the Speech from the Throne, the member 
for Yorkton and the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, for the capable manner in which they made their 
presentations. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the three members of the Legislative Assembly who have taken their seats 
in this House for the first time in this session. The new member for The Battlefords has been well chosen 
and while he has some big shoes to fill I have no doubt that he will meet the challenge successfully. The 
people of Estevan constituency are to be congratulated on the selection of their new MLA and I am sure that 
their new member on this side of the House will confirm the wisdom of their choice by serving his 
constituency intelligently and effectively in the months and years ahead. Welcome is also extended to the 
new member opposite who will find, I am sure, that he has a very hard act to follow in terms of service to the 
Kelsey-Tisdale constituency and to the province. I hope he will find his experience here both interesting and 
enlightening during his brief stay as a member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the MLA for Melfort constituency it is a pleasure to stand in this House and reflect on the 
achievements of this government and on the developments that have occurred in the constituency as a result 
of this government’s policies and programs. The people of Melfort and area have seen growth and 
development as a direct result of this government’s leadership in developing the economy of our province. 
 
The throne speech is another example of the recent and progressive approach of this government, an 
approach which has served the province so well in the past and will continue to serve it well in the years 
ahead. The government has shown ongoing concern for the well-being of the people of the province. This is 
reflected in the service offered to the people in my constituency over the past number of years. 
 
One of the most important recent developments in the Melfort constituency is the construction of the George 
Willis Bridge on the Saskatchewan River north of Gronlid. This bridge provides an important access 
between the northern and southern regions of the province. For the people in the communities immediately 
to the north of the river, the bridge provides an access to the new city of Melfort and provides a direct 
substantially shorter route south to Regina. This direct route will also be of great benefit to Southerners who 
will have much easier access to the excellent recreational areas along the Hanson Lake Road and points 
north, east and west. 
 
The construction of this bridge will bring economic benefits to the communities along the highway. The 
George Willis bridge provides a shorter, less expensive route for business and industrial vehicles. With the 
development of Saskatchewan’s North, it is conceivable that this bridge will become a major north-south 
route for the movement of goods and services, providing a direct route from the American border to the 
northern parkland. 
 
Therefore, in the broadest sense, this bridge is an important additional link in our provincial transportation 
system. It will benefit the people of my constituency and the Shellbrook constituency to the north, but it also 
has the potential to become a route of major importance to the province as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency has also benefited substantially from the government’s housing programs. 
During the ’70s, through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, public housing projects from Lake Lenore 
to Star City have created 189 senior citizens 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
263 

housing units and 14 family units, with a provincial government contribution of approximately $1,535,000. 
Between 1972 and 1979, over 200 grants totalling $150,000 were paid out to assist people building houses in 
the Melfort constituency. Many people, especially senior citizens, have received assistance under the 
residential rehabilitation and senior citizens home repair programs. From the fall of 1973 to the spring of 
1980, 136 loans totalling $370,000 were made to assist in home rehabilitation and over half of this amount 
has been forgiven. Nearly 800 senior citizens in the Melfort area qualified for grants of approximately 
$330,000 to repair their homes. In addition, government programs to provide rural housing, non-profit 
housing and to assist with land assembly have been used in my constituency to the benefit of all local people. 
 
Obviously this government is taking action on an ongoing basis to improve the quality of life for our 
citizens. People of my constituency and of the province as a whole have benefited from these wide-ranging 
housing programs. 
 
In the area of social services, improvements are also being made in the Melfort constituency. The 
provincially funded home care service is getting established, with Melfort district, no. 32, being officially 
recognized on July 1 of this year. The local home care board has received grants of over $21,000 for 
administration and public education. I understand the board is presently preparing a development plan for 
that region. This program will contribute to the self-sufficiency of individuals and families who might 
otherwise be dependent upon government for their daily care. It will enable more of the elderly, the disabled, 
the handicapped and the chronically ill to live with dignity and independence in their own homes. 
 
This program is an important demonstration of the ongoing concern and the innovative response of our 
government to the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year has been one of celebration and renewal for our province and its people. The occasion 
of our 75th anniversary as a province was marked by many happy events in the province and the Melfort 
constituency. During the summer months I attended over 20 celebrations in as many communities — 
reunions, talent nights, art shows, parades — all developed by local people, each reliving its special 
memories and expressing its unique hope for the future. These were celebrations which reflected the special 
community spirit that is rural Saskatchewan’s strength. I would like to commend all volunteers in my 
constituency who gave so generously of their time to make these local celebrations a success. I would also 
like to extend my congratulations to the minister responsible for Celebrate Saskatchewan, and to the staff of 
the corporation for the important part they played in working with local organizations in planning this year’s 
celebrations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my community of Melfort marked this year in a unique way by becoming the twelfth city of the 
province. I am pleased that milestone in my community’s development coincided with the milestone in the 
province’s history. I am sure that both the community and the province can look forward to further growth 
and development in the years ahead. Let me congratulate the people of Melfort and their council and with 
them well in the decades ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not mean to suggest that there are no challenges that face us in the present or in the future. 
On the contrary, our province and our nation are facing major issues, and I am pleased that this throne 
speech addresses those issues. The debate on the constitutional proposal presently before the House of 
Commons is a major 
99



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
264 

concern, and I am proud of the clear thinking and the consistent and constructive approach which our 
government has taken in addressing this issue. 
 
The constitutional debate is becoming a divisive factor in our nation, and this is both unfortunate and 
unnecessary. The constitutional issue is divisive because of the hard-line positions which have been assumed 
by both the federal and various provincial governments in the discussion process. These opposing groups 
have become entrenched and have assumed a stance of confrontation in a situation where I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, negotiation and compromise would be a more productive approach. This government has always 
taken the position that the Canadian tradition of making decisions by consensus must be followed in all this 
important constitutional debate. 
 
This government stands firm on those issues such as control of resources which are vital to Saskatchewan’s 
well-being. However, we continue to strive for more changes in those parts of the constitutional package 
which are unacceptable to consultation and negotiation rather than confrontation. In this regard I feel that our 
government is behaving in a responsible manner and is striving to provide for the best interests of our 
province and our nation. 
 
We have made progress, and yes, there is still potential for persuading the federal government to make 
important concessions in the constitutional package. And I would like at this time to congratulate both the 
Premier of the province and the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs for the intelligent leadership that they 
have shown. They have earned the respect of all Canadians. 
 
Western Canada and our province of Saskatchewan are playing an increasingly important role in national 
affairs, largely because of the quality of leadership provided by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
In my capacity as the Minister of Industry and Commerce, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see a growing 
recognition of Saskatchewan’s industrial potential. We are finding that there are tremendous opportunities 
available in the province for the establishing of manufacturing and service industries — a spinoff to the 
development in the primary resource sector. These secondary industries will bring diversification and 
increasing stability to our provincial economy in the next decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite have frequently expressed skepticism regarding these facts. This 
government’s approach to economic development is working and working well. The current situation is the 
result of good management. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of the few areas in North American to record 
economic growth in the 1980s. Our unemployment continues to be the lowest, or the second lowest in 
Canada. People move to Saskatchewan to find jobs. Our population is at an all-time high. Since 1972, 
85,000 jobs have been created. Personal income is up 10 per cent this year, and private and public 
investment continues to grow. 
 
Questions have been raised in this House, Mr. Speaker, about the number of business failures in the 
province. the opposition has quoted isolated statistics to attempt to demonstrate that business is in serious 
difficulty because of this government’s policies. I will not argue, Mr. Speaker,, with the statement that these 
are difficult times for business. However, the problem is caused by the policies of the federal, and not the 
provincial, government. The current policy of maintaining impossibly high interest rates is a prime cause of 
business failure. It is the policy which is supported, not only by 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
265 

the current Liberal government in Ottawa, but was supported by the previous Progressive Conservative 
government under Mr. Clark. 
 
The members opposite have quoted federal government studies which indicate that the number of 
bankruptcies in Saskatchewan has increased over the last year. However, the members followed their usual 
Progressive Conservative practice of presenting only half the facts. In this case, the members neglected to 
mention other findings of that same study, which indicated that the principal reason for this increase in 
business failure was undercapitalization of businesses — undercapitalization, Mr. Speaker, which occurs 
because of the high cost of money. Undercapitalization is a major cause of business failure. It is a direct 
result of the monetary and fiscal policies imposed on that province and the whole nation by the federal 
government run by the old-line parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as minister responsible for business in the province, I am pleased to report that both Sedco and 
the Department of Industry and Commerce are offering assistance to business communities to deal with 
current problems. 
 
Sedco is taking a responsible position with regard to interest rates, and is able to offer interest rates 
somewhat lower than the excessive levels charged by some agencies in the financial market. Sedco also 
places a high priority on manufacturing and secondary industries, thus helping Saskatchewan to develop a 
diverse industrial base. Sedco is filling this role well and is making a substantial contribution to the 
industrial development in our province. For example, in the first 11 months of this year, Sedco has approved 
loans and guarantees in the amount of $16.1 million to the manufacturing sector. As a result of these 32 
manufacturing projects, approximately 300 Saskatchewan jobs will be created or maintained. This is a clear 
demonstration of the commitment of this government and its agencies to industrial diversification and 
reliable long-term growth. 
 
The Department of Industry and Commerce continues to offer a range of services to businesses and has 
programs which help businesses deal with current different economic situations. As a result, our province 
has a health business climate and bright prospects for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech we had the honor to hear a few days ago represents another step in the steady 
progress of our province towards prosperity and stability of the economy and the total well-being of all 
Saskatchewan people. I’m proud to speak in support of the Speech from the Throne and of the policies it 
represents. I will be honored to vote for the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — Mr. Speaker, it has been quite a number of years since I’ve participated in the 
throne speech debate, but certain events occurring of late prompted me to take part. The Melville 
constituency has been well treated by this Blakeney government, but I will refrain from commenting on this, 
Mr. Speaker, because of the time pressure. However, I want to congratulate the mover and the seconder for 
the positive and factual critiques of the throne speech and to the general performance of the Blakeney 
government since coming into office. I also want to congratulate the retiring members of this legislature in 
the past year. They were outstanding MLAs all of their long years of tenure in this legislature. 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
266 

I want to congratulate, as well, the winners in the three by-elections. Many comments have been made in the 
post-mortem of these results. I will not go into those results except to make one comment on the win of Mr. 
Chapman over the Conservative leader, Grant Devine, in a seat which the Conservatives of Saskatchewan 
deemed solidly safe for an outside candidate. I believe that one of the factors having a good deal to do with 
the loss for the Conservative leader was that the farm people in Estevan and community did not forget the 
statement made by Mr. Devine a few short years ago in his review of Saskatchewan’s agricultural future. In 
the interests of efficiency and good management, he said that three our of every four farmers must get off the 
land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the Estevan farmers were not fooled by the election prattle of Mr. Devine claiming 
that the Progressive Conservatives, if elected to power in Saskatchewan, were going to be saviors of the 
family farm — a statement, Mr. Speaker, totally contradictory to the fact. If anything, the Devine statements 
revealed that the Conservative policies on Saskatchewan agriculture in this regard were totally politically 
oriented with no real commitment as to performance to help solve the squeeze-out of the family farm. If 
anything, these policies would tend to greatly escalate growth of corporate farms and large-sized land 
holdings with little or not consideration of the social and economic destruction suffered by the rural village 
and small town communities. I want to congratulate the people of Estevan for remembering. 
 
I will say no more as every one of the government members participating in the debate has done a 
remarkable job of analysis of the throne speech and the Blakeney government ‘s thrust in the future, a future 
faced with confidence and determination and with the approval of the majority of the people of 
Saskatchewan, I may add. 
 
I said at the outset that certain events occurring in the present and immediate past prompted me to participate 
in this debate. I refer to the constitutional crisis and debate which is raging across the country, a crisis 
brought on by the almost total inaction of Conservative and Liberal federal governments over the past 100 
years in dealing with not just the patriation of the Canadian constitution, but with many other divisions, its 
dominant control by central Canada (culturally and above all economically), and numerous other outstanding 
concerns and problems of provincial and regional conflict which have been forever ignored until the 
constitutional lid blew right off, Mr. Speaker. All of a sudden the federal government introduced hurried and 
ill-defined measures to deal with these horrendous problems in many areas not acceptable to western 
Canadians nor to Canadians in other parts of the country. 
 
I want to deal with only one aspect of this debate — the question of multiculturalism as it affects ethnic 
minority groups in Canada and in Saskatchewan. You may want to ask, Mr. Speaker, why is it that the 
Melville member want to bring into discussion the question which some would rather see left out? Over 
many years, but particularly in the recent years, in spite of a more open and acceptable tolerance of the 
minorities, there still is, to a degree, strong objection from some members of the majority groups toward 
active participation and involvement by minority groups. These objectors would have it that the minority in 
ethnic factors should disappear rather than be part of the Canadian scene. This negative attack is open, 
sometimes subtle and obscure, but nevertheless cynical, critical and downgrading and through the news 
media, radio and television, it adds fuel to the conflict, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I could quote numerous examples of this type of minority ethnic downgrading sort of 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
267 

“putting those upstarts in their place.” Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, at a time when the whole question of 
Canadian unity is of such vital importance, evidence of this so-called minority bashing continues. 
 
I have here in my hand Mr. Speaker, two recent articles written on the editorial page of a local newspaper — 
one under the headline, O Canada — Multiculturalism. It is an article which says in effect to the ethnic 
community, “We have provided you with a sanctuary, we have given you a new set of rules and obligations; 
this new world is the ideal, forget your barbaric and backward culture, etc., you are a born-again Canadian.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is impossible for a person of an ethnic minority not to be offended, nay, Mr. Speaker, to be 
insulted. I would like to have read some excerpts of that particular article of November 19 in the Melville 
Advance as it was written, supposedly to strengthen and add tissue and substance to Canadian unity but time 
will not permit me. I will refer to these parts of the article as I replied in the letter to the editor. I will not say 
the first part except . . . the first quotation: 
 

Over the last century we have welcomed people from many lands and cultures. They have learned new 
ways and have become full Canadians. 

 
Actually, they are admitting that the foreigners do have culture. Whatever a full Canadian is, I don’t 
understand, and I’m sure nobody else does. May I ask the writer who wrote this, who is we — the Canadian 
Indian? The English? The French? And pray tell me, what is a full Canadian? 
 
The writer emphasizes the fact that they have learned new ways — meaning the immigrants. There is 
nothing at all said about the fact that these people from foreign lands have provided a strength and a sinew in 
the great expansion of the prairie West. 
 
The building and upkeep of the railroads, the expansion of the northern frontiers — nothing is said of their 
contribution to the Canadian culture. However, the writer openly says that somehow these Canadian 
immigrants, by denying their identities, by denying their cultural heritage, by denying their roots and history, 
would become full land better Canadians. 
 
That, of course, Mr. Editor, as I wrote to him is nonsensical and totally unacceptable. Thank heavens most of 
the Anglo-Saxons in western Canada are not of that frame of mind. One of the most outstanding and 
well-know Anglo-Canadians of all, Governor General Lord Tweedsmuir, told a great gathering of Ukrainian 
people in Winnipeg, in 1939 at the dedication ceremonies of a monument dedicated to Taras Shevehenko (a 
celebrated and famous bard and poet of the Ukraine) the following words. Paraphrased he said this: the mark 
of a true Canadian is only possible if you know who you are, where you came from, are proud of your ethnic 
roots and identity, and are proud of your Ukrainian heritage. 
 
Lord Tweedsmuir noted that you cannot be false to your ethnic roots and identity and be true to your adopted 
land. That I say is equally comparable with and true of multiculturalism. 
 
Somehow in his mind, the writer of that article to the Melville Advance on multiculturalism arrives at the 
conclusion that there is hope — a new trend on the part of governments to encourage new groups of people 
to resist learning the new ways of the new world, and to impart their old culture and ways to Canada. What a 
mealy- 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
268 

mouthed quote in the former part of the sentence, Mr. Editor. 
 
What government is he talking about, specifically? I’m not aware of any government advocating that 
scenario he outlines. To imply that any government openly encourages resisting learning new ways is 
ludicrous to say the least — with possibly some truth as far as the province of Quebec is concerned. 
 
The writer goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “They want Canada to be a land of many cultures.” I suppose 
by “they” he means multiculturalists and some governments. To that I say amen. Canada is richer by far 
economically as well as culturally for that. It is much more alive, invigorating and exciting because of its 
diverse people, because of its mosaic composition, its rich identifiable mosaic patterns. It’s much better and 
much more acceptable than that of the United States which personifies sameness and conformity. Our 
country deserve better than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What really petrifies me is the following paragraph in the article: 
 

It is impossible to build a great nation if you deliberately divide it into a hundred different groups each 
speaking a different language. 

 
He ends up by saying “. . . living in ghettos.” The writer is obviously overstating the case, for effect as well. 
As we all know that would never happen. But let us never forget that it is a fundamental democratic right, in 
a country like Canada, to speak whatever language we want to speak, to worship in whatever tongue we want 
to worship, and so down the line. 
 
What the writer is really saying and implying is that it is dangerous for ethnic groups to have the same rights 
as the majority group. He is saying that the time has come for those foreigners to toe the line, that we have to 
begin to look the same, to take the same and most fearful of all, to think the same. You must not be different; 
you must be a cog that fits the big machine with as little variation as possible but preferably with no 
variation at all. What an ugly repressive picture. And this comes from a spokesman in a newspaper of a 
society which prides itself that the first and foremost plank of western democracies is individual freedom. 
Somewhat of a paradox I would say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — And what is even more frightening, Mr. Editor, (that’s the way I write to him) is 
that if one applies the reasoning outlined in the quote above to our global home, our global nation, the earth, 
the people of the world will not be allowed to exist in their own cultural state but will be forced to become 
Anglophones, Francophones, Soviets or (closer to home) Americans. The writer of this article most 
pointedly alludes to the fact that we must all be part of a whole. He is saying, as it applies to the global 
situation, that there is no room for a diversity of culture; there is no room for a diversity of language and I 
suppose there is no room for a diversity of color either. Somehow the writer finds credence in suppression 
and repression to be the ideal conducive to making a united country. How bitterly ironical and wrong, Mr. 
Editor. 
 
I say, Mr. Editor, that if we want a united Canada, rich and proud in its diversity, then we will not stifle and 
suppress our multicultural heritage or the many races and creeds that have made their home in this land, but 
with every means possible will provide nourishment and encouragement for their development and growth. 
The writer of the article on multiculturalism is to be pitied rather than condemned. It is quite obvious that 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
269 

the writer is most certainly not a member of one of our multicultural groups in Saskatchewan. It is very 
ironical, Mr. Editor, I write, that what we see happening in Canada today is not volatile dissension and 
reckless abandon by multicultural groups on the question of Canadian unity. No. Nearly all of these 
multicultural groups are quietly and rationally watching and assessing the situation. However, as the saying 
goes, still waters run deep, and the agony and suspicion grows when it becomes daily more evident that some 
of the majority groups in Canada don’t give one tinker’s damn about the many different ethnic groups that 
make up a very substantial portion of our western Canadian population. No, Mr. Editor, it’s the majority 
groups of Canada that are wading into the constitutional battle with reckless abandon, strictly concerned for 
themselves and with their own egotistical interests, even though it means the breaking up of Canada. And I 
say this in the end of my letter to the editor. 
 
How terribly sad that such ill-conceived verbiage graces the pages of a community newspaper. What a 
terrible tragedy that the writer identifies opportunity, progress and technology with his interpretation, with 
his ideal of a golden opportunity, forgetting that all civilizations, in whatever countries, in whatever space or 
time, are based on the lessons of the past, on the bricks of innovation and halting but progressive 
advancement in all aspects of life — in the technologies of the humanities or writing literature, etc., etc. — 
leading to the kind of civilization we have today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today was built on the bricks of yesterday. But that isn’t the only inopportune message that 
people have attempted to build on ignorance, discrimination and prejudice. In the November 5 issue of the 
same paper there was another article entitled O Canada and subtitled English Speaking to be Second Class 
Citizens — not to be worried about in my opinion. I won’t read the article except one section of a paragraph. 
 

The great, new, flexible, innovative, vibrant society will be destroyed by giving official and equal status 
to the backward French culture. 

 
A most unbelievable statement, Mr. Speaker. Regardless of where we stand on the question of bilingualism, 
that is unbelievable and stupid, in my opinion. Mr. Speaker, if we are to believe that the French culture is 
backward, where does that leave the ethnic German culture in Canada? The Ukrainian culture? The Jewish 
culture? The Indian culture? The answer is clear, Mr. Speaker. It leave them even farther below the status 
attributed to the French culture. The greatness of this nation will not be built by subtracting from its possible 
potential. Yes, there must be recognition of the two official languages within reasons of practicality, but if 
this nation is to survive, it must also include recognition of the multicultural aspect of its composition. 
Saskatchewan is a good example of the mosaic pattern of diverse people. The Melville constituency is 
equally a population composite of many different races and creeds, as are most constituencies in 
Saskatchewan. Premier Allan Blakeney is a stalwart supporter and proponent of the multicultural fact. 
 
The Premier of Saskatchewan and the Attorney General, whether at the first premiers conference, or placing 
Saskatchewan’s position in different regions of Canada and in this legislature, continuously stress most 
emphatically the multicultural aspect of western Canada, and Saskatchewan in particular. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
270 

MR. KOWALCHUK: — Being given the position of where this government is and where its Premier 
stands on multiculturalism, the position of the opposition is not so evident and clear, even here in the 
legislature. I see by the amendment submitted by the Leader of the Opposition that they have identified 
compulsory bilingualism as a basic priority. Good, good. But, there is a total silence on multiculturalism. 
You don’t hear much in that regard from the other western premiers either. You would think that Manitoba 
and Alberta would be cognizant of the mosaic composition of the prairie populace, but that is not so. 
 
Canada today and particularly western Canada is at the crossroads of a monumental decision. In the final 
analysis, the minority groups of the prairies have, for three-quarters of a century been the most loyal and 
dedicated adherents to their Queen and country. But I say, that time is running out. The minority groups of 
the western regions as I have said before, have been quietly and rationally assessing and re-assessing the 
controversial constitutional situation. such outright attacks on multiculturalism, as I have laid out before you, 
can very easily become a key factor as to where the West will go. It can easily turn the tide one way or 
another. 
 
In the next few months, the direction of ethnic minority alienation could become a real fact. No group, or 
groups of people in all of Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, want so much to be a part of the future Canadian 
scene as do Canada’s minority groups. But that could easily turn; they could easily say “a plague on both 
your houses.” It could well become the straw that broke the crucial debate of western separation. Let’s hope 
that the right will be done and that the West will be won for Canada. 
 
Because this is the last time I will be speaking in the legislature before Christmas, I want to wish you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and the rest of the House, a very merry Christmas. To all the people who are going to be 
celebrating Ukrainian Christmas, I want to say Chrystos che rozdaye, Slaveti Yaho. 
 
I will be supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I consider it a great honor, every time I rise in this Assembly, to 
address not only the members of this Assembly, but the people of the Wilkie constituency and all the people 
of Saskatchewan. I believe in the dignity and individual rights of everyone, whether they be rich or poor. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — I have sat in this Chamber throughout much of this throne debate, and I have heard the 
Premier and members opposite talk about the new decade — the decade of the ’80s — and the great future 
that lies ahead for Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, I will turn to that in a moment, but first of all I would 
like to recognize some of the events that have happened this past year. 
 
I think Celebrate Saskatchewan was the number one event, and it bother me very much when I hear members 
opposite on the government side, trying to take credit for the great success of Celebrate Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, they say that without them, it wouldn’t have happened. Well, I think we have to put the credit 
where it should go — on the people of Saskatchewan! 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
271 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — These are the people who made Celebrate Saskatchewan happen, these are the people 
who made Celebrate Saskatchewan a success, and to them I say, thank you very much. 
 
I would now like to review some of this present NDP government’s record since 1971. I think two of the 
things that should be brought to bear right away are two Crown corporations — Sask Tel and Sask Power. I 
believe that these are both very good, very worthwhile Crown corporations. But what I do question is the 
financial picture. 
 
Since the Blakeney administration came to power in 1971, and we’ll take Sask Tel for an example first of all 
profits were a little over $12 million. Last year, in 1979, the profit picture turned to $25 million. Now is this 
government trying to tell me and the people of Saskatchewan that when the Sask Tel rates go up that the 
phone is going to ring louder? It won’t. They are turning this good Crown corporation into nothing but an 
NDP multinational corporation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — Now, I would like to turn to Sask Power. When the Blakeney government came to 
power in 1971, it had a profit of $22 million. Last year, in 1979, the profit picture was $40 million. Now the 
same thing happens here. Are they trying to tell the people of Saskatchewan that when the Sask Power rates 
go up and each and every citizen of Saskatchewan has to pay more for power, that the lights are going to be 
brighter in Saskatchewan? They won’t be. 
 
These are just two examples of how the Blakeney administration is managing the business and the taxes of 
the people of Saskatchewan and trying to balance the budget on the backs of the hard-working taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would now like to turn to a statement by the Premier of Saskatchewan where the Premier considers what he 
is doing. I’ll just read one little line to you, Mr. Speaker. It comes on December 2, 1980, by the Hon. Allan 
Blakeney. 
 

In the past our attention as a government has, as I indicated, been focussed on the basic needs of our 
people. 

 
When we came to office the grants from the provincial government to Regina were $900,000. this year 
they will not be $900,000 but $18 million. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, $18 million. This is a 2000 per cent increase to the city of Regina. 
 
I want it clearly understood that I am not against the city of Regina receiving money from the province of 
Saskatchewan, but I would just like to point out to the members opposite and also to the people of 
Saskatchewan how fairly this government deals with people. 
 
In contacting one of my local R.M.s in 1971 they received $59,474; in 1979, a little over $100,000. Now that 
is an 80 per cent increase in cash paid out to the R.M. That’s not even near the 2000 per cent increase that 
was paid out to the city of Regina. 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
272 

Another example: a town in my constituency on conditional grants receive $4,600 in 1971; in 1979 it 
received $18,644. The record was a little better here. It was a 400 per cent increase. But a 400 per cent 
increase is a long, long way from a 2000 per cent increase to the city of Regina. 
 
Does this mean that we have to have the gold windows in SGI buildings — all of the administration 
buildings that are being built in Regina? Does this government not realize Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is 
a Saskatchewan outside of Regina. Then this government wonders why we have a decline in rural 
Saskatchewan, in the small towns in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the result. In reality, those who see this province as a land near social and 
political perfection are dwelling in a fool’s paradise. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would now like to turn to another issue, how this NDP government, the Minister of 
Education and the Minister of Social Services, deal with problems of the people of Saskatchewan. It has to 
do with a little seven-year-old girl. The mother was on social assistance. The little girl needed extra summer 
classes. She was to attend a summer reading clinic. Her teacher spent two hours a week with her every week 
assisting her. The special education spent on-half hour per day on her speech problem. It was recommended 
to her by the special education teacher to take these extra classes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I got in touch personally with the Minster of Education and the Minister of Social 
Services, and the cost for this program was going to be $225. The local school unit put in $100. She needed 
$125 more for this class. The Minister of Education informed me that he was concerned. But do you know 
what is answer was, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the request for $125? His answer was, ‘I’m sorry, no.’ I say, 
shame to the minister, shame to the government, shame to everyone who sits on the opposite side of this 
Chamber. This is how this government treats the young people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the little girl did receive her education, because I took the money out of my 
MLA’s salary and paid her $125. She did have her classes this summer. It was still paid by the Government 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, here is just part of her report card after taking this. This is from the 
principal. 
 

She was functioning well at the beginning — grade 2 level in all areas and should not need extra help at 
school next year. (That’s a positive note.) She has made great strides in her ability to sound out new 
words. Her phonics show an improvement of one and one-half years. 

 
Great! Now, this little girl needed the education and the government opposite would not help her for the sake 
of $125. I have had to sit in this Chamber many times and hear of the wealth, the prosperity of this 
government opposite. That was all I asked for, for a little girl with her mother on social aid, no other 
funding. If it was my little girl, I had the money for it. But how did they deal with this case? With a big 
answer of no. I say shame. I will be dealing with this further as the session progresses. 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
273 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would now like to turn to another area that has to do with government members 
opposite calling the Progressive Conservatives “separatists,” “western Canadians” and everything else. I just 
want to inform every member in this Assembly . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What are you? 
 
MR. GARNER: — I hear someone ask what I am. I’ll tell you what I am. I lost a grandfather and an uncle 
in World War I. I had an uncle who was buried over three during World War II. He fought to keep this 
Canada free. I will not stand here and take it from anyone opposite that I am not a Canadian. I will not sell 
my farm, because any farmer who sells the topsoil has nothing left. I want us to have a good Saskatchewan, a 
strong Saskatchewan, a united western Canada, and last of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one Canada. And you 
know who said that — the Right Hon. John George Diefenbaker. If he were here . . . Right now, he would be 
turning over in his grave if he could hear the members opposite condemning the Progressive Conservatives, 
when he was the man who put Canada together, who brought in the rights for the individual. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like now to turn to a topic which is not too nice for me in this Assembly. The 
government members opposite call it land bank. I call it state farming. I think I might as well (since the new 
member is in here who was the grandfather of land bank) point out to the members opposite just how can a 
young farmer ever buy land from land bank? If five years ago he couldn’t afford to pay $50,000 for a section 
of land, can you tell me how he can afford to spend and pay $250,000 for it today? It’s impossible, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. This is why we have lost 8,000 farmers in Saskatchewan since this government came into 
power. 
 
Another fact which maybe should be pointed out is when a young man, on a land bank lease, goes to the 
bank to borrow money, his banker asks him, “What do you have for assets?” The young man replies, “Well, I 
have a land bank lease.” There isn’t one banker in Canada who will use that for collateral to help that young 
man finance to expand and to get through a tough year. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How about the credit union? 
 
MR. GARNER: — Well, I don’t think even a credit union would do it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You don’t know that. 
 
MR. GARNER: — I don’t know that. The member for Regina North-West keep saying that I don’t know 
that. I can’t hear him because he has an acoustic coupler stuck in his mouth. There isn’t a financial lending 
institution in the country, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which would loan him money, including credit unions or 
anyone else. There isn’t anyone. Because he doesn’t own it, except maybe Sedco, my hon. colleague for 
Maple Creek has brought up. I see the minister shaking his head and nodding yes. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
is not the direction to go. I believe a positive approach to this would be the policy of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What’s the policy? 
 
MR. GARNER: — Well, he asks me what the policy is. We’ll call it a Saskatchewan family farm purchase 
program. This would allow a young farmer to borrow $350,000 at 8 per 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
274 

cent interest for the first five years (that looks pretty attractive right off the top), and 12 per cent or prime 
(whichever is lower) for the remainder of the pay-back period. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a positive 
program which would get young farmers back on the land and give them the opportunity to own it and not be 
running a farm just for the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is just a prime example of how naive the Premier of 
Saskatchewan is when it comes to dealing with land bank or agricultural policies. In his speech of December 
2, on page 108 (had better put 1980 because some of the other members opposite might miss that point), he 
states in there: 
 

There have been 2,700 land bank leases, 4,200 FarmStart loans, (he puts it all together and he has) 7,000 
new farmers. 

 
Well, I mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now come on. Even the members opposite who do have an agricultural 
background, surely should be able to see through this, and I know the Minister of Agriculture can see 
through it, because there is no way that you have 2,700 land bank leases and 4,200 FarmStart loans. They 
have to have a FarmStart loan in order to get going in land bank. This is he way this government deals with 
the farmers and the people from rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is no wonder that rural 
Saskatchewan is declining and declining rapidly. 
 
Oh, I hear the minister of feed grains talking again now. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would now like to urn to the Department of Social Services. This is another almost 
horror story by the Government of Saskatchewan. I’ll just give you one case as an example (I could give you 
100, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we don’t want to be sitting that late tonight), a man paralysed with polio, 
living in his own home and the Department of Social Services will give him only $100 a month for food, 
clothing and miscellaneous. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know very well that man, unable to work, staying in his 
own home, not only cannot live high on the hog —he’s lucky if he sees any hog at all in a month. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we now go to level 3 care in the province of Saskatchewan. What does this government 
do with level 3 care? They drain the resources of the pioneers of Saskatchewan down to $1,500 and after 
they have drained all of their resources they turn around and say, “Well here’s the last shot in the teeth. 
We’re going to put you on social aid.” Now isn’t that just a great thing to have to do to your senior citizens, 
to the pioneers who build this country which we are living on the fruits of today? Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
personally don’t want to do that. I don’t like to see a government do that. And this is the government which 
tells us of the millions of dollars they are making in all the resource revenues. Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this 
government would follow the example of the B.C., Alberta and Manitoba governments, and gear that fee to 
the old age pension and supplement, maybe some of these people could retain their pride and retain some of 
their dignity. But this government is not concerned about senior citizens, as I’ve just proved they are not 
concerned about the young people in Saskatchewan and the education program. 
 
Now since this is 1981 (or going to be the year 1981), the year of the handicapped, I think all of you 
members will remember what happened last year in the Assembly with the member for North Battleford. We 
still have another young Saskatchewanite 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
275 

wanting to work, wanting an opportunity. And I just wonder if in this upcoming session with a new minister 
of highways — and yet I see it is very difficult for the Premier to reach for a minister of highways . . . I was 
thinking it was going to be a long reach but I don’t think that any more. He just can’t go anywhere for a 
minister of highways. Maybe he will continue with the present Minister of Highways. If he does, the young 
man, Mr. Randy Wangler, won’t get the chance to take a test. Butt here’s just another example, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, — a young man who wants to work, wants the opportunity, and this government says no again. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this is getting to be known as the “no” government when dealing with people and people’s 
problems. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve introduced a bill into this Chamber, an act to amend The Vehicles Act (I think this 
must be the third time around). I don’t see how many member of this Legislative Assembly can oppose this 
bill on the order paper. And if they do, or if a member does, I promise that member right now that there will 
be a mail-out to every one of his constituents. I am not kidding. This is a housekeeping bill that should have 
been passed years ago. We could have prevented accidents and injury, but it seems that this government will 
not act unless someone is killed. We have had evidence that they don’t even act when that happens. It brings 
to mind the bus accident down on that south highway when the Progressive Conservatives called to double 
lane it. 
 
Well, I must be truthful. I didn’t think it should be double laned. I thought perhaps money should be spent 
elsewhere, until I travelled that road this summer with my young son. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have had in 
the past Kramer’s cow path, that’s a death path and that’s the only way to describe it. 
 
If this government cannot negotiate to get funds from the federal government, well, just maybe some of this 
resource revenue they tell us about could be put into that. But once again, nothing was done. And now my 
colleague for Maple Creek tells me there were two more people killed on that stretch of road the other day, 
too. Small children, senior citizens — people being killed doesn’t disturb this government one bit. 
 
One of the reasons I introduced this bill was that I believe our children are the most important resource we 
have in Saskatchewan. It is my job as a parent first and a politician second, to protect them and their 
interests. I am concerned about it, as every other member in this legislative Chamber should be. I say now to 
the Attorney General, you are the one who controls this Chamber; you are the one who calls the shots. How 
about it if we put politics to the side and bring in this bill? Let’s not have it stalled on the order paper. The 
decision is in your hands and no one else’s. 
 
I would now like to turn to strikes in the province of Saskatchewan. You know, at the last two openings, and 
I think that is one of the greatest days in the year — at least it used to be . . . Now every time I come in from 
my constituency and bring people in, they say, “Jim, are we going to have to cross a picket line?” And this is 
just what happens. Last year we had the SGEA (Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Association) 
workers on strike. The government had them walking in the cold. They couldn’t sit down to negotiate a deal. 
We had the dairy workers on strike — thousands of gallons of milk dumped before we finally got them back. 
That is a waste because the people in this province could have consumed it themselves. 
 
We go to the ambulance workers, another very important service on strike. We turn now to liquor board 
employees. They’re on strike. This just seems to be an annual staged event in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
276 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Which side are you on? 
 
MR. GARNER: — Which side am I on, they say. Well, is there any other side to be on but the side of the 
people? I am going to read just how concerned this government was with the strike, and how the minister in 
charge of the liquor board answered the question in a joking fashion, the question being: 
 

Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board. In view of the fact 
that 53 of the 83 provincial government liquor board stores now are closed in the province and over 100 
employees have been locked out, will the minister assure the private vendors and hotel-restaurant 
industry that they will receive their products so the employees will not nose the jobs? Will this 
government now stop the confrontation tactics between the liquor board employees and the Government 
of Saskatchewan? And when will negotiations start taking place in good faith before all the government 
liquor stores in the province are closed? 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, his answer was: 
 

If the member had read the press release yesterday, we indicated that as long as we could, we would 
continue to serve the special liquor vendors and provide liquor to the hotel and the restaurant industry. 
We intend to do that to the best of our ability with management personnel. With respect to the tactics 
used, I have no particular comment there except to say that the liquor board is prepared to negotiate at 
any time. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, negotiation through the paper, through the media — is that how we settle strikes 
in Saskatchewan? By advertising in the paper? No, that is not the way. That is the way this present socialist 
government intends to settle strikes, and the strike are not being settled. 
 

Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, could you tell this Assembly how much revenue has been 
lost by this strike which is this NDP government’s annual staged event? And how do you intend to 
recover this lost revenue? 

 
Now here is the fact right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the Hon. Mr. Cowley. 
 

My rough estimate at this point in time, the result of the strike is an increase in revenue of about $8 
million. 

 
Now, strikes making money for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I can’t buy that and I 
don’t think the members opposite can buy that either. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how many people have to walk before Christmas? Christmas is the time of families. 
What a way to celebrate Christmas — to be on strike, to be without pay. Is there concern by the government 
members opposite? No, no, no. Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again we get back to the “no” government of 
Saskatchewan, to the government that doesn’t care about the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Labor recently let go, I think an employee who was pretty good. My 
colleague said “fired.” I wasn’t going to use such strong terminology. He fired Mr. Ron Duncan. Why was 
Mr. Ron Duncan fired? Was it because he couldn’t 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
277 

get along with the new deputy minister or was it because this government intends to bring in a no-strike 
clause? Is that the real reason why Mr. Ron Duncan was fired — that the Minister of Labor knew that Mr. 
Duncan would not go along with this theory. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Labor has not been handling the labor problems in Saskatchewan. It 
seems to me that he is causing the problems in Saskatchewan. No negotiations. Don’t sit down at the table. 
 
I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, anyone can come to an agreement. You sit down at that table long enough 
and talk. But when a government starts confrontation tactics, of course somebody’s going to leave the table. 
But do they care? No. They get their salary. They’ll have a nice Christmas, but how about the employees? 
How about the employees who have been locked out? . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. My 
colleague says, “Who cares about them?” This government doesn’t care about them, that’s for sure. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to turn to another section of this government, and it has to do with Sask 
Tel. When we start talking about Sask Tel, we start talking about Bill 13. Mr. Speaker, I blame the minister 
in charge of Sask Tel for introducing Bill 13 to take over total control of telecommunications in the 
province. 
 
When this session started, Mr. Speaker, I questioned the minister (it maybe sounds trivial or won’t seem like 
much to some members of this Assembly) about the new Zenith space phone receiver. I asked the minister if 
it could be connected in Saskatchewan. I knew it couldn’t be purchased. He went into a long speech. Mr. 
Speaker, I will read a part of a sentence. “. . . it cannot be used and the regulations today are no different than 
they were in 1928.” 
 
Is this a modern government with modern ideas on how to handle modern technology when we are being 
governed by regulations from 1928? No. 
 
With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read a Telex I received from the head of Zenith sales for 
North America. It reads: 
 

Dear Mr. Garner: 
 

In response to your request as to the reasons you could not purchase a Zenith space phone television 
receiver in Saskatchewan, please be advised that while we are able to market our space phone television 
receivers in all provinces of Canada, we are not permitted to do so in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
Our attempts to market our space phone television receivers in the province of Saskatchewan was 
blocked by Saskatchewan Telecommunications. Mr. J.G. McGregor, assistant vice-president, planning 
and development, Saskatchewan Telecommunications, advised us of the following: “Within 
Saskatchewan, The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act prohibits the connection of customer 
provided network and non-network connecting loudspeaking devices to Sask Tel’s switching network. 
The Zenith space phone falls into this category. In addition, the act also prohibits the advertisement and 
sale of equipment which is not permitted by the regulations . . .” 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
278 

Mr. Speaker, I’m talking about the regulations of 1928. The only thing which reminds me of 1928, Mr. 
Speaker, is a car which my father is restoring out in his shop this winter. Now that car he is restoring is a 
heck of a lot different than the car which I drive to Regina. 
 
I will repeat a portion of the quote: 
 

“In addition, the act also prohibits the advertisement and sale of equipment which is not permitted by the 
regulations to be attached and whose primary or advertised purpose is to connect to Sask Tel’s facilities. 

 
If national advertising of the Zenith space phone is planned, a disclaimer stating that the space phone is 
not available in Saskatchewan should be inserted to satisfy the requirements of The Telecommunications 
Act.” 

 
Now Mr. Speaker, that points out that Sask Tel has taken over not only the monopoly of manufacturing, 
sales, leases, but even advertising. Is this government opposite trying to tell me that every other province in 
Canada is wrong and only Sask Tel is right? No. Mr. Speaker, they’re not. It’s just one more step, in fact it’s 
a backward step, Mr. Speaker, showing how this government is running the province of Saskatchewan and 
not allowing people this new technology in Saskatchewan. They’re not allowed to buy it and now allowed to 
connect it. And this is a government by the people? This is a government dictating to the people, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t doubt that in the upcoming year or years there will be many more pieces of equipment 
which someone will want to connect to Sask Tel lines and the answer will be no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I always like to have an alternative. It’s very easy to stand here and criticize the government. If 
we back up to Sask Tel and Sask Power rates and also to Bill 13, I think it’s time that this government 
implemented a public utilities review board in order to have some independent expertise making this 
decision — not the minister, not anyone else — so that there’s another avenue, Mr. Speaker, whether it be 
for Zenith or word processors or whatever, if the minister of Sask Tel or Sask Tel employees say they can’t 
connect. It’s there in Alberta and in other provinces and it should be here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now I’d like to turn to the natural gas distribution system which we have in Saskatchewan or, 
as my colleague says, which we don’t have — 10 to 15 per cent in rural Saskatchewan. This government 
likes to compare us with Alberta, so let us compare with Alberta at 85 per cent. No wonder that province is 
going ahead. No wonder they’re making money on their oil resources. Mr. Speaker, it’s time to start 
switching rural Saskatchewan over to natural gas so that this other energy can be used in farm tractors, in 
diesel trains. It’s a good policy. It’s a common-sense policy. But then, Mr. Speaker, I could see that would 
shoot right over a lot of the members’ heads. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Well, this is not a common-sense government. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Yes. My colleague says it is not a common-sense government and I have to agree with 
him. Mr. Speaker, 10 to 15 per cent is not very large in Saskatchewan. Since oil exploration has happened a 
little in my constituency, there have been many gas wells found on local farmers’ lands. We have lots of gas 
in 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
279 

Saskatchewan. Why can those farmers not get connected at a reasonable cost? Why can this government not 
bring forth a positive program to connect them? Well, they say no. We’re back to the “no” government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to touch on the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t think that the government would ever be listening to the opposition, but I must confess, this one time 
they did. It has to do with the mandatory firearms training program. For two years I called for a mandatory 
firearms training program, along with the Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. I want to give them most of the 
credit. Finally, they brought a new minister into the department who seems to be responding to their wishes 
and to the wishes of the opposition. To the minister and to the government opposite, I say thank you for this 
program because if only one life is saved it will be well worth the whole program. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources moved through an 
order in council and really hit the cottage owners in the provincial parks. Last session I asked twice, I 
believe, what the rate increase was going to be. The minister said, “It will be ready in one week.” I asked him 
one week later, “Oh, give me two weeks.” Two weeks later, no answer. So this summer, through their great 
little democratic circle they call the cabinet, bang, there was a 150 per cent increase, a 200 per cent increase. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Tell the truth! 
 
MR. GARNER: — ‘Tell the truth,’ the minister says. When a man pays land rental which rises from $90 to 
$150 or from $100 to $240, that is a little much. Anyone can live with an increase of 10 per cent, maybe 
even 15 per cent. But when you get hit with a plus 100 per cent, that’s not fair. Why, Mr. Speaker, did they 
bring that order in council in and not do it through the legislative Chamber? Could it be that they think the 
people of Saskatchewan will not fight back, that they will say, “The heck with it, you can take our cottage; 
just absorb that in another socialist grab.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, an order in council almost eliminates the Legislative Assembly. I would like to dwell on that 
for a moment. What is the point of having a Legislative Assembly with 61 members? We sit long enough in 
a year. The government bring in the bills; we scrutinizes them, the government records; then in the summer 
we get an order in council. What response do we get on this? Nothing. Are we going to be wasting the 
taxpayers’ dollars in Saskatchewan for another session because for anything the government wants to do 
when we are out of session they will pass an order in council? So what do we have? We have the cabinet 
running the province of Saskatchewan, not just the NDP government and all of its members. I feel sorry for 
the backbenchers once in a while. I know it must be very depressing to have to sit there day after day, and get 
two speeches in a year. It must be hard. But you are sitting on the government side at least. But maybe not 
for long when the people of Saskatchewan get this. Mr. Speaker, every time this government moves, it 
erodes a little more power and a little more freedom from the people of Saskatchewan. They say the end 
justifies the means. But some of the means concern me when it comes to passing orders in council. Things 
happen and as a member of the Saskatchewan legislature, I don’t know about them until after the order in 
council is passed. How can I defend and stand up for the people of Saskatchewan when you have this little 
socialist circle called the cabinet, which waves its magic wand and bang, it hits the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The socialist sickle! 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
280 

 
MR. GARNER: — My colleague says “the socialist sickle.” Well, I have another name for it but I will not 
use it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have one other area I would like to go into that is the air service in the province of 
Saskatchewan. This has to do with why we don’t have business — why business aborts Saskatchewan and 
goes to Alberta. The money market and the businesses are moving from the East. We have two major cities 
in the province of Saskatchewan. (I harped about this for two years; I won on the mandatory firearms 
training program, and I might win on this one.) During the week on this mighty wing we call Norcanair, we 
get air service between the two cities of three flights a day whether we need it or not. We generally need it. 
When it comes to the weekend you can fly into Regina, you can fly into Saskatoon, with many other air 
services. Can you commute back and forth? No. Norcanair doesn’t fly on weekends. So that means we shut 
down the province for Saturday and Sunday. Then they wonder why Saskatchewan isn’t going ahead. 
Progressive businesses will not come to this province when they can’t move around. Now in the by-elections 
the member for The Battlefords promised air service from North Battleford. I’ll be waiting for that air 
service. That’s just like reaching for pies in the sky. When we can’t get air service between the new major 
cities . . . I want us to have air service from North Battleford and other cities in the North. But he’s kidding 
himself and flirting with the truth with the people of North Battleford if he thinks he can get them air service. 
 
I think that I have brought it to the attention of this government opposite. I have drawn on examples of senior 
citizens; of a little seven-year old girl (an personally it hurts me very much that she couldn’t get her 
education in the province of Saskatchewan); what the government is doing with the crown corporations — 
turning them into their own multinational NDP socialist corporation. I like Sask Tel and I like Sask Power. 
They can be good. They will be good, under a Progressive Conservative government. I have no choice, from 
what I brought forward describing how this government is handling senior citizens, children in 
Saskatchewan, business and farmers, but to oppose the motion. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacAULEY: — Mr. Speaker, It’s a pleasure for me to take part in the throne speech today. I have a 
number of comments to make about this announcement. First I would like to welcome to this Assembly the 
member for Estevan, Jack Chapman, and the member for The Battlefords, David Miner. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacAULEY: — I also want to welcome the member for Kelsey-Tisdale, Mr. Hardy. I wish them well 
here, in their service in the House. 
 
We have lost two long-time ministers. Mr. Kramer, who has served in Battleford for 28 years, will be missed 
in the Assembly as he was a great speaker. Also Mr. Jack Messer for Kelsey-Tisdale, who served in the 
House for some ten years in a minister’s position and also served three years as an MLA, served well in his 
capacity as a member for this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to hear the throne speech promise a new system of local government in the North. 
In 1972 when the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
281 

was formed only 60 per cent of the people in the northern administration district had some form of municipal 
government. Only two schools — one at Uranium City in Mr. Thompson’s riding, and the other one in 
Creighton in my riding — had elected school boards. Then in 1973 a meeting was held in La Ronge to talk 
about the system that would let Northerners govern themselves where local issues were concerned. The 
result was that a northern municipal council was set up to the following year. The northern municipal council 
has served well in the last six years, but not it’s time to move to another stage of local government. The NDP 
believes strongly in bringing local governments closer to the people and to the system of municipal 
representation in the North, as you will see from the example I have just given. 
 
I want to point out that the people of northern Saskatchewan already have moved a long way since 1972. 
One hundred per cent of the people in the NAD (northern administration district) now enjoy the right to elect 
municipal governments and 100 per cent of the schools now are run by elected school boards. They have Mr. 
Blakeney to thank for these things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes talked about in the last speech would do three things. First, the northern municipal 
governments will be given formal authority in local and regional concerns of community residents. 
Secondly, there will be much more northern input into the direction of northern development. This is 
something which Judge Bayda called for in the Cluff Lake inquiry. Finally, the changes will bring local 
government closer to the people it represents. 
 
These changes are very welcome in the North, Mr. Speaker, and as in so many other areas, Northerners have 
come to know that they have a friend in the Blakeney government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to see the throne speech talk about protecting the wilderness areas, keeping our 
environment clean. People in the Cumberland constituency are very interested in taking care of the northern 
environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of our valuable timber was destroyed by fire in the past summer. When this happens it 
sets off a change reaction as follows: 
 
1. Many of the fur-bearing animals are killed or flee to another part of the country, leaving trappers without 
fur in their areas; 
 
2. We lose the economic benefits we would have derived from the forest timber that is burned; 
 
3. Thousands of dollars have been spent fighting fires, money which could have been spent in other 
important areas of endeavor; 
 
4. Many of the people are left without employment in the northern area as the fires take their toil as they go 
through. We had a little bit of this in the dry area of this province and we realize something out of that area. 
This is exactly what has happened to the northern people in my area. 
 
Whenever this happens, Mr. Speaker, and whichever way people want to look at it many of these fires are 
caused by carelessness. Some are caused by natural causes, such as when lightning strikes but, however, 
most of them are set by people travelling 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
282 

through the northern areas. I want to point out to impress our people holidaying in the North, and indeed 
those living in the North today, to take extreme care in extinguishing fires in that north country. If this is not 
done, it will cause a lot of problems, such as unemployment, as I mentioned. 
 
The Blakeney government has spent a considerable amount of money buying equipment and airplanes for the 
use of protecting our forests, but if the public does not co-operate, no amount of money or equipment will 
relieve the situation such as occurred last summer. 
 
I would like to say a word or two about the constitution. It appears to us, in this province, that the meetings 
which have been taking place between the premiers and the Prime Minister of this country, have in many 
ways caused us to drift further away from the hope of agreement on bringing the constitution to this country. 
 
We hear the people to the west of us talking about separation from the rest of Canada. It is very sad to hear 
about what is taking place there. Those of us who have fought in the two world wars . . . If those same 
people had to go through what we did, they would think differently today of separating from the rest of 
Canada. We were told after we joined the forces, that you work for one Canada and one Canada only, to 
protect your parents, your children and their children’s children. That’s what we were told when we put the 
uniform on. I want the people in this province and in Canada to understand what has taken place in that area. 
It was something that we contributed and I hope it’s being respected. It’s too soon to forget about those 
things. It is very necessary for all of us to remember that we are all Canadians, whatever ethnic backgrounds 
we come from, and we should all work together in Canada. We must be calm and determined to keep our 
country together. We have much to lose if this takes place in our country. I think we should follow our 
Premier in the direction he is going, remain calm and listen to what is taking place in this province and in the 
rest of Canada. Let us not be foolish and get carried away by what is happening in this area. There may be 
more than meets the eye to what is taking place in the political life and in other areas in this country. 
 
Many of us realize that we have relatives living in the eastern part of the province, and to the west, and we 
must not work against them or see them working against each other. We must fight to control, and work to 
see that this thing is corrected. I think our Premier stands for this and we should all stand with him in 
correcting this problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we may laugh at our neighbors to the South when they put their flags up and sing their national 
anthem at the top of their voices but I think that’s what this country needs today — all Canadian should work 
together and be proud to be Canadian, not have just half-measures in n what is happening in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know there are problems in the country, but as you hear the Minister of Agriculture say, “We 
should work to see that these things are settled not only in this province but in the rest of Canada.” 
 
I want to say now that I am very happy I was able to say a few words, and I will be voting with the members 
on this side of the House and supporting the throne speech. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — It is a pleasure to once again rise in this Assembly to debate the throne speech. 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
283 

I wish to thank the constituents of Arm River for their continued support. During this past summer, I had the 
privilege of travelling throughout the constituency attending Celebrate Saskatchewan activities. This gave 
me the opportunity to meet many constituents and former residents of the communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the government for its Celebrate Saskatchewan program. I wish to 
congratulate the winners of the three by-elections, and welcome each one of them to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have three main requests from the constituency of Arm River, and they are under these topics: 
natural gas, irrigation, and the senior citizens’ home. 
 
Natural gas in the constituency of Arm River has become quite a concern to a few people. In 1969, Mr. 
Speaker, they put natural gas from Saskatoon down as far as Craik on Highway No. 11 and at the same time 
they brought it down Highway No. 2 to Holdfast, on the Imperial-Simpson line, but since 1969 we have had 
no more gas brought to our small towns and to the farmers close by. Now this is becoming a great concern 
because after 11 years we ask, “Why is there no natural gas in theses towns?” 
 
In the Outlook to Elbow line, they have petitioned several times, and were told yes. The power corporation 
said, “Absolutely, you can put natural gas in, but you have to pay the full shot.” When they put the gas line in 
on Highway No. 11, the government paid the full amount to bring it in and the people just had to hook on to 
the main lines in the towns. Now they tell them, from Outlook to Elbow, that they will have to pay the full 
amount of the main line coming in, which they can’t possibly do. They can’t afford this. 
 
We have an area from Aylesbury, Chamberlain, and going into Thunder Creek constituency, Findlater, 
Bethune. These people want natural gas just as much as they do on my line or the rest of the lines of the 
North. What is the holdup here? Why don’t we have natural gas in this area? Back in the 1940s we could 
have power brought in by the same government at $600 per farm. They tell me today that it cost less money 
to bury a gas line than it does to put a power line in. What’s the holdup here? Why can we not have natural 
gas on our farms? We have power on our farms. I ask this very important question on behalf of the people of 
Arm River. 
 
There’s the Minister of the Environment already saying no way. He doesn’t want it. But I’ll bet you he has it 
on his farm . . . or awfully close to it. He’ll get it! . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I want that on the record. The Minister of Environment says he has it on his farm. 
 
Well, then, he’s a very lucky man. I was in Yorkton on the weekend and I was talking to a farmer who is 186 
feet from the main line. He built a new home and wants gas put into that home — $4,000. The contractor 
said he could hook it up at cost — $600. 
 
Did the Minister of Environment pay $600 or $4,000? He says he has it on his farm. I just cannot figure out 
why we don’t have it. 
 
If I have all these town in my constituency that don’t have natural gas, how many more are there in the 
province of Saskatchewan? I’ll tell the government opposite that since you came into power in 1971, there 
has been almost nil for natural gas to small towns and farmers in Saskatchewan. You’re going backward; 
you’re not going ahead. And 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
284 

don’t tell me to take it easy, because this is serious. 
 
We have petitions going now in my area. I’ll tell you what we’re going to do in Arm River: we’re going to 
get natural gas. If you are a government like you say you are — that you’ll do what the people want — then, 
when my people come with their petition, they’ll get it. 
 
The other very important issue in my constituency is irrigation. Outlook is in my constituency. This is where 
the government did start this irrigation program. But why didn’t they do like Alberta did in the summer? 
They put another $340 million into irrigation. What do you fellow do? You don’t even take care of what’s 
there! Mr. Minister or Agriculture, you are not even taking care of the ditches that are already there. The 
alkali is coming up through the ditches. 
 
I have brought this concern up for three years. Here goes the Minister of Environment again. He’s always 
thinking that anything the opposition says is tommyrot. I have many thing to say about the environment. He 
better stick to doing something about PCBs in drinking water. Never mind worrying about natural gas and 
irrigation. 
 
Why can’t we, in this province, have more irrigation when we have nearly a third of our province lying in 
water? We have it in the states to the north or south of us, we go down on a trip through the farming areas 
and see they have irrigation. We go to Alberta and see they have irrigation. We come to Saskatchewan and 
we have a little tiny spot in Outlook where we have irrigation . . .(inaudible interjection) . . . They have it on 
my side, but what about over in Rosetown? In the Hon. Mr. Swan’s constituency it is just about at a 
standstill. 
 
Now last summer . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Do you have irrigation on your farm? 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — No, I don’t have irrigation on my farm. The only way I’ll ever get irrigation on my 
farm is to put it in at my own cost, because these people are not going to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last summer we had an emergency in this province. It was drought, and we had a shortage of 
hay. Why did we have to worry about bringing in hay from the States, Alberta and Ontario? Why are we not 
irrigating here in this province and growing hay to build up a hay bank when years are good, that will serve 
the farmers in a bad year such as last year? Why did the farmers have to get taken like they did last year? 
 
Our Minister of Agriculture and the federal Minister of Agriculture completely blundered on the cattle and 
hay subsidy programs. In the month of April, I had a list of people in Ontario from whom we could buy hay 
for $60 a ton. Then the two governments became mixed up in it and up went the price. They put a subsidy in 
from here and from the East. And who was getting that extra dollar? The farmer in Ontario was getting it. 
The farmers and the truckers were getting it and the farmers here had to pay the same costs . . .(inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
I can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, why we cannot get speakers from the other side of the House for one week. 
Mr. Mostoway, the Government Whip, told me that we just can’t get speakers, but when I’m up speaking we 
seem to suddenly have lots of them. There’s two and a half hours left after supper tonight, so they’ll have 
their chance. 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
285 

Another main concern in Arm River is about a senior citizens’ home. I have had requests from the area to the 
south, which includes the Craik, Holdfast, Aylesbury, Chamberlain, Tugaske and Dilke areas. The only 
home the people from these areas have to place their loved ones in is located in Davidson. This home only 
holds about 20 people and continually has a five- to ten-year waiting list. In the summer of 1980 I went to 
the minister and asked what I could do to help the people get a senior citizens’ home in their area. He said to 
go home and make formal applications through the municipalities and towns, and a survey would then be 
taken. 
 
A year will soon have passed and we haven’t had any results; we haven’t even hard from them. In the 
meantime our own survey shows that we have enough loved ones from our area in various homes in Regina, 
Saskatoon and Moose Jaw to immediately fill a home in the Craik-Aylesbury area. Why fool around with 
surveys? That’s just talk. The people have said they want a home and we have people who want to go into a 
home. Why has the Minister of Social Services been putting me off for almost a year now, saying they are 
doing a survey when no one has been contacted in this last year? 
 
There is going to be some action now, Mr. Speaker. Just as I said there is going to be some action on natural 
gas and irrigation, now there is going to be some action on a senior citizens’ home in our community 
because the people say there is going to be one built. You have to do what the people say they want or you 
are not living up to your responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am going to turn to Hansard now. On page 99 there is a remark by the Premier in his throne 
speech that is just a little more than I can take. He was speaking about a comment made by our leader, Grant 
Devine. The Premier says: 
 

He (Mr. Devine) is already on record as saying that four out of five farmers should go. 
 
The Premier sits over there and says that our leader say four out of five farmers should go. It’s written right 
here in Hansard. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What page, Gerry? 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Page 99. And he also says we have too many senior citizens. I will tell you (and I 
want this on the record) that this is an absolute lie from the Premier. It is an absolute falsehood. It is 
absolutely . . . Who is called order? Nobody is calling order. Who would want to call order? Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I will take the member for Yorkton on a point of order. 
 
MR. NELSON: — The member for Arm River said that the Premier had spoken an outright lie. I would 
request him to withdraw the statement. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I think all members are familiar with the rules of the House with regard to the 
use of that type of language in this House in that it is unparliamentary. While I didn’t hear the comment from 
the member for Arm River, I will take his word as to whether he said it or not. If he did say it, I would ask 
him to withdraw it. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes. I got carried away on this terrific statement by the 
Premier. I did say that word. But I withdraw the word. I’ll just say that it 



 
December 8, 1980 
 

 
286 

is definitely a falsehood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the statement which the Premier has been talking about (the Attorney General was heckling a 
while ago here) that our leader, Mr. Devine, say there are 67,000, or thereabout, people on welfare, the same 
number there are farmers — the Premier takes those words and he twists them all around and he says, “You 
Tories want to cut them off.” Well, I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, these are not the words of the Premier of a 
year or two ago. Because, Mr. Speaker, when I read these statements from the Premier last night, then turned 
back and read his throne speech from a year ago and two years ago, it is not the same man talking. 
 
What has happened to the Premier? Is the Premier running scared that he has to sue these kinds of tactics? 
I’ve known the Premier since the time he was elected in 1971. I’ve always said, there’s a man who, even 
though we don’t agree with his philosophy, at least stood up as a man in this House and never belittled 
anybody. But now you had better clap for him because Mr. Premier has placed himself in trouble. You 
should have heard coffee row in my constituency. They couldn’t believe that this came over the air, that the 
Premier of this province would stand up and say something like this, that four out of five farmers have to go. 
Now every one of you over there knows that Mr. Devine never made that statement. Not one person will 
agree with that. You know that he didn’t say it. You know that he did not say that the senior citizens must 
go. That is our conniving Premier putting in words and twisting them, twisting the words . . .(inaudible 
interjection) . . . Never mind, I have a little go for Sedco. I have a go for you in a minute. If I were the 
minister of Sedco, I would be down so low in my seat that I would never come up with even a word. 
 
I’ll tell you where we stand on welfare in this province, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell the NDP opposite where we 
stand on welfare. We don’t want to cut anybody off. Nobody is going to cut anybody off welfare. All right, 
now we’ve heard. They are all twisters over there. Every one of them is twisting. I’ll tell you what we want 
to do. For the people who are on welfare and are ill, we want to give them ore. But for the other people who 
aren’t (who are strong and healthy), we will find them a job. You people won’t do it. Our goal is to provide 
full employment in the province, so that for everyone willing and able to work, there will be a job available 
in the market place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the Premier to state, as he has in his speeches, that my party would cut off welfare to all 
citizens is yet another example of NDP scare tactics — statements which have no basis in truth. I’ll tell you 
why. These people are twisting the truth on welfare because they are only interested in one thing when it 
comes to welfare, and that’s the vote. That’s all they are interested in. When I call on doors in Arm River I 
receive lots of requests from people wanting welfare. When I see somebody needing welfare who has no job, 
whether healthy or not, (and this can be proven, because I’ve done it), I’ll fight to get him/her welfare before 
I have him/her go hungry. And I’ll fight as much as any one of you people. I’ve done it. Yes, sir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the member for Moose Jaw, who was just heckling there, if he saw me without a 
job and I was down and out, I’m sure that he’d be the first one in the officer to get me some welfare. Just to 
show you that what’s going on in this province, in 1960 some wheat pool statistics came out. I was secretary 
of the wheat pool committee for 13 years. These statistics came from the wheat pool saying at that time that 
each person who worked provided for five people. But it also said that by 1970 it would be one providing for 
12. By 1978, when I ran in the last election, the statistics were that one person was providing for 17. What’s 
going wrong? Is that am improvement? 



 
December 8, 1980 

 
287 

Something’s going wrong. No one says that we want to cut anyone off, but you people or somebody has to 
do something about getting it down. 
 
Mr. Minister, sitting over there yapping away, will you tell me that people on welfare are proud people and 
wouldn’t like to be taken off? The member for Meadow Lake says that he has many people who are proud 
people, the native people. “Get me a job.” Why didn’t you take your potash money? 
 
I’ll tell you what you’ve done wrong. Millions and millions of borrowed money went to take over the potash 
in this province. You never really balanced the books, did you? They didn’t balance the books because if you 
were going to balance them right they would have to take what would have happened the other route. What 
would have happened if you had borrowed the same amount of money and started up some new enterprise 
that would employ some more people and give more people jobs? You didn’t do anything. The minister 
responsible for Sedco seems to be very excited about the words I’m saying. I will say that he does do his best 
to supply people with jobs by giving out loan after loan after loan to NDP hacks. I see that I cannot finish by 
the allotted time. I have more to say. Can I call it 5 o’clock, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


