






















































Hansard: May 06, 1980


(2624) 2625 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
May 6, 1980 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. J.A. HAMMERSMITH (Prince Albert-Duck Lake): — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and through you to the House, 99 Grade 8 students from Westmore Junior High School in Prince 
Albert. Some of these students are from the Prince Albert-Duck Lake constituency, and some from 
Shellbrook. They are accompanied by their teachers and chaperones: Mr. Twyver, Mrs. Kulyk, Mr. Johnson, 
Mrs. Senkiw, Mr. Stocki, and Mrs. Hankewich, as well as their bus driver, Norm Wicks. Westmore Junior 
High School makes an annual trip to Regina and makes visits and tours of various places in the city. I think 
they are to be congratulated for travelling so far. I trust that their stay in the legislature will be interesting, 
informative, and educational. I’ll be meeting with them out in the rotunda at 3 o’clock for pictures, and 
joining them for questions and refreshments. I ask all members of the House to join me in welcoming this 
group this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Shellbrook): — I want to add my words to those of my colleague, the member 
for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, and welcome to the galleries this afternoon and to the legislature the students 
from Westmore Junior High. The hon. member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake did indicate that some of the 
students may well be from the constituency of Shellbrook, and I’m sure there are some although I don’t 
recognize any of you from here. But welcome to the legislature this afternoon. We appreciate you making the 
effort to come. We appreciate the teachers and the chaperones taking their time and the unit board putting 
whatever effort they have into getting you here to the legislature. I’m sorry that I will not be able to be with 
Mr. Hammersmith this afternoon to meet with you for pictures and for discussions later on. I have some 
appointments and I will not be able to be there. So welcome to the legislature and I trust all members of the 
House will welcome the students as well. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to you and to the other members of the House, 47 students seated in the east gallery — Grades 5 
and 6 students from the schools of Montmartre and Glenavon. They are accompanied today by their teachers, 
Sandy Brown and Judy Squire, along with their bus driver, Connie MacKay. These students from 
Montmartre and Glenavon are very proud of the fact that their older brothers in many cases were part of the 
juvenile hockey team made up of Glenavon and Montmartre that captured the provincial final ‘C’ 
championships this year in the province. I’ll be meeting with you a little later for some pictures and 
refreshments. I hope you enjoy the question period, and your visit to Regina and the legislature. Have a very 
safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to this 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2626 
 

Assembly 23 students from Briercrest High School, Grades 7 and 8. They are accompanied by their teachers, 
Mrs. Moen and Mr. Johnson. I sincerely hope that the students will find their trip to this legislature 
rewarding and educational, and that it will give you some insight — good or bad — as to how your 
government is run. I’m sure we all wish you a safe trip home. I’m trying to cancel something so that I can 
meet with you afterward. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Bill No. 105 
 
MR. D.G. TAYLOR (Indian Head-Wolseley): — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Attorney General. 
Mr. Attorney General, I have noticed for the past few days that you have omitted to introduce a bill to amend 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act that has been on the blues, and in reading some of the 
columns in the paper it indicates the government is perhaps a bit undecided on this bill. My question is do 
you intend to introduce that in first reading today? 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — I should advise the hon. member that he would be well 
advised to read certain columns but only lightly. It will be introduced in first reading today. 
 

Receivership re Shane Industries Canada Ltd. 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — I direct a question to the minister responsible for SEDCO. Can the 
minister responsible for SEDCO indicate what the loss will be on the 
impending receivership of Shane Industries Canada Limited, one of whose major shareholders is Reg Parker, 
three times defeated candidate? 
 
HON. N. VICKAR (Minister of Industry and Commerce): — Mr. Speaker, no I cannot indicate what the 
loss will be. The firm only went into receivership yesterday so there are no figures compiled until they are all 
completed. We have no accounting. 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to direct a question to the minister. Would it be fair to say that the loss will 
approximate at least $175,000 on this venture? And can the minister tell us how a project, which as recently 
as December and January was being fairly highly touted for its great future in both the Leader-Post and the 
Star-Phoenix, fell so far short of your expectations? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, the produce that Shane Industries has developed and was marketing was, 
and still is, very viable and a very good project. Unfortunately the entrepreneurs who were involved 
apparently didn’t promote it properly or what have you. I can’t give you any answers as to why it went under 
but it did, and we are looking forward to being able to use that particular project further. We are going to 
develop it even after the receivership. 
 
MR. LANE: — A supplementary to the minister. Will the minister not admit that his branch of SEDCO in 
Saskatoon turned down the original application (perhaps the Attorney General want to get into this) by Shane 
Industries at the outset and it was approved by the Regina office? In fact the project was a bad one from day 
one and the only reason the officials got the money was because of the political allegiance of Reg 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2627 
 

Parker and his immediate family; it’s the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who are being made to take another 
financial bath because of your granting public funds to defeated NDP candidates. 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, that may be the opinion of the hon. member but I can assure the hon. 
member that many projects are turned down by the offices within the province of Saskatchewan and are 
accepted at head office or vice versa. This is no particular reason for the particular project to go into 
receivership or no particular reason why we granted a loan to the entrepreneurs. 
 
MR. LANE: — Final supplementary to the minister. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I’ll take a new question. 

 
Use of SEDCO for Political Patronage 

 
MR. LANE: — This is the third project involving former NDP candidates, or defeated candidates. I am 
referring to Golden Acres; I am referring to David Lange. I am referring to the fact that Mossbank Foods has 
some financial trouble, and now Reg Parker who was defeated federally on two occasions, provincially once. 
When is your government going to quit using SEDCO as a lever of political patronage and begin to put the 
interest of the taxpayers and the business community of this province first? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, we treat all people alike, no matter what party affiliation they have. It 
doesn’t make any difference to us. So for the information of the hon. member, I want him to know that as far 
as Mossbank Foods is concerned one of these days he’ll get the shock of his life to find out that will be a 
viable project. Golden Acres — I want you also to know we have discussed that subject in this House on 
many occasions. The member to whom he is referring was not a member at the time that loan was taken out, 
so it has no bearing whatsoever. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary to the minister. Would you also give some explanation to this Assembly as 
to why there was some rather strange financing in Shane Industries in that SEDCO is not in the practice of 
financing merely inventory (which you acquire after you are in operation) which was for the longest time, if 
not throughout the existence of that company, the sole basis for SEDCO’s security. Could you tell us how 
the rather strange financing took place and how SEDCO was required or instructed to give such a significant 
amount of money to people with: (1) no track record, and (2) really no business background (I’m referring to 
Mr. Parker in particular) other than it being straight political graft and patronage? 
 
MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with more than one Mr. parker in Shane Industries. If you 
will read the track record oft he other people involved, you might find a track record. We have no particular 
reason why we were dealing with one particular person. SEDCO did know that the produce which they were 
producing is a marketable produce, one which is desirable to all firefighting units right across the country. I 
say again, possibly if the thing was promoted and developed further, it still can be a viable product. 
 

Formaldehyde Vapours 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2628 
 

MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Minister of the 
Environment. Concerns are being raised as to the hazardous effects of formaldehyde vapours on humans 
because of experiences in two schools in Saskatchewan and a dwelling in Saskatoon. My question Mr. 
Minister, is your department prepared to conduct a full-scale investigation into the use of formaldehyde 
oriented products such as the foam insulation, plywood or chipboard in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. G.R. BOWERMAN (Minister of the Environment): — Mr. Speaker, I think the question should be 
more appropriate directed to the Minister of Health. If it has to do with the environment inside a building, in 
a work area, it has to do with the Minister of Labour, who deals with the area of the work place. If it has to 
do with a dwelling, I would suspect it is a matter having to do with the Minister of Health. Environment, the 
outside environment and matters related thereto, has to do with the Department of the Environment. I can’t 
give the hon. member an adequate answer. I can take it as notice and try to get the information to her. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — A question to the Minister of Health. In Massachusetts, the Department of Health has 
banned the use of urea formaldehyde foam. In light of what has transpired over the weekend, is your 
department at least investigating the possibility of having it banned here in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. H.H. ROLFES (Minister of Health): — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member last week in this 
House, the Premier has instructed the various ministers concerned to do an investigation on the health 
hazards of urea formaldehyde. My department is, at the present time, looking at this particular problem. I 
can’t give a definitive answer to the member. We have been in contact with the Department of Consumer 
Affairs and the Department of Labour and I would expect in due course we will make a decision in that 
regard. 
 

Kennedy School Gym 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct a supplementary question to the 
Minister of Education. As a result of a letter dated April 10, 1980 from the secretary of the Kennedy School 
District Board, I raised a matter of the Kennedy School guy with you. I can appreciate the fact that you did 
not get back to me about that particular problem, given the serious nature of it, and did not get back to me 
before I made the national news. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister obviously is, now that you’ve taken some action with Kennedy, 
what action will you be taking as the head of the Department of Education to ensure the safety of our youth 
in this province as it relates to formaldehyde foam insulation being used in other schools? can you give this 
Assembly our assurance that you will work to investigate all the school systems in the province of 
Saskatchewan to ensure the safety of our youth? 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, first of all with respect to the comment 
about a reply to the member’s information, I am sure he will concede that it was only two or three days ago 
that he passed the letter on to me. I am now compiling a letter to respond to the specific request he passed to 
me in writing. 
 
However, with respect to the broader question he raises. I would point out to the hon. member that we do 
continue to monitor through our system of superintendencies, 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2629 
 

directors of education, and regional superintendents the genera condition of our schools in this province on a 
regular basis. In undertaking that kind of monitoring, we certainly do take into account on a continuing basis 
particular and potential health hazards that may be identified. 
 
I will indicate to the hon. member that as a result of that kind of process we for instance very recently 
undertook a thorough and complete survey with respect to asbestos. The experience with the Kennedy 
gymnasium is currently being assessed with the help of highly professional experts from a number of 
government departments and private agencies. As a result of the analysis of that experience and the advice 
provided, we will then be taking whatever further steps should be added to our regular monitoring to 
determine whether or not this particular problem is one that could potentially have more general application. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary. I would also ask, Mr. Minister, that you give the 
Assembly the assurance (notwithstanding the fact that the Minister of the Environment is attempting to 
exclude himself from the problem), that you will be in direct consultation with the Minister of Health and the 
Minister of Labour concerning the building codes and building standards, since it is well-known in the 
Kennedy situation that the contractor is not about to do anything at this point in time. You have not furthered 
any action whatsoever as the head of your department in that regard. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I find it incumbent upon the minister to make sure he is in direct consultation with these 
other two ministers, so that they can collectively get together to resolve this particular problem in the schools 
in the province of Saskatchewan. I surely can’t understand how three departments could muck up all at the 
same time. 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — I can assure the hon. member that officials from the three departments he identified 
have been engaged in the analysis of the problem with the Kennedy gymnasium. I will comment on the hon. 
member’s suggestion that the minister should in some way step in to impose a solution to the problem that 
exists between the school board and the contractor. I have to advise the hon. member that the laws of this 
province give me no such powers. The relationship between a contractor and a school board as the 
contracting agency rests within the civil law arena. I think the hon. members would be the first to criticize 
me if I were to attempt to abuse the powers of my office by trying to step into such a relationship. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — New question to the Minister of Education. Mr. Minister, have you checked the McLurg 
School in Regina, where the students are suffering from eye irritations and skin irritations from 
formaldehyde insulation? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t personally checked the McLurg School, but I can assure the 
hon. member that dating back to early last fall officials of my department, officials of the occupational health 
branch of the Department of Labour, and private consultants in the occupational health and safety field have 
all been engaged in an ongoing analysis of the particular problems at McLurg School. The problems there 
have proved to be particularly intractable in terms of identifying the source of the irritants. 
 
As the hon. member will perhaps know, there are irritants being identified that are causing itching of eyes 
and so on among the students. There has been a great deal of professional attention paid to that problem. I 
have to tell the hon. member that those 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2630 
 

professionals, we agree, have not been able to finally determine the source cause of those irritants. But all 
alternatives are being examined and every effort is being put into trying to determine the cause of that 
particular problem. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary to the minister. I realize that as late as six months ago the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs was trying to get formaldehyde put on the restricted list. You did a study of the schools for 
asbestos. Can you tell me why you didn’t study the schools for formaldehyde and other dangerous chemicals 
that could be compounded in these schools? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, with reference to McLurg School, I can’t tell the hon. 
member whether or not formaldehyde is a problem there. All possible potential sources of those irritants are 
being analysed. I will tell the hon. member that we have not, at this time, undertaken the same kind of survey 
with respect to formaldehyde as we did with respect to asbestos. We are still undertaking to analyse the 
source cause of the problems, as has happened in the Kennedy situation so that we could know exactly what 
it is that we are out there to try to search for. 
 
AS the hon. member will know, I think there appears to be a problem with particular applications of the 
formaldehyde substance. An attempt is being made to further identify that so we can carry on with the 
general survey to identify whether or not that particular problem has more general application. 
 

Validity of Food and Drug Act Standards 
 
MR. W.C. THATCHER (Thunder Creek): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. Mr. 
Attorney General, back in February the Supreme Court of Canada issued a little noticed decision which 
would appear to render most of the federal standards under the Food and Drug Act as invalid and 
unconstitutional so far as content and purity of the food product is concerned. Mr. Minister, this would seem 
to indicate that it has been tossed back to the provinces and that food processors and consumers are going to 
face 10 different sets of regulations in food products across Canada. Obviously this has got to mean a 
dramatic increase in food prices just through bureaucratic red tape. 
 
My question to the Attorney General is: how is the province of Saskatchewan reacting to this Supreme Court 
of Canada decision? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I do not have the legal opinion before me which was prepared for my 
consideration by department officials, but if my recollection is correct, their legal judgment is not quite the 
same as that of the hon. member for Thunder Creek as to the effect of the supreme court decision. I think one 
might raise it to the level of saying that it has cast some doubts (if I can put it in those terms) as to the federal 
regulatory powers. But it did not go so far as to destroy it. 
 
We are in the process of examining what the decision does mean. We are in consultation with other 
provinces and thereafter a course of action will be announced. I presume that it will involve discussions at 
the political or governmental level if such are deemed necessary. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question to the Attorney General. His departmental experts may very 
well not agree with my opinion, but perhaps in response the Attorney General could tell me why charges 
have been dropped against Ontario supermarkets 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2631 
 

by the federal government — a supermarket which received a great deal of press about a year ago for mixing 
pork and beef half-and-half and calling it hamburger, as well as virtually all other charges which have been 
made under this act — if they do not agree. Now my supplementary question to you, Mr. Attorney General, 
is this: it would appear at this time, as far as food content and food purity is concerned, nobody is minding 
the store. Obviously the federal government is not doing so since it is dropping charges which are already 
there under the act. Therefore, if the provinces are not doing it (and from your initial answer I would assume 
the provinces are not), what protection does anybody have today as to what is in the food and the purity as 
previously administered under this act? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the alleged statement with respect to the 
proposed case which has been dropped in Ontario. I will simply have to get information on that to satisfy 
myself that it is indeed the case. But I can assure the hon. member that — I shouldn’t say it is not correct. It 
would not be a fair conclusion to assume that from this decision the result is that the consumer is not 
protected. If that assumption was correct, we surely would have heard about it by now if for no other reason 
than by the questioning of our friends in opposition in the House of Commons of the federal Minister of 
Consumer and Corporate Affairs. It simply has not been raised. I say that is the case because my 
interpretation of the legal decision (the one which I have been provided with at any rate) is more likely to be 
the proper conclusion. It does not have that degree of legal punch or impact that the hon. member would 
have the House believe. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — This is the final supplementary to the Attorney General. I light of your answer on the 
initial two questions, might I get your assurances in this Assembly today and for the people of Saskatchewan 
that at this point in time somebody is regulating the Food Purity Act and that consumers are getting what 
they are supposed to be getting? Are you prepared to make an unequivocal statement to this legislature today 
indicating that they are going to be protected today, tomorrow and till this matter is resolved? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I am confident that the consumers of Canada and Saskatchewan do 
have adequate protection under the laws. I do not (as I say again) subscribe to the legal opinion that the hon. 
member has tendered. Having said all that, I have told you on the very first question that I do not have a copy 
of the judgment before me. It has been some weeks since I have perused it. I will take it upon myself to go 
back to get the lawyer’s view of this and other appropriate views to satisfy myself that there is no immediate 
danger. 
 

Advertising re Fire Hazards 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I would direct a question to the Minister of the Environment since it has 
been made well aware by you that you are responsible for the outside environment. Mr. Minister, yesterday 
as a result of some extensive travel throughout the province and of course in the evening as well, it became 
very evident to me that there were a great number of fires burning out of control in all parts of this province, 
let alone the fires and devastation that is being caused in northern Saskatchewan. In southern Saskatchewan, 
we have a great number of fires burning out of control. My question very simply to you is, would you 
consider, as a government, excluding some of the wasteful advertising (I might suggest like the family of 
Crown corporations) and replacing that with some meaningful advertising like fire hazard warnings for the 
people of Saskatchewan so that we don’t have any further wasteful 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2632 
 

losses due to fires running rampant and out of control in the province? 
 
MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, this is a rather twisted and distorted view of the responsibilities of 
environment. But I will try to answer as best I can the rather obvious question that is very difficult to answer 
in any way. 
 
the family of Crown corporations (and I suppose under the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation)) will make 
the decision with respect to what publicity they wish to embark on with regard to their family of Crown 
corporations. They will do that, I would suspect, regardless of the forest fire condition and regardless of what 
the prairie fire situation is. 
 
With regard to publicity with respect to the direct issue — prairie and forest fires — I do believe that the 
Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources . . . My colleague is here. He will be undertaking 
whatever publicity he feels is necessary and proper in order for the public to be informed with regard to both 
forest and prairie fires. 
 

Bill No. 65 
 
MR. G. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Provincial Secretary. Could you 
please advise me whether this Bill No. 65, if passed in its present form, is applicable to cemeteries operated 
for gain and licensed as such by the Provincial Secretary? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I will take the next question. 
 

Cottage Lease Fees 
 
MR. J. GARNER (Wilkie): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources. Mr. Minister, I had quite a few calls lately regarding cottage lease fees in the provincial parks. 
Have you set the new structure for the lease fees for the upcoming year, because these cottages were all 
appraised last year. If you have set it, what is it set for, and what percentage did it go up? 
 
HON. R.J. GROSS (Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resource): — Mr. Speaker, the lease fees for 
the upcoming year have not been officially set. They are under consideration. I am awaiting a report, and 
when we have the report it will be tabled and the information will be sent out. It’s not available yet. 
 
MR. GARNER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, one of your department officials — 
and I quote from a letter I received — 
 

However, this department official did state that he knows the rates, and has chosen to wait until the session 
is over and will establish the new rate structure then through an order in council, so that no one can step on 
your toes. 

 
Why do we have to wait so long for this rate structure to be brought about, Mr. Minister? The appraisal was 
done last year. Why can we not have the rate structure right now? 
 
MR. GROSS: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated to the member earlier, it was under review and the assessment 
that took place was just completed very recently. I haven’t had a full recommendation made to me on what 
the exact rates will be, and until I’ve received a recommendation from the department as to what those rates 
are, we can’t make the 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2633 
 

decision. So when we have that solid recommendation with the exact rate structure for all the cottages 
concerned, we will make the recommendation accordingly, but we still haven’t the material finished or 
completed. 
 
MR. GARNER: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, when and how long before we get 
out of the session? Can you tell us if you can bring that in within a week, within two or three days? Just give 
us some idea, some guideline. The people of Saskatchewan are quite concerned as to how much it is going to 
go up — the rent. let’s deal with the people of Saskatchewan. When are you going to bring this forward? 
 
MR. GROSS: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member it will be announced in due curse, and in due course 
is not very long. It will be a matter of a couple of weeks, a week to two weeks, and we should have it 
completed at that time. 
 

FIRST READING 
 

HON. E.L. COWLEY (Provincial Secretary) moved first reading of Bill No. 105 — A Bill to amend The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a first time on the following recorded division: 
 

Yeas — 33 
 

Pepper Gross Cowley 
Allen  Shillington Tchorzewski 
Bowerman MacMurchy Koskie 
Smishek  Mostoway Lusney 
Romanow  Kaeding Prebble 
Messer  Hammersmith Johnson 
Snyder  Dyck  Thompson 
Kramer  Feschuk  Poniatowski 
Robbins  Byers  Lingenfelter 
Baker  Vickar White 
McArthur  Rolfes  Solomon 
 

NAYS — 02 
 
Collver Ham  
 

Point of Order 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — As you know, The Legislative Assembly Act and The Executive 
Council Act at the moment provide that the third party status in the Assembly shall be granted to a party with 
two or more members of this legislative Chamber. As 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2634 
 

Mr. Speaker is also aware, over a week ago I spoke to Mr. Speaker about some aspects of that recognition of 
a party in the legislature, as to what the law is now, and Mr. Speaker agreed to give it consideration. Mr. 
Speaker, I suggest to you on a point of order that consideration in this matter is not possible. The law states 
that the Unionest Party shall in fact be a recognized party as far as this legislature is concerned, and all 
matters pertaining to that party including the seating arrangements of this Assembly including the granting of 
grants shall be carried forward in accordance with the law by the Clerk’s office and by Mr. Speaker’s office. 
That is not now the case. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — At this point I see no conflict between the private conversation I had with the member 
for Nipawin with regard to the Unionest Party and the legislation which we have just concluded voting on 
for first reading. I would expect that the legislation that’s in effect now with regard to the government, the 
opposition, and any other parties in the Assembly remains in effect until such time as it is amended or 
dropped. So, therefore, I don’t see that there’s any point of order that the member raised and I’m unable to 
determine what the point of order is because quite clearly if there is a point of order some rule must have 
been abridged in the House. If the member could briefly specifically tell me what that is then I could deal 
with it. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Briefly, Mr. Speaker, as one example and I will only present this in the example — the 
present seating arrangement of the House. This particular space is reserved for independent members, as Mr. 
Speaker is aware. The space for a third party is there. Now Mr. Speaker has left us in the independent 
section. I think that that is just one example of the recognition. Another example is the receiving of grants, 
and so on which have not yet been received by our party or by my office as leader of that party. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Well, I think the seating of members in the Assembly is something that is decided by 
the Speaker, and legislation has no bearing on it whatsoever. I’ll take the member’s comments under 
advisement about where he should be seated in the Assembly, as members know I always do. With regard to 
anything else the member has said, I don’t believer there is any point of order there. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 
 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. I just wanted to 
perhaps recognize rather than introduce, in the gallery, an individual who has left, the wife of our former 
premier, Mrs. Thatcher, and I was going to welcome her on behalf of all the members. I do that in her 
absence in any event. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Return No. 671 
 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Arm River (Mr. Muirhead), that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 671 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the urban affairs department that 
are (a)on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of their 
regular salaries now being received. 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2635 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — I have a motion form the member for Rosthern, seconded by the member for Arm 
River. I rule the motion out of order because there is no urban affairs department. 
 

Point of Order 
 
MR. R.L. COLLVER (Nipawin): — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. The Provincial Secretary today 
moved first reading of a bill. It was passed by recorded division. Does the clerk have a copy of that bill 
tabled at his desk? 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I can’t answer for the clerk but I am advised as House Leader that a printed copy of 
the bill is available and presumably will be distributed (unless there is some other information) in the 
normal, usual fashion. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — It is just a question of getting the number stamped on the bill and delivering it in the 
Chamber. I think that is all that is holding it up. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — On a point of order though. When a minister reads first reading of a bill, is it not 
customary to table the bill at that moment in time for first reading? I mean how can you first read the bill if 
no one can read it, including the Clerk? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I believe the Assembly’s following the usual practice. As soon as possible after the bill 
has received first reading in the House, it is distributed to the members. It is not the practice of the Assembly 
office to stamp the numbers on the bill until such time as it has been read in the House. Therefore, it comes 
in in the proper order in relation to other bills. That’s the reason it’s not here yet. I expect it will be here 
momentarily. 
 

Return No. 676 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Arm River (Mr. Muirhead) that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 676 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Department of Social 
Services that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
HON. R.J. ROMANOW (Attorney General): — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington), with respect to Return No. 676, that all the words after the word 
‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal years: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the Department 
of Social Services who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the employee was 
on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 677 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2636 
 

MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Arm River (Mr. Muirhead), that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 677 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members or the social planning secretariat 
that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay: (2) the proportion of 
their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. 
Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the social 
planning secretariat who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; 
(2) the amount of a remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the employee was 
on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 678 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Arm River (Mr. Muirhead), that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 678 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of SaskMedia Corporation that are 
(a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of their 
regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I moved, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. 
Shillington), that all the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

In the fiscal year ending in 1979: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the SaskMedia 
Corporation that were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on leave with partial pay for purposes of 
union business; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries received while on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 679 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Arm River (Mr. Muirhead), that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 679 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of SaskMedia Authority that are (a) 
on education leave with partial pay, (b) on 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2637 
 

union leave with partial pay; (2) the proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 
 
MR. ROMANOW: — I moved, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington) that all 
the words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the SaskMedia 
Authority who were (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the employee was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

Return No. 680 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern) moved, seconded by the member for Arm River (Mr. Muirhead), that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 680 showing: 
 

In the fiscal year 1979-80: (1) the number of permanent staff members of the Saskatchewan Securities 
Commission that are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave with partial pay; (2) the 
proportion of their regular salaries now being received. 

 
MR. ROMANOW: — I move, seconded by the Minister of Culture and Youth (Mr. Shillington) that all the 
words after the word ‘showing’ be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
 

During the 1979-80 fiscal year: (1) the number and names of all permanent employees of the 
Saskatchewan Securities Commission who are (a) on education leave with partial pay, (b) on union leave 
with partial pay; (2) the amount of remuneration agreed to by the government and each employee while the 
employees was on leave. 

 
Amendment agreed. 
 
Motion as amended agreed. 
 

RESOLUTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 17 — Plant Breeders’ Rights 
 
MR. D. LINGENFELTER (Shaunavon) moved, seconded by the member for Pelly (Mr. Lusney): 
 

That this Assembly, recognizing the benefits of the public plant breeding system to western farmers and to 
consumers of western grain around the world, urges the federal government to reconsider the legislation 
proposed by the previous federal government to grant monopoly privileges to private plant breeders. 

 
He said: Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the opportunity to place this motion 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2638 
 

before the Assembly. I hope that we are able to convince all members of this Assembly to support the motion 
and thereby represent what I believe are the best interests of the prairie producers. 
 
It is interesting to note that in advancing the case for granting seed patents, and I think that that is the way we 
should refer to it, W.T. Bradnock of Agriculture Canada says the purpose of the legislation will be ‘to 
stimulate the provision of crop varieties so the Canadian agriculture can produce to the maximum to help 
feed the hungry.’ Surely this is convoluted logic, Mr. Speaker. If it’s the hungry world about which we, as 
Canadians, are concerned, we could do a lot more if we turned things around from the situation where we in 
Canada are net importers of protein — and beef producers might have a word or two of advice about where 
we could start. No, Mr. Speaker, if it’s the hungry of the world that concerns the federal bureaucrats (and it 
should be), we should drop the idea of private seed patent legislation in keeping with the model legislation 
codes drafted by United nations agencies for use by third world countries, which advise against patent 
legislation. 
 
There are reasons for suspicion regarding the motives behind patent legislation in Canada. Many people 
suspect it has little to do with feeding the hungry and quite a bit to do with the fact that Agriculture Canada 
is losing its battle for research funds with treasury board, and it hopes, through patent legislation, to attract 
corporate dollars to take up the slack. These suspicions are given credence when we witness the fact that the 
only real voices supporting the legislation are the major seed companies and chemical company spokesmen. 
They are anxious to consolidate their enterprises by getting rid of the small seed companies and thereby 
gaining greater monopoly situations, enabling them to wring greater profits out of the producers — the only 
place from which profits can come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in advancing patent legislation they argue that we will achieve better and greater varieties. The 
experience in such places as in Europe, in the EEC countries, all has been to the contrary. Dr. Erna Bennett, 
of the crop ecology branch of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, who was in 
Regina on March 2-0 tells us that the common catalogue approach of the EEC will wipe out three-quarters of 
Europe’s vegetable varieties within a decade after the regulation comes into effect. Dr. Bennett is not alone 
in her predictions. Professor J.K. Bleasdale, the director of national vegetable research station at 
Wellsbourne, United Kingdom, describes the common market regulation as a self-inflicted wound. he 
confirms Dr. Bennett’s predictions and describes the attitude of the European plan breeders as one of 
accepting the inevitability that purely commercial interests will dominate the situation. Many other experts in 
the field agree. The evidence from experience is stacked against those who would argue that we can expect 
more and better varieties. The evidence is all the other way. 
 
The evidence is that patent legislation would be a retrograde step for a number of reasons: 
 
1. It does and it will restrict the free exchange of genetic materials. 
 
2. It has and it will continue to do a poor job of preserving, exploring, cataloguing and storing of germ 
plasm. Less than 2 per cent of the agricultural research dollars are devoted to preservation and genetic wipe-
out. 
 
3. It has and it will continue to allow large and private corporations to profit unfairly 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2639 
 

from the public sector’s financial support of research. 
 
4. It has and it will continue to enable these same companies to increase seed prices — a situation beyond the 
control of any single government and a situation particularly unfair to third world counties, when you 
consider that for the most part these countries are the home for most of the nine major and three minor 
centres of genetic diversity. 
 
5. It has encouraged and will continue to encourage improper promotion of weak and less than best seeds 
since the motivation of the controlling companies is to make a profit on their variety. They, therefore, must 
recover research and development costs plus a profit margin regardless of the prospect that better varieties 
are available. Their dominant position and ability to buy promotion and advertising will enable them to carry 
this off. 
 
6. Perhaps the most chilling realization of all, it could enable corporations to develop varieties that are 
dependent on various chemicals for their germination, proper growth and final maturation. 
 
I want to take a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to discuss this last point I have identified so that all members 
will understand the reason for my concern and the reason for a good deal of the concern expressed by many 
producers and research people. It would be a fair question, Mr. Speaker, to ask why? Why would anyone 
suspect or question the motives of these agri-chemical corporations? Or why would anyone be concerned 
about the vertical integration of chemical companies with seed companies? I will try to deal with both these 
issues. 
 
The chairman of the Canadian Seed Trade Association’s plant breeders’ rights committee had this to say 
about the respective role for public and private efforts in plant breeding and I quote: 
 

Personally, I see research divided into the discovery phase and the exploration phase. I believe that much 
of the discovery work in plant breeding, such as genetic resistance to disease, that kind of discovery 
research will continue in the public institutions. Conversely, I believe that the exploitation of research can 
best be done by private enterprise. 

 
The implications of that statement are reasonably obvious. It suggests that the public, the taxpayers, should 
continue to fund any real research that will be carried out. This is a costly process in view of the fact that 10 
to 15 years of work are required to develop a new variety. The statement suggests that the public should fund 
the finding and developing of useful germ plasms. The public should have to worry about disease resistance 
in new varieties and once these things are done, the fruits of that public investment in research should be 
turned over to private companies for patenting. Public money, it is suggested, will underwrite the licence for 
private profit. Companies can take the benefit of public financing research and then charge Canadian 
farmers, the producers, and therefore Canadian consumers commission for the new variety. In effect the 
public would pay twice, once for the research, and again for the privilege of buying the fruits of their own 
research. It’s ludicrous to say the least. 
 
Let me give you one further sampling of what I consider to be fairly revealing comments in regard to the 
potential of the so-called plant breeders’ rights legislation. I quote from 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2640 
 

an article which appeared in February 1979 issue of Canadian Business. The article is reporting on the 
attitude of a research director of a seed operation and it says? 
 

Recently he remarked in a moment of unguarded candor that plant breeders rights legislation would permit 
companies to advertise and sell anything the suckers (suckers being the farmers) will buy. 

 
That is the attitude, Mr. Speaker, not what’s good for the hungry world, much less what products have the 
best natural resistance or the best nutritional value, but whatever the suckers will buy. And with the power of 
advertising what they will buy is what is good for the company. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I quoted the chairman of the CSTA’s plant breeders’ rights committee and the head of 
the seed house research operation. Whoa re these people who have this obviously warped view of 
agricultural production and the producers? The chairman referred to Byron Beeler who, when he is not 
acting as a lobbyist, acts as vice-president of Ciba-Geigy Seeds of Canada, and the research director is 
George Jones from Steward Seeds of Ailsa Craig, Ontario. Interesting, isn’t it, that Ciba-Geigy only last year 
bought out Steward Seed, lock, stock and barrel? 
 
Next question — who is Ciba-Geigy, Mr. Speaker? Ciba-Geigy ranks number 52 in Fortune’s non-U.S. 
listing of major industrial corporations. It’s a pharmaceutical chemical company. Agri-chemical sales 
accounted for 25 per cent of its more than $4 billion worth of sales in 1977. Now why would anyone suspect 
the motives or question the motives of a company wanting to muscle in on the small seed businesses? The 
answer is pretty obvious, I think, and the attitudes expressed by some of the top Canadian brass I have 
already put on the record for those who might think the motives in selling chemicals are just fine, 
outstanding and altruistic. The answer is only too obvious. Ciba-Geigy is only one of a couple of dozen 
multinational chemical companies which has this more than passing interest in the seed business. The list 
includes more familiar names like IT&T, Purex, Royal Dutch Shell, Union Carbide (the third largest and one 
of the most notorious), General Foods and even our old friend, Cargill. And the list goes on. 
 
In England when it was learned that patent legislation was forthcoming, the giant flour miller Rank-Hovis-
McDougall bought out 84 small county seed companies in one week and was the proud owner of 100 such 
family seed firms before they quit buying. Other giants joined in the plunder with less spectacular results but 
with no less enthusiasm. Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to imagine their reasons were altruistic. 
 
In the United States similar actions were sparked by patent legislation in 1970. There was so much activity, 
in fact, that a meeting of the American Seed Trade Association set aside most of one day to explain to 
members how to sell their seed companies. It is difficult to imagine that such enthusiasm on the part of the 
giant agri-chemical companies was altruistic and that they were gobbling up these small family enterprises so 
they could, in turn, feed a hungry world. With that kind of evidence Mr. Speaker, it is difficult not to suspect 
and not to question the motives of these oligopolies in wanting patent legislation here in Canada. 
 
Their own spokesmen, whom I have quoted, have told us why. Their interests are in profit and in expansion. 
The higher the better and the more the better. Whether it’s at the expense of the farmers, whom they regard 
as suckers, is of little concern; whether it’s at the expense of publicly funded research is also of little 
concern; and whether it’s 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2641 
 

at the expense of the consumer is of no concern at all. 
 
I earlier asked a second question: why should we be concerned about vertical integration of chemical and 
seed companies? I would like to turn to that question and I will deal with it more briefly, since most of my 
earlier remarks already provide plenty of reason for concern. Quite apart from the fact that these giants are 
stepping on countless hundreds of small, privately owned, mostly family enterprises and quite apart from the 
attitude I described regarding the function of public and private funding — quite apart from these things 
there is an even more frightening aspect to the consequence of the strangle hold on our food chain being in 
so few and such suspect hands. 
 
I am referring to the prospect of these agri-chemical giants dovetailing their chemicals with their seed 
research. I want to describe a few cases where evidence already exists. In 1978 the National Academy of 
Sciences noted that in the 400-500 new varieties brought forward in the United States annually since patent 
legislation was introduced the improvements actually amounted only to find tuning of existing varieties. 
Nothing new was really added. The changes brought about might have increased the harmony with farm 
mechanization but added nothing to nutritional quality and in fact may have subtracted. In the only consumer 
acceptance test done in 1977, modern tomatoes, for example, were singled out as being less tasteful and less 
nutritious — hardly a recommendation for following that route. 
 
An even more graphic example of dovetailing is the classic example of the Walter tomato which requires the 
gas ethylene to ripen. In the first step the seed has to be purchased form the company which produced it 
because it is a hybrid, so the seed must be bought each year. Before the fruit can be marketed the same 
company has to be called on to ripen it and make it marketable. That prospect is frightening enough without 
considering that chemicals supplied by the same company are probably required by the plant to make it 
grow. 
 
The third point I want to register in this regard is that the patent rights create the necessary monopoly and 
liquidity for these companies to make gift-edged investments in developing hybrids. They will have the 
muscle, scientifically and financially, to force production into these lines. Anyone who doubts this need only 
look at the hybrid corn production in United States and Ontario. It can only be a matter of time before these 
firms bring forward a range of hybrid cereal crops. 
 
Good news, you might say. And it is, unless you realize the implications of it. Hybrids, Mr. Speaker, would 
mean that the farmer would have to return to the company each year for seed. With good planning on the part 
of the company it means the farmer would have to return to the company for chemicals to make it grow 
properly and with a bit more good planning another chemical to make it ripen. Far fetched — not a bit. It is 
already happening. 
 
Imagine it, Mr. Speaker. Thatcher wheat used to be a fairly popular variety of Saskatchewan grown wheat. If 
we turned it over to the brain trust of Cargill they might be able to tinker with it a bit and come forth with a 
new-hybrid Thatcher wheat. The members opposite might be interested in this, In a dry year they might still 
grow a 15-bushel an acre stand of straw, and unless you applied the right chemical you would have a 15-
bushel per acres stand of straw of this new hybrid Thatcher wheat, but nothing in the heads. People could be 
forgiven, Mr. Speaker, if they didn’t see switching to the new Thatcher hybrid as progress. 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2642 
 

There is every reason to be concerned about this vertical integration which is taking place. It is almost 
getting too late to express our concern. In fact, it is probably too late for most of the members opposite, 
much to my disappointment. Mr. Speaker, their federal counterparts in Ottawa had a lot to do with 
promoting the cutback mentality adopted by the Trudeau government in 1978-79, resulting in the cutting of 
agricultural research funding, in turn resulting in the drive for patent legislation. I earlier drew the 
connection, Mr. Speaker. In the brief period when the Conservatives were in office in Ottawa, they gave 
every indication they would follow the Trudeau course. Now, Mr. Trudeau is back again and so is Mr. 
Whelan. He hasn’t had the time yet to do anything to help the hard-pressed farmer but he has had time to 
indicate that he is back on the course with patent legislation. 
 
I am not surprised that the Tories didn’t change the thing when they had a chance. A little over a year ago I 
attended a meeting at the research station in Swift Current. It was a meeting sponsored by the Cypress Hills 
Community College and on the subject of plant breeders’ rights. In attendance was our member of 
parliament, Frank Hamilton. When asked for the Conservative position he indicated that his part had given 
cautious approval to legislation proposed by Whelan; cautious approval, Mr. Speaker, another half pregnant 
position staked out by the federal Tories — a position, the temptation of which I hope the members opposite 
resist in the best interests of prairie producers and consumers the world over. I hope it is not too late for the 
Tories opposite, but I rather suspect it is because of the position taken by their federal counterparts. 
 
I suspect it is too late for yet a third reason, Mr. Speaker. I raise this point because it lends weight and 
credibility to the theory often advanced that the corporate game plan of agri-business is being carried out 
with the knowing co-operation of the Liberal and Tory Parties. It is a game plan in which a particular farm 
organization is acting as the cutting edge for the old Liberal and Tory corporate axe being swung at the 
family farm in rural Saskatchewan. This seed patenting business is just another example. 
 
One year ago, on March 19 and 20, there was a conference in Regina on this matter of patent legislation. The 
conference was told by Dr. Harris Gleckmann of the United Nations Center on Transitional Corporations 
that this debate involves philosophical and ideological questions: that the question of introducing patent 
privileges and control is a political question. My colleague, the member for Pelly will have a word of two 
more in this area. 
 
So what else was the conference told, Mr. Speaker,? What can we anticipate being told by the members 
opposite? I predict that we are going to be told by the members opposite approximately the following: first, 
they are going to say that our information is half-truths, possibly mistruths, biases trotted out as facts; 
second, they are going to say that so long as there is strict control, grain producers’ rights will be protected. I 
predict they won’t tell us how the Government of Canada is going to control these large multinationals any 
more than they have in the past, whether it involves nickel or whatever. I predict they will say that. I hope 
not but I think they will, and they will demonstrate their willingness once more to sell out Saskatchewan. 
 
Thirdly, they will probably say, let us simply discuss plant breeders’ rights and leave out the emotional side 
issues and fears. I predict they won’t want to discuss those so-called side issues and fears because these 
issues get to the real crux of the matter, that being who is going to call the shots in Canadian agriculture? I 
hope I am wrong, but I suspect I 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2643 
 

won’t be. 
 
Fourthly, Mr. Speaker, I predict that the members opposite might even go so far as to say that a lot more 
farmers are becoming concerned about this issue who are going to hold meetings, and it would be better to 
stay at home and farm, as if they weren’t doing that by finding out about seed patent monopolies. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, members opposite might go that far. I hope not, but you can never tell. Why do I 
anticipate that response from the members opposite, Mr. Speaker? Well, I already told you about the federal 
Tory position, the half-pregnant position on this issue, but the Tories opposite are already squeamish about 
Frank Hamilton, because of the things he said on other issues concerning agriculture — we have already put 
that on the record last year. So they might not follow him on this one. But they no doubt will say things 
which I have predicted, or things closely resembling them because those are the things being said by the 
agricultural committee of the Tory caucus, as the member for Morse dubbed the Palliser organization last 
years, because those generally are the things which were said to this Regina conference by none other than 
Bill Heenan of Regina, who is, it just happens, a leading member of the Palliser Wheat Growers. The 
member for Moosomin pronounces the name right, and he has probably been at the same meetings on a 
regular basis so he would know him. 
 
If they follow Heenan’s lead they will be telling Saskatchewan producers that it’s Ciba-Geigy and Cargill 
and the rest whose brief they carry, and not the prairie producers’. 
 
I hope the points I have tried to register establish the point that granting patenting rights is in the corporate 
agri-business’ best interest and not in the public interest. 
 
I hope I am wrong in my predictions about the members opposite, Mr. Speaker. I hope that in spite of these 
things, Mr. Speaker, members opposite will join with us in supporting this resolution for the reasons I have 
given and for the reasons I expect my colleague to add, and in the best interest of Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Instead of following the lead of Palliser and the spokesmen of the dominant agri-chemical giant, members 
should consider views and attitudes more broadly representative of Saskatchewan’s agricultural community. 
For instance, members might consider the view of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
Does the SFA take the view, like Palliser, that farmers should quit going to meetings, stay at home and pay 
attention to their farming? Is that the view of the major farm organization in Saskatchewan? No, Mr. 
Speaker, not at all, in fact far from it. Here is a sample of what the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture 
has to say about plant breeders’ rights, in the context of a brief outlining their view of farming policy for the 
1980s. 
 
First, they say the federal government must maintain absolute control over the licensing of plant varieties. 
Furthermore, they say no change should be made without fully consulting the agricultural community. 
 
Secondly, they ask for a commitment to ensure increased public funding and plant breeding, and related 
agricultural research. 
 
Thirdly, they say that royalties from public plant breeding programs should be returned to the public research 
institutions, not corporate agri-business, as would be the case from granting patent privileges, Mr. Speaker. 
Furthermore, they call for strengthened 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2644 
 

competition laws and the use of FIRA (foreign investment review agency) to prevent the concentration of 
power over plant varieties, and the call for public control over pricing and public banking of plant genetic 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I agree with every one of those policies spelled out by the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Agriculture. In my remarks I hope I have been able to demonstrate the reasons why I believe the federation is 
on the right track. I hope all members will conclude they are on the right track. 
 
A decision by this Assembly doesn’t need to be delayed either, Mr. Speaker. The issues involved have been 
in the forefront of public discussion for at least two or thee years. All members have had ample time and 
opportunity to consider the facts. They have no legitimate reason for ducking the issue here today, and I hope 
they won’t. 

 
Solid support for the motion may influence federal Agriculture Minister Whelan to reconsider his ill thought 
out plan, as I hope all members support the motion in the best interest of Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
I thank members for this opportunity to advance the case for this resolution and I am pleased to so move, 
seconded by the member for Pelly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. N. LUSNEY (Pelly): — Mr. Speaker, in seconding this motion, I want to make it clear that I regard the 
question of whether or not we have plant breeders’ rights legislation as extremely important. It is very 
important to prairie grain growers, to consumers of our cereal grains, both in Canada and in our foreign 
markets, and it is important to the future of scientific agricultural research all around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the present time, the Liberal government is once again advancing the idea of plant breeders’ 
rights. And they are doing so for two reasons. First is because it will permit the federal government to do 
some more budget trimming, just as they did in so many other worthwhile areas prior to the May, 1979 
election. At that time we saw the Trudeau government refuse to go on funding cost-shared programs in 
health, social services, post-secondary education and highways. Now we see them ready to cut back on 
money for proper agricultural research. It may save money for Ottawa, some money in the short run, but I 
say in the long run we will be very sorry if our public plant breeding system at our research stations and 
universities do not get the financial support the past federal governments have seen fit to extend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I am on this point I think the Blakeney government should get some credit for setting up 
the Saskatchewan Agricultural Research Fund to attempt to take over some of the federal responsibilities is 
yet another area that the federal Liberals are leaving high and dry financially. 
 
The second reason for the federal government’s support of plant breeders’ rights legislation is that it will 
help the corporate friends of the two old line parties, help them to make money — millions and hundreds of 
millions of dollars. That’s why federal Liberal and Conservative members of parliament have endorsed the 
idea of plant breeding right. It means millions of dollars for their corporate friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, plant breeders’ rights will permit the company to patent new seed 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2645 
 

varieties and charge the farmers for each bushel of seed he buys. Since many of the new varieties will be 
hybrids, the farmer will have to return to the market each year for seed and each year the company will get a 
cut on the seed he must have to remain in business. And, Mr. Speaker, the companies involved are the giants 
of the international corporate elite. 
 
Royal Dutch Shell now has the biggest single share of the seed breeding business in the world, having 
purchased North American Plant Breeders’ and Agripro Incorporated . International Telephone and 
Telegraph recently purchased O.M. Scott and Sons. That will be good news for the Third World, Mr. 
Speaker, to know that friendly companies like IT&T are now in the seed business. 
 
The huge multinational Sandoz recently purchased Northrup King, the biggest seed company in the United 
States. Monsanto now owns Farmers’ Hybrid Company. Union Carbide owns Keystone Seed Company. I 
know this will warm the hearts of the member for Moosomin, who stepped out of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
because last year he expressed his warm affection for Cargill; Cargill Grain recently purchased Dorman 
Seeds, PAG and Kroeker Seeds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is bad enough that the federal government seems intent on allowing these huge transnational 
corporations to have their tentacles in the pockets of Saskatchewan farmers but the implications are much 
more widespread than that. 
 
The large chemical companies and conglomerates that now own the seed companies have been pushing their 
products into the Third World. The new high-yielding varieties are too good to pass up for the farmers in 
third world countries. This is where a very real danger begins to loom. Almost everything grown for food in 
Canada, with the exception of a few wild berries, has its genetic origins in the Third World. In parts of Asia, 
Africa and Latin American, subsistence farmers grow crops, which due to diverse topography and 10,000 
years of agricultural activity, have fantastic variety. These areas of extreme genetic diversity are called 
Vavilov centres after their discoverer. 
 
It is this very diversity of the crops in the fields of many third world countries that has allowed agriculture to 
be viable at all. Disease, drought or some insect pest could not successfully attack all the different varieties 
in the fields at once, and thus diversity meant some portion of the crops would always survive. 
 
The hundreds of different strains of seeds in the Vavilov centres have also been important to us here in North 
America. Our public plant breeders have repeatedly used the parent plant material from Turkey, Peru and 
North Africa to develop plants suitable for this part of the country. Even today our new plant varieties can, in 
many cases, not be duplicated without the parent stock in the Vavilov centres of extreme diversity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at this very moment, the Vavilov centres are being threatened by the huge seed 
companies that are arms of the multinational corporations. The seeds which the third world farmers have 
used to put in their crop for thousands of years now have competition from the new hybrids and miracle 
varieties promoted by the likes of Monsanto, Sandoz, Union Carbide and Cargill. 
 
You cannot blame the farmers of the Third World, Mr. Speaker. They need the increased yields of the new 
varieties. But we can blame the large global corporations and their seed companies for brining the centres of 
extreme genetic diversity to the edge of extinction with no apparent concern about the future if disease 
happens to strike our 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2646 
 

relatively few modern seed varieties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many noted experts have predicted grave consequences should the plants of the Vavilov centres 
be lost for all time. Three-quarters of our bread wheat grown in Canada comes from four varieties; 92 per 
cent of our flax comes from four varieties; 64 per cent of our barley comes from three varieties; and 96 per 
cent of our rapeseed production is accounted for by four varieties. Without the genetic diversity available to 
plant breeders in the Vavilov centres, our North American agriculture is in a very vulnerable position should 
disease or pestilence strike. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of whether or not to implement plant breeders’ rights legislation has generated a fair 
amount of discussion throughout Canada. As usual we see the Conservatives and the Palliser spokesmen 
aligning themselves with their corporate friends in support of the legislation, as they have with rail line 
abandonment, as they have with the move into western Canada of Cargill and as they have in their attack on 
the open market system. 
 
Plant breeders’ rights legislation would only encourage the private breeders to concentrate on varieties which 
would bring the most profit, leaving the public breeders to develop the non-profitable varieties which may be 
required in different areas of the country. Mr. Speaker, plant breeders’ rights may benefit the Atlantic 
provinces, B.C. and Ontario, where varieties imported from other parts of the world could be of importance 
because of greater variations in climate and soil conditions along with the advantages of better production. 
However, we also have some disadvantages. On the Prairies we have problems right now with the separation 
and shipment for the various categories of grain varieties. This would probably increase with the 
introduction of a multitude of mediocre varieties by the private breeders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a proliferation of new varieties combined with an extensive advertising campaign would make 
it very difficult for an average grain farmer to make a wise choice in selecting the kinds of seeds best suited 
for his area. The result would of course be a sizable financial loss to the farmer if he should make the wrong 
choice. 
 
We have a public plant breeding system which guarantees high quality and performance of plant varieties 
suitable to western Canada and provides us with unbiased information regarding many of these varieties. At 
present in Saskatchewan we rely on research stations and university plant breeding institutions for the 
information. 
 
With the introduction of new varieties from private breeders, the provincial governments would then have to 
provide staff, facilities and funds to evaluate and gather information on different varieties which would be 
required for the production to make a choice on the variety best suited for his area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a speech delivered over a year ago in Saskatoon by the Minister of Agriculture, Eugene 
Whelan, he seemed to indicate that involvement of multinational companies in plant breeding would bring 
nothing but benefits to farmers of Canada. But when you look at the companies which, in anticipation of this 
legislation, are buying up small seed companies, it would be rather naive of the federal Minister of 
Agriculture to believe and to suggest that the interests of Monsanto, Union Carbide or many of the other 
companies would be in developing a better seed variety for the producers. 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2647 
 

What is more likely is that we would see these companies developing hybrid varieties which would respond 
only to certain chemicals produced by those companies. As a result producers would be forced to purchase 
seed in conjunction with the necessary chemicals in order to be able to produce a crop and to produce food 
for this country. 
 
We in Canada should not allow the powerful corporate giants of the world to reach into the pockets of our 
grain growers so they can finance the ultimate destruction of the genetic parent stock of our agriculture 
produce. Canada is no doubt viewed as a rich market for many companies like Shell, Union Carbide, 
Monsanto, IT&T and Cargill. They would dearly love to further expand the hold they now have on the seed 
business around the world. 
 
But we have to say not to them and to plant breeders’ rights. We must say no because our farmers do not 
need another hand reaching into their wallets. We must say no because the horrible results of wiping out the 
diverse genetic stock in the third world countries is something we should play no part in financing. Finally, 
we must say no to plant breeders’ rights legislation because there is something highly immoral about paying 
money to a corporate patent holder before you are allowed to produce food in a starving world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am certain many of the concerned members in this House will be very pleased to support the 
motion put forward by the member for Shaunavon because it is in the best interests of the province and of 
the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. L.W. BIRKBECK (Moosomin): — Mr. Speaker, I just want to say a few words on the motion put 
before the Assembly by the member for Shaunavon. I want to say firstly there is no way in the member’s 
wildest dreams that he could foresee the opposition’s position on this motion or anything for that matter. Just 
absolutely no possibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have to reflect very briefly on the motion itself, where it in the first part recognizes the 
benefits of this proposed legislation, the plant breeders’ rights. And then in the latter part of the motion it 
asks members of this Assembly to urge members of parliament to defeat the legislation. So it would appear, 
Mr. Speaker, that the member for Shaunavon (I would suspect speaking on behalf of the government) is 
attempting to play both sides of the issue. Now, Mr. Speaker, an issue of this nature is not one that one 
should attempt to play both sides of. It is a matter that is, I would suspect, a very strong concern of our 
agricultural sector and not an issue which members should be attempting to gain support on from both 
camps, if you like. 
 
Of course the arguments he furthered were in opposition to the legislation, not mentioning what benefits may 
or may not be derived from it for the producers and subsequently the consumers. Obviously, Mr. Speaker, 
the member’s observations as he discussed his motion were not (as he attempted to lead the House) in terms 
of facts, but again back to the old philosophical argument of those terrible multinationals which are there 
lurking in the dark to damn us all sooner or later. I don’t think from my point of view at least, Mr. Speaker, 
that that is a reasonable viewpoint to take, for any member of the Assembly to use a kind of a scare tactic, if 
you like, to promote support for a particular concept or motion or legislation or whatever. 
 
We can’t help but reflect on the old medicare scare the government used in the last election. It would seem, 
Mr. Speaker, that the member for Shaunavon is using more of less the same kinds of arguments, and so to a 
lesser degree, I might add, is the member for Pelly. In his remarks the member for Pelly put his case more 
adequately and more 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2648 
 

precisely and kept his arguments more to the facts, although he ranged a bit from time to time to that 
philosophical scare of the multinationals. 
 
Now let’s get back to where it all began. Let’s be clear on one thing; it all began with the Liberals and it 
happens to be that the Liberals and the NDP are a lot closer than a lot of people would have them, but not 
maybe as close as I know them to be. Certainly, Mr. Broadbent’s and Mr. Trudeau’s meetings and 
suggestions that the two parties should get together clearly indicates the Liberals are no different than the 
NDP, only they move a little faster I might suggest. For any of those who are opposed to the NDP and 
associate it with socialism, I suggest that the Liberals have you beaten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you reflect on that legislation you say, all right, the first thing to concern ourselves with 
is that the Liberals brought it in. Then the member for Shaunavon proceeds to paint the scenario that in six 
short months the Progressive Conservative government of Joe Clark did not change that legislation and 
throw it out. There were many things that the Joe Clark government did not get to do, but not nearly as many 
as the things that it did do. Mr. Speaker, surely in that short space of time they were able to make many gains 
in transportation in the agricultural sector in particular. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, the point which needs to be made at this juncture is that it was the NDP federally, 
Broadbent and his boys, if I may refer to them as that, who brought on the election with a motion of non-
confidence which ultimately saw the Liberals and the NDP gain back together to defeat the Joe Clark 
government. If you are concerned about plant breeders’ rights legislation, I might ask you what is the 
difference between 16 cents a gallon excise tax and 18 cents a gallon excise tax? Certainly the point in the 
matter is that your Liberal government, which you brought into power by putting the vote of non-confidence 
before the House of Commons, did achieve nothing in terms of anything constructive. But one thing it did 
achieve was that it put your party, federally out of any perspective of power or influence on the House of 
Commons in any matter. 
 
Had the House of Commons remained the same and Joe Clark’s government remained in power, your party 
federally might well have had some influence in working with both the major parties, the Liberal Party and 
of course the Progressive Conservative Party in bringing about the necessary changes as you see them in the 
legislation. So, the bottom line on all of this is that the legislation is now back on the books and being forced 
by our agricultural minister because of the actions of your federal party, Broadbent and his boys. They 
brought this on and in so ding gave up the only power your party had federally to fight any legislation that it 
deemed not in the best interests of Canadians at large. 
 
As far as the multinationals having a finger in all of this (or a thumb, or whatever may be the case) and 
producing only chemical s which would affect the particular breeds of plants that were promoted by their 
group (if you like), that is a pretty far-out scenario to be painting here in the legislature. Surely that would be 
a matter I would want to see some substantiation of, to charge that these companies are going to do such a 
thing. I don’t know how there could be any examples since the legislation is not in place. I don’t know how 
you could cite any situations where that has happened. It is purely hypothetical here in this country and that 
is what we are talking about. I just fail to see how they can stretch this issue, Mr. Speaker, so far as to bring 
Cargill into the argument again. 
 
I think what we have to do, certainly, is to look at the plant breeders’ rights legislation and say, now look, if 
there is an opportunity to improve the breeds of plants that we 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2649 
 

have, to ultimately increase the production for our producers — not just here in Saskatchewan, but 
throughout our country — and following that be able to provide to the consumers of our country produce at a 
reasonable price during times of inflation, then I think the benefits of such legislation should be brought in. 
If, on the other hand, the case is well made that those benefits will not be available to the producers, and 
those benefits would not be available to the consumers, and such legislation wouldn’t be in the best interests 
of those two commodity groups, then certainly the legislation would have to be passed by. 
 
The member refers to the comments made by Frank Hamilton that it would maybe gain cautious support 
form the Conservatives. Mr. Speaker, I would suggest at this time that the legislation is under review, not 
only in the House of Commons and now before the members of this Assembly, but certainly commodity 
groups are making their arguments and making them well. It is certainly a matter of federal jurisdiction. I 
feel somewhat strange in saying that, as the Minister of Agriculture refers to it so often — well, that isn’t our 
problem, that’s a federal matter. Clearly, in this case, it is a matter of federal jurisdiction, certainly affecting 
the people of Saskatchewan. I suppose one could draw in indirectly the members of our legislature. Whether 
or not, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we on this side of the House will be able to support this particular motion put by 
the member for Shaunavon, will not be evident to members at this time. Our critic for the agriculture 
department will be wanting to put his case as it relates to this particular motion. Therefore, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 20 — Emergency Telephone Number 
 
MR. D.M. HAM (Swift Current) moved, seconded by the member for Nipawin (Mr. Collver): 
 

That this Assembly urges Sask Tel to immediately implement 911 as the emergency telephone number in 
the province of Saskatchewan recognizing the need for a three digit emergency telephone number since 
fire chiefs and police chiefs in the province of Saskatchewan have been calling for 911 as the emergency 
telephone number. 

 
He said: Mr. Deputy Speaker, it has been, until this day, a pleasure for this member to rise in this legislature 
to speak in debate and on motions and resolutions. Today it is not. I think it is not recognized by members of 
this legislature, we have seen the roots of democracy being torn at today. I only have one further statement 
before I speak on the resolution, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that is what in blazes are you people afraid of? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the control and use of fire, like the ability to reason and walk upright is a characteristic 
peculiar to human beings. Man has had fire as a companion and servant since long before the dawn of 
recorded history. Yet today his mastery is far from perfect and his understanding limited. There is today 
scarcely any aspect of our lives to which fire is not a contributing element. Far beyond the human needs for 
cooked food and heated shelter, fire is essential to a developed society based on technology. As man’s 
environment expanded from the cave (and I wonder how far from the cave that was after witnessing those 
amendments today), so did his application of 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2650 
 

fire and so did his need to understand and master the phenomenon. I thought we were mastering democracy 
in this legislature, but apparently we are not. 
 
Fire continues to extract an enormous and dreadful toll on society; a toll measured in pain, suffering an 
death; a toll which is also measured in wasteful destruction of property. Not sparing historical or cultural 
treasures, fire has economic costs which tend always to depress the standard of living. 
 
Man’s understanding of fire, imperfect though it is, has been sufficient to enable him to develop the 
technology of control to a reasonably advanced state. Indeed, our failure to minimize the fire threat to life 
and property lies not in the lack of technology or available means, but rather in social attitudes, in business, 
economics and practical politics. 
 
Fire is not perceived by most people as a significant personal threat to themselves though they acknowledge 
the existence of the danger of fire. (And I didn’t acknowledge any danger with the existence of democracy 
until today). It is rarely personalized and the only in relation to others. For most persons fire is too remote a 
possibility to invoke an action response. The resulting apathetic attitude subverts fire prevention education 
and obstructs practical application of fire prevention knowledge. 
 
For the past number of years the fire chiefs of this province, both those of major cities as well as chiefs from 
smaller centres, involving volunteer and part volunteer department, have expressed a real concern for the 
loss of life and property resulting from delays in response to fire calls. hence the need for an emergency fire 
number such as 911. 
 
To give you some history on the status of 911, the following: 911 is a three-digit telephone number 
designated for public use throughout the United States in reporting an emergency and requesting emergency 
assistance. It is intended as a nation-wide telephone number giving the public direct access to an emergency 
answering centre. The concept of a nation-wide telephone number was first realized in Great Britain more 
than 30 years ago with the country’s establishment of 999 on a national scale. Other countries in Europe and 
elsewhere have since provided their citizens with a similar uniform emergency telephone number. 
 
In the United States (incidentally first in the North American continent) official impetus for the development 
of a nation-wide telephone number was provided by the 1967 recommendation of the president’s 
commission of law enforcement and administration of justice, that a single number should be established for 
reporting police emergencies. Other federal governments and agencies of various government officials 
supplied a further stimulus. In 1968 the American Telephone and Telegraph Company announced that it 
would make the digits 911 available for national implementation. 
 
The intense interest in the concept itself can be attributed primarily to the recognition of several relevant 
characteristics for modern society — increased incident of crimes, accidents, medical emergencies, 
inadequacy of existing emergency reporting methods, and the continued growth and mobility of population. 
In March of 1973 the office of telecommunications policy, executive office of the president, issued a 
national policy statement which recognized the benefits of number 911; encouraged the nation-wide 
adoption of 911; and provided for the establishment of a federal information centre on 911. Over three 
hundred 911 systems representing communities of all sizes and serving total populations of over 22 million 
are currently in operation. The overwhelming majority of communities which have provided 911 report 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2651 
 

positive experiences and consider 911 an important component of their total emergency response capability. 
 
A single number, both easy to remember and possessing a short dialling tone, in event of fire is more vital 
than an emergency number for any other situation, where immediate help is required because of the 
confusion and excitement that occurs as a result of the rapid increase of the dangers to life as the fire 
progresses. A trapped victim’s possibility of survival under uncontrolled fire conditions is reduced 
drastically within the pursuing minutes of the discovery of a fire, unlike many other emergency situations. In 
the past we find that many wrong numbers have and are being dialled under fire conditions, causing a delay 
in response of fire suppression equipment. 
 
The seven digits required in many areas of the province increases both the time in dialling and the possibility 
of dialling the wrong number. (I was hoping, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Premier would be here today to hear 
some of this and I wonder where he is today?) Looking for a number in the directory is time consuming, and 
in some instances an impossibility because of a lack of power for light, or smoke conditions in the building. 
In some instances a delay results because the dialler reverts to the only alternative, and that is dialling the 
telephone operator, which presents two problems. Firstly, you often wait a period of from 6 to 8 rings before 
the busy operator answers. Secondly, when the message is passed on to the fire department it often lacks 
important and vital information for the dispatcher. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d now like to list the reasons why 911 is of benefit to the public and the communities 
of Saskatchewan. Only one number to remember — an individual needing to summon emergency aid or 
report a crime, fire, or medical emergency is often severely emotional and perhaps, under physical stress. He 
may not know or may forget the proper seven-digit number to call. If a local directory is available he may be 
confronted with a confusing array of telephone numbers. If he is a stranger in the community, his plight is 
intensified because he may not even know the political jurisdiction in which he is located. (I’m questioning 
today as to whether I’m in a democratic society or not myself, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You people may be next. 
It may happen to you someday so I wouldn’t be too critical. You shouldn’t sleep at night as a matter of fact, 
Mr. Health Minister.) It’s an easy number to remember. In times of stress even a simple well-known seven 
digit number can quickly be forgotten or confused and the numbers transposed. 
 
As the use of 911 in this country increases, so will the familiarity with the number increase until dialling 911 
becomes a nearly automatic response in the event of an emergency. An easy number to dial, faster access to 
emergency services; the position of the numbers 911 on both the dial and touch-tone telephones, can be 
easily located by most persons. The possibility of misdialling is somewhat remote. Dialling a three digit 
number is obviously easier and faster than dialling a seven digit number. 
 
I should interject here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is with some interest I was able to find out today that the lone 
NDP member in the Alberta legislature receives in excess of $75,000 a year in the form of grants and 
assistance. Nothing to do with it at all. This is supposed to be a democratic institution. 
 
The increased ease of reporting emergencies through 911, together with the communities’ interest in 
providing the public with a service, appears to have created greater awareness and acceptance of public 
agencies and a heightened sense of citizen responsibility. 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2652 
 

It would be of special benefit to travellers and new residents. Travellers are unfamiliar in surroundings 
they’re not acquainted with and therefore are in particularly vulnerable positions should they need 
emergency assistance. By providing 911 service, communities not only assist their citizens but many others, 
such as tourists and business people on whom their economy may depend. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 911 answering centre personnel are trained in the techniques of obtaining complete 
information from person who may be unable to adequately communicate their request for assistance. 
 
Use of 911 has the potential of providing public safety and other agencies with a number of further benefits, 
potential reduction in the total or true response time, as measured from the time of detection of the incident 
to the time of notification to an agency (the second stage during this part of the response cycle can be critical 
in many emergency situations); better co-ordination between emergency services, and especially vulnerable 
capability when multiple services are required to handle a single incident. 
 
Another benefit is immediate identification of an emergency and thus priority calls. Other benefits are further 
potential for improving data collection and analysis procedures, opportunity for identifying necessary 
improvements and modifications because proper planning for 911 requires review of current methods and 
capabilities of handling emergencies, increased public confidence in the ability of emergency resources to 
respond to the need. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are but a few concerns in relation to my resolution. I would encourage all 
members of the legislature to bring our province into line with most other Canadian provinces with respect 
to 911. 
 
One further note, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I should add to the record for the information of all concerned, 
statistics in Saskatchewan have indicated that deaths by fire in our province in 1974 were 42 and in the 
subsequent years to 1979 went 26, 31, 39 (in 1978) and 49 (in 1979). Accidents have increased substantially 
from fires in Saskatchewan through years 1974-75-76 from a low of 18 in 1974, to 28 in 1975, and 48 in 
1976. 
 
I encourage all members of the legislature to seriously consider this. I suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for a 
government which is oriented to national control of everything, to a planned state — within every 
department we’ve heard bills come through the legislature. Since I have been involved (since 1975) it has 
been the attitude of the government to make things efficient, to make them provincially wide and make them 
available to all citizens of Saskatchewan. Therefore, with that attitude, I think it is incumbent that the 
Minister of Telephones and the Government of Saskatchewan seriously consider implementing 911, not as 
has been suggested in the past (at least those who choose shall have) but make it available through subsidies 
by the government in order to save the citizens of Saskatchewan from harm and potential death. 
 
MR. J.L. SOLOMON (Regina North-West): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a number of things I 
would like to say about 911 service. I wanted to draw to the attention of the House one very significant 
aspect of 911 and it is this. The service itself is the function and the responsibility of the community. In other 
words, the main answering location or 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2653 
 

answering bureau is situated in a location, Mr. Speaker, chosen by the municipal authority. In addition, the 
municipality is also responsible for the staffing of the answering bureau. The staff must be fully trained and 
knowledgeable in all aspects of each participating safety agency. It is essential therefore, Mr. Speaker, that 
there be agreement between municipalities within the telephone exchange served by 911 and between the 
safety agencies within the municipalities. 
 
Our government through Sask Tel is prepared to work with municipal authorities who express an interest in 
911 service. I understand that Sask Tel is prepared to provide any service and assistance which 
municipalities and safety agencies may require in establishing an emergency-call arrangement which 
effectively meets the needs of safety agencies organized to handle emergencies on a community basis from a 
common answering bureau. 
 
I would just like to say, Mr. Speaker, before I continue, that the 911 answering service has been under 
investigation by Sask Tel. I would like to add further comments but at this time I would beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 32 — Rail Safety 
 
MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North) moved, seconded by the member for Regina North-West (Mr. 
Solomon): 
 

That this Assembly urges the federal Minister of Transport to expand the pubic inquiry into the 
Mississauga accident to all major CNR and CP Rail terminals in Canada in order to determine whether 
proper safety and maintenance is being practised in the Canadian railway operation. 

 
He said: Mr. Deputy Speaker, in moving the resolution this afternoon it would appear tome this is one that 
could gain unanimous support on both sides of the House because all of us recognize the serious problems 
evident over the last number of years insofar as derailments are concerned on the various railroads and also 
the dangerous situation that’s quite evident. 
 
The motion calls and urges the federal Minister of Transport to expand the public inquiry into the 
Mississauga accident to all major CNR and CP Rail terminals in Canada in order to determine whether 
proper safety and maintenance is being practised in the Canadian railway operation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to go back just a few years and explain what has happened in the past and 
that has to do with what has been asked for and what has been requested by various groups in Canada — 
various organizations, the many brotherhoods of both CN and CP Rails, various public bodies — in order to 
try to bring about inquiry into the total railway industry as it may pertain to mishaps. I refer very briefly, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to September 4, 1969, when a bulletin was put out to all of the . . . I’m having quite a time 
trying . . . 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. I wonder if we could have a little bit of order in the House. If the 
Attorney General and the Leader of the Opposition would like to chat maybe they could go behind the bar. 
We are having a little trouble hearing the hon. member for Moose Jaw North. 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2654 
 

MR. SKOBERG: — It’s a fact that there is some very serious discussion going on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I take that into consideration. 
 
On September 4, 1969, there was a bulletin issued to all of the roadmasters on the Canadian National 
Railway system and it reads this way: 
 

As you are no doubt aware the increasing number of derailments on account of track conditions is a matter 
of grave concern throughout the railway industry as a whole. This concern is becoming more apparent, not 
only in the United States but in Canada as well. 

 
That went out to all the roadmasters in order for them to try and have more surveillance out, particularly the 
switches involved at that particular time with a sharp increase of derailments in those years. 
 
Again in 1969 a letter was directed. At that time I was in another House in this country. I was proud to be a 
member of parliament for Moose Jaw, proud to be a credited representative representing the people who 
elected me. At that time a letter was addressed to the then minister of transportation, Mr. Bryce Mackasey, 
and it had to do with track inspection. 
 
My words to him really asked him whether or not track maintenance came within the Railway Act or just 
exactly where the jurisdiction did lie. His response at that time, Mr. Speaker, was that the subject of track 
inspection would come under the Railway Act and the Canadian Transport Commission was responsible for 
administering the Railway Act. Again, we entered into the field that track inspection referred to the 
inspection of track and structures in regard to safety, for those opposite who may not be familiar with railway 
terminology. 
 
I might suggest at that time back in 1969 and 1970 we ran into a situation where the Canadian Transport 
Commission decided there should be some investigation. I make brief reference again to a letter in 1970 
addressed to the president of the Canadian Transport Commission, Mr. Pickersgill, over the signature of the 
assistant Canadian labor representative, Mr. McDuffe of the United Transportation Union. I quote a portion 
of that letter, Mr. Speaker, addressed to Mr. Pickersgill: 
 

As you are aware, the major railway companies in Canada have been systematically slaughtering their 
track and equipment maintenance and inspection forces. The process of reduction has developed to the 
point that it is fair to say that they are almost non-existent at some points and inadequate nearly 
everywhere. Operating crews literally fear for their lives and the number of recent train accidents which 
have occurred across the country support their contention that something is drastically wrong. 

 
Your commission recently announced they would hold a special public inquiry into the causes and 
circumstances connected with three recent rail accidents. We congratulate you on your action however, 
belated as it may be. We most strongly urge that you expand your inquiry to include all those which have 
recently occurred anywhere in the country. We further urge that your investigation include a very close 
examination of the maintenance and inspection services provided by the railways to determine to what 
degree they were a contributing factor to the accidents and whether or not they can 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2655 
 

be considered inadequate or adequate. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there is a tremendous amount of correspondence available over the years indicating very clearly 
that the railway brotherhoods were vitally concerned at that time and previous to that time with the 
maintenance and safety of operation in the railway industry. It is quite apparent that even though there was 
possibly some action taken, the fact of the matter remained that there were not enough inspectors put on staff 
to try to do something about it. 
 
I believe the public has a right to know the reasons and causes of the railway mishaps just the same as they 
learn the causes of air and sea accidents through public inquiries. It may be ironic but the railway mishaps 
were one of the few types of public mishaps that may occur throughout the country which do not have a 
public inquiry. The sea and air did have public inquiries. I strongly opposed at that particular time any 
general order or act which gives the commission the power to declare the extent to which information 
concerning the accidents, given by the railways, may be privileged. Mr. Speaker, that is still the case in most 
instances at this time in our history. There appears to be no justification for a veil of secrecy provided in 
legislation or regulations in keeping the public ignorant as to the cause of railway mishaps. 
 
I ask those opposite and I ask any members of the House this afternoon, after they read in the newspaper or 
hear on the air of rail mishaps, whether they ever hear of the real cause of those particular mishaps, and I 
believe the answer is usually no. Privileged information can only be justified when matters affecting our 
national security are concerned. It cannot be said that our national security is in jeopardy in so far as making 
public the cause of and the responsibility for railway mishaps. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the National Transportation Safety Board that was created by the transportation 
act in 1966, in the United States, came about as a result of such thinking and similar conditions to ours 
existed in that country at that time. The safety board as set up in the United States that that time determined 
the cause of accidents through direct investigations, public hearings. Although structurally located in the 
Department of Transportation, it was an autonomous agency. I do believe that still exists at this time in the 
United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, accidents or mishaps are caused in many cases by mechanical breakdowns or defects. I don’t 
suppose that is an outstanding statement at this time in our history. But naturally, one way to prevent 
mishaps attributable to mechanical failures is a preventive medicine type of approach — in other words, 
proper main terminal and intermediate terminal car and train inspection. Mr. Speaker, the information of car 
inspection staff at many terminals on both the CN and CP systems in my opinion contribute tremendously to 
the mishaps we are seeing today. 
 
We have to admit that with the advent of roller bearing equipment, the burnt-off journals may be as prevalent 
as when dope was used in the journal boxes. For those not familiar with railway terminology, the roller 
bearings which we all understand but a pad of dope with oil mixed into it that rotated about the journal on 
the cars. Even the member opposite might recognize that. 
 
However, the question must be asked as to how many cars are roller bearing equipped 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2656 
 

and being used in high-speed freight service at this time. I believe the answer today, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
majority of them are. But the other question has to be asked how many roller bearing cars have been found to 
be defective when mishaps do occur? 
 
I believe the entire structure of the cars must be considered when one is determining mishaps. As evidence 
indicates, some cars have a tendency to rock and sway much more than others, resulting in possible 
derailments. Mr. Speaker, anyone who has seen the movement of cars, particularly the potash cars, 
understand complete what that circumstance is all about. 
 
Under the Canada Labour Code, certain regulations are prescribed for the safety and health of persons 
employed upon or in connection with the operation of any federal work. Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that 
safety is a concern of both employees, employers, and the travelling public. Implementation and 
interpretation of all legislation and regulations is not the sole prerogative of management as some in 
management would like to presume. 
 
Conditions of roadbeds and possibly the sun kinds that occur in hot weather, the broken rails and turnover 
rails are all of concern to us. There’s no question mechanical improvements have resulted proportionately 
with a maintenance and operating efficiency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one can refer not too far back when section crews were responsible for a section of track, 
usually about 10 miles. They assumed a direct responsibility for a section of track and were in the main fully 
familiar with the soft spots, potential washout hazards such as beaver dams that build up, underground 
springs and the layouts of the roadbed generally. With the change to extended sections and shortage of time 
to patrol the track, this familiarity came to an end. Track patrols are not able to detect any appreciable change 
in conditions along the back from the right of way, with a resulting hazard of washouts and cave-ins. 
 
I’ll refer to one situation that occurred a number of years ago west of Moose Jaw — an incident where a 
CPR freight plunged into a body of water at mileage 20.5 in the Swift Current subdivision. For those who 
may now know where that is, it’s just around Besant Park. At that time it plunged into the ditch and the crew 
was submerged in water. In fact, there was one fellow riding on another diesel engine who was fortunate to 
get out of it because it was completely buried in the mud and water. The evidence indicated the track had 
been undermined by the water at that particular time in the spring. The crew had absolutely no warning of 
the impending derailment and while the diesel units and a number of cars ended up in the water, fortunately 
there were no fatalities in that incident. 
 
I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that if there had been section men, who I maintain are the backbone of any 
railway industry, that would not have happened because they would have been familiar with the back up of 
the water and the undermining of the roadbed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of referring to this incident (and we could refer to many of them) is to indicate 
what can and does happen when maintenance or track patrol is reduced. I feel confident that the railway 
transport committee, the Canadian Transport Commission investigators are aware of the mishaps and of this 
one in particular. They are aware of many mishaps but the problem is there isn’t enough manpower to do 
anything about it. 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2657 
 

Mr. Speaker, as an example of reduced track maintenance, one can refer to practically any subdivision in 
Saskatchewan or throughout Canada. I can assure you that when we look back a goodly number of years 
when we did have those section men, we did not have the type of derailments we are having today. It’s my 
opinion, such as it is, those are some of the real problems that are still the real concerns of the operating 
brotherhoods and the operating men and the railway companies in the particular instance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order to bring about some type of recognition of the real problems, back in the years of ’70-
’71 and upward, there was an effort made by many parliamentarians, by the brotherhoods and other 
concerned groups in the communities to try to get the railway transport committee to have a public inquiry. 
Finally, on November 24, 1970, there was a railway transport committee to have a public inquiry of rail 
mishaps. Some of those terms of reference I’ll refer to very briefly, included such things as the maintenance 
and inspection of roller bearings and solid bearing rolling stock; the location of maintenance inspection staff, 
the rolling stock inspection procedure at major terminals and intermediate points en route, standards and 
procedure at major terminals and intermediate points en route, standard and procedures of maintenance of 
trace instructors, allocation of staff, materials and equipment for adequate inspection of maintenance of track 
structures and signals, standards and procedures of maintenance and operation of all types of railway 
signalling installations, track motor operation with centralized traffic control; instruction given to train 
crews; and a procedural follow-up by railway companies when accidents occur, including accidents 
involving dangerous commodities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these were some of the terms of reference and they go on to include about 14 terms. Following 
that, there were public hearings and a good amount of public input. There were reports issued by the railway 
transport committee concerning this situation. I’ll refer to one paragraph which was preamble to the initial 
report of the railway safety inquiry. I quote: 
 

Between 1967 and 1970, the committee (and that’s the railway transport committee) had watched with 
growing concern an increase in the number of serious accidents on Canadian railways. This gave cause for 
anxiety, anxiety not solely in absolute terms, but also because accidents involving modern, heavier tonnage 
trains were correspondingly of greater magnitude than had been the case in the past. 

 
Another factor of grave concern was a rapidly increasing involvement in railway accidents of cars carrying 
a wide variety of dangerous commodities whose cargo, if accidentally released, could pose a serious 
hazard not only to railway employees but also the lives and property of the public. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this inquiry came about with this type of preamble and came about with some 
recommendations. One of them in particular, which all of us are concerned about, is the handling of 
dangerous commodities. I might say that at that time they went into an in-depth study of the handling of 
dangerous commodities on rail and came up with some suggestions. It was suggested here that these 
accidents raised certain urgent and critical questions for the inquiry. Were dangerous commodities creating 
such hazards that the regulatory authority in Canada was being confronted with a new dimension in 
destructiveness and danger to life and limb? The answer to this question certainly appears to be in the 
affirmative. If so, what were the reasons for this, other than the obvious factor that modern industrial 
technology is producing larger quantities of dangerous material and having a greater destructive potential per 
ton or per car then eve before. They asked various questions, Mr. Speaker, such as: is new 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2658 
 

railway technology increasing the hazards? Are railway practices and rules for dangerous commodities, 
many of which date back 20 or 30 years, adequate to meet the increased hazards? Are these possibly now 
inadequate rules at least being properly applied by railway personnel? Is there sufficient enforcement? How 
much research in the causes of and the prevention of such destruction is being done? 
 
They also proposed that a task force on the carriage by rail of dangerous commodities be created. This was 
immediately and enthusiastically seconded by the railways. The proposal was accepted and the committee 
addressed itself to its implementation. Mr. Speaker, that task force was created in those years. They spent 
many years going into the dangerous commodity situation and the dangerous situation of handling that type 
of commodity. The task force consisted of the committee, the CNR, CP Rail and the Canadian Railway 
Labour Association, which was made up of all railway brotherhoods. Its terms of reference are simple; to 
review the hazards attendant on the carrying of dangerous commodities by rail, and to recommend to the 
committee such measures as will achieve the highest level of safety compatible with the economy of 
operation, and the expeditious movement of goods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of other reports were made form that first report from the railway transport 
committee safety inquiry. The committee concluded that it should, as soon as staff resources permit, form an 
accident investigation team at its headquarters in Ottawa, responsible for the conduct of investigations. I 
might suggest again, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe there has been adequate staff resources provided for that 
accident investigation team. As suggested here, the team would be composed of senior officers with 
professional or technical staff appropriate to the needs of individual accidents who would give direction to 
the field staff and the conduct of investigation. It would also deal directly at the accident scene, participate in 
the investigation in concert with the field staff, conduct its investigations later at the local level by 
interviewing railway employees, officers, and others, including witnesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been involved with the railway industry since 1944. To date I have yet to see a railway 
transport committee of the Canadian Transport Commission come to the railway employees affected to try to 
determine whether or not, or what they consider to be the uses of any accidents. I believe someone is 
forgetting what the first report said back in the year it was originally issued. Mr. Speaker, there are many 
other areas that we could deal with in so far as the entire railway safety inquiry is concerned. 
 
Again, on January 4, 1974 the third report on the safety inquiry was conducted. I might just say here again 
the conclusion of that particular report from the Canadian Transport Commission stated that the number of 
derailments by track conditions on Canadian National and Canadian Pacific in 1972 were three times that of 
1959, and nearly double that in 1969. Because of this continuing increase in derailment to date, it must be 
concluded that in the foreseeable future the number of derailments on account of track conditions will 
continue to increase with a continuing increase in the number of injuries and deaths as a result unless 
immediate action is taken. Mr. Speaker, again that third report was issued in 1974. It encompassed about a 
two-year span of hearings and investigation. 
 
Certain other areas were involved at that time. They talked about another conclusion the derailments because 
of broken rail. It may be of interest to those in the House at this time, Mr. Speaker, to realize now on the 
main lines of both Canadian Pacific and Canadian National we have what we call ribbon rail which is brand 
new steel put in most 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2659 
 

recently. There were as many broken rails with the ribbon rail as there were with the conventional type of 
steel. The conclusion of the committee back in ‘74 states that if some of the best type of testing equipment, 
the ultrasonic, or some other sources were made available, and more frequently operated on the Canadian 
railways, there would be an appreciable increase in the number of defects, particularly vertical split heads 
and defects in rail joints, detected and removed form the track before they could possibly cause derailment. It 
would appear the suggested increase in testing of rail would reduce costly derailment and the savings thus 
affected could offset the cost of more frequent testings; in other words, increase safety of trains operating at 
no additional cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this third report referred to other causes of derailment, if more staff, material and equipment 
were available, more prompt action could be taken to correct these conditions including Sundays on all 
mainline tracks and important branchline tracks was needed, establishment of links of each section of track 
to be respected so it could be careful and adequately inspected within a normal eight-hour day. 
 
These are some of the things, Mr. Speaker, that were suggested under the third report of that railway 
transport commission safety inquiry. But in effect I am not too sure what really has happened. 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2660 
 

I might now turn to something more recent. All of us are well aware of the Mississauga mishap and what 
happened in that incident. The public inquiry is going on. We are also well aware of the MacGregor mishap. 
We know what happened in that situation. it is very ironic that the very people who were transporting or 
responsible for the movement of the dangerous commodity advised the press — advised the CBC that 
morning — that there was no danger whatsoever. When the CBC reports arrived on the scene (and other 
reporters), what did they find? The only person wearing a gas mask was the person from the area in control 
of that particular dangerous commodity. I think this is a clear indication that there is not the type of 
surveillance that should be involved when you are handling dangerous commodities, whether they be on the 
rail, on the road or wherever they possibly may be. 
 
I would like to refer very briefly, Mr. Speaker, to some of the somewhat recent occurrences. There has been 
every effort made to try to expand the Mississauga public inquiry into all of Canada, at he major terminals in 
particular. It is my opinion (and the opinion of many people who have a practical knowledge in the industry) 
that if public inquiries are conducted in the main terminals across Canada on both the CN and CPR, you will 
have input and you will have briefs and you will have statistics which affect that particular terminal. What I 
am frightened of is that they will have one public inquiry of MacGregor and the other one at Mississauga 
(which is going on now); they will have the main representation made there which will then curtail that 
inquiry and the report will be made. 
 
In view of the fact that the bill on dangerous commodities has now passed the House of Commons most 
recently (I believe last Friday) and is now referred to the standing committee on transportation and 
communication, we are trying to get them to expand that inquiry into the main terminals across the country. 
Letters have been written to the United Transportation Union and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, 
the Brotherhood of Railway Carmen, the maintenance workers and all the main brotherhoods affected. 
 
In doing some research, which I have kept track of over the last couple of years, it is very significant the 
number of derailments which are occurring on CP and the similar experience is evident in the Canadian 
National — which I will leave to someone else. On the CP (and there is one here in particular which the hon. 
member for Indian Head Wolseley will recognize as he has raised it in the House and justifiably so) we go 
back to the major wrecks in Saskatchewan, which I kept track of, from 1978 up to April 3, 1980: on 
February 6, 1978 at Balgonie, 29 cars and 2 units derailed — very, very fortunate no one was killed in that 
one; March 1, 1978 at Rouleau, 1 car derailed — there again, very fortunate; another one at Caron, May 31, 
1978 — just 1 car; November 27, 1978 at Grand Coulee, 23 cars derailed; December 20, 1978 at Roche 
Percee, 40 cars derailed — not counting the one that happened here less than a week ago when the truck hit 
the diesel engine at the public crossing (that was protected by the way); December 31, 1978 at Parkbeg, 16 
cars; January 15 at Wolseley, 43 cars, 2 units — cause indicated was a broken rail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that one at Wolseley could have been as serious, if not more serious, than the one at 
MacGregor. MacGregor was out in the country; the populated area was not surrounding the derailment. The 
one at Wolseley was within the town limits and was practically downtown opposite the main street. Beside 
the derailment, as the hon. 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2661 
 

member opposite will realize and know, many people live in that area. If there had been an explosion there 
could have been a catastrophe there which would have made Mississauga look pretty sick, and I think it is 
something we have to recognize. 
 
Again on February 4, 1979, Milestone, 22 cars; again at Red Jacket, Saskatchewan, February 18, 1978, 21 
cars; July 21, 1979, Secretan, 15 cars; September 12, less than 9 days later at Meyronne, 16 cars; at Rouleau 
on January 9, 1980, 18 cars; April 3, 1980, Regina, right down here, 12 cars. Mr. Speaker, that is not 
including in the same period of time, another 50 derailments in Saskatchewan just on the Canadian Pacific 
Railway alone, which I have access to, or have been able to keep count of. 
 
What I’m really saying, Mr. Speaker, is we have to be serious about what is going on in so far as the 
transportation of dangerous commodities is concerned. We have to be serious in trying to bring pressure to 
bear on the Canadian Transport Commission, bring pressure to bear on the minister in charge of 
transportation federally (and I know he is concerned). We have to bring pressure to bear and try to expand 
the hearings across Canada. Somewhere along the line someone has to be answerable for what is going on. 
 
Many people may suggest from what I have been saying, I am very critical of the railway companies, but for 
those who are here this afternoon, we have what we call general operating instructions for handling 
explosives and other dangerous commodities, which tell exactly where these cares are supposed to be placed, 
and are placed in so far as the consist of a train is concerned. Bulletins are put out each month over the 
signature of the superintendent of the respective division giving instructions pertaining to the handling of the 
cars, and the locating of the cars within the consist of a train. It is also recognized in our part of the country 
that the railways have done a magnificent job of trying to detect the mishaps before they occur. 
 
On the main lines out of Moose Jaw — Moose Jaw to Broadview and east, Moose Jaw to Swift Current and 
west — they do have what they call the hotbox detector signals which will indicate when there is any defect 
on the running gear of the trains which pass over those hotbox detectors. They can tell whether or not there 
are any heated journals in such a way that the crews on the head end get an indication — a detector 
indication advising of the problem in such a way that they can stop. 
 
All of us realize that at Mississauga, the hotbox detectors were not installed at that time, and it is an ongoing 
process throughout the system. 
 
What I’m really saying, Mr. Speaker, is that I hope there will be support for this resolution, mainly so that 
the standing committee of transport and communication, federally, at this time who are sitting on this issue 
can at least have our support here at the provincial level, in urging the federal Minster of Transport to expand 
the public inquiry across Canada. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
MR. J.L. SOLOMON (Regina North-West): — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to expand the 
motion this afternoon ably presented by the member for Moose Jaw North. Because of his long railway 
career, the member for Moose Jaw North has a very special interest in ensuring that proper safety and 
maintenance is being practised in Canadian railway operations. 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2662 
 

Mr. Speaker, I, too, have had a special interest in proper safety and maintenance procedures (and still do) in 
railway operation. As a former brakeman of the CNR I share the concern of railway workers for safe working 
conditions. As the MLA for Regina North-West, I share the concern of my constituents who live on or next 
to the southern boundary of my constituency where the CN yards are located in Regina. As an urban MLA, I 
share the concern of all families who reside in urban areas who have a railway track located in their 
community; a concern that proper safety and maintenance procedures are being adhered to, to allow for the 
safe transport of dangerous chemicals and goods. 
 
I would like to inform the members in the Assembly this afternoon that I am wearing a lapel pin which was 
given to me by the union I was a member of for eight years, the United Transportation Union. I feel because 
of my experiences with the railway and with the union that very frequently the safety precautions taken are 
not necessarily safe enough to ensure injuries are minimized. 
 
I would like to point out to the members opposite as well and to hon. member of the House that the 
maximum speed CN trains travel through the yards located in Regina is 15 miles an hour. That is one of the 
safety precautions the railway does take but that doesn’t necessarily mean there will not be any accidents due 
to transportation of hazardous chemicals or goods. 
 
I strongly support this motion because I believe the recommendations which will result from the Mississauga 
inquiry should expand to all constituencies where hazardous chemicals are transported. I support the right of 
railway workers to safe working conditions and view with pride the achievements of my former fellow 
workers of CNR and all workers on Canadian railways. 
 
Between 1956 and 1975, Canadian railways workers increased the amount of freight they handled by 86.8 
per cent, Mr. Speaker. During the same period person-hours or man-hours, as some people refer to them, 
have decreased by 39.5 per cent. This type of increased productivity is responsible for a profit of $208 
million by CNR during 1979. The profit is up from $136 million in 1978 and once again proves the 
economic viability of government ownership, economic viability, coupled with the necessary and important 
transportation services provided through a Crown corporation, created to serve its owners, the people of 
Canada. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is my contention that railways must operate safely as well as profitably. The need for 
increased safety standards for railways has been demonstrated to the public by the two recent incidents at 
Mississauga, Ontario and MacGregor, Manitoba, as the member for Moose Jaw North has pointed out. 
 
I am concerned the passing of a bill to prevent disasters in the transportation of hazardous goods by rail, 
truck, ship or air, which was passed in principle last Friday in the House of Commons, will lull the public 
into a faire sense of security. 
 
The bill itself, aside from a few minor points, is basically a good one. It is similar to legislation introduced 
by the former Clark government in November, soon after the Mississauga accident. The Liberal bill is 
intended to create a single legislative authority on the transportation of dangerous goods. It provides uniform 
safety standards for the shipment of dangerous materials, ranging from toxic chemicals to explosives. All 
parties in the House of Commons agreed it is a bill that will provide badly needed 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2663 
 

protection. 
 
But, what hasn’t been pointed out is that the Canadian Transport Commission (CTC) already has all the 
power they need to enforce safe rail traffic. There is no reason to believe the CTC will be able to do better 
now under new amalgamated legislation than they did before. 
 
The problem is that while federal Tory and Liberal governments pay lip service to the idea of safe rail traffic, 
they are unwilling to make the financial commitment to make this possible. To be fair to the CTC, the 
chairman of the Canadian Transport Commission indicated last fall that the CTC budget was insufficient. 
About the same time, the CTC received a directive from treasury board to reduce staff by 100 persons. Not 
all of those people would be involved with safety inspections, but some of them inevitably would. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number of persons at the CTC involved with rail safety were cut back on a consistent basis 
in the past two years. Between 1979-80, safety inspectors were reduced from 107 to 105. That number is to 
be reduced further from 105 to 100 by the end of the fiscal year 1981 — reduction of five safety inspectors 
over the next year. 
 
It is my belief that what they should be doing is increasing the number of safety inspectors and hiring 
inspectors form industry who have had experience with rail and other transport facilities, rather than people 
from outside the industry with an axe to grind with the particular agency involved, whether it be the railways 
of the transports, ship or air. These reductions are being implemented despite the fact that, at the present 
time, there are not enough rail inspectors for properly carrying out the responsibility of the CTC for rail 
safety in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these cutbacks were first implemented under the Liberal government. They were continued 
under a Tory government and they are still continuing under the re-elected Liberal government. It is yet 
another case where the two old line parties are indistinguishable in their political opportunism and their lack 
of concern for the working people of Canada. 
 
Other components necessary for safe rail transportation have also been cut back. The railways themselves 
have eliminated 60,000 jobs between 1957 and 1977. Of these 60,000 jobs, 31,000 were involved with road 
and equipment maintenance. Both the Mississauga and MacGregor derailments were caused by faulty 
equipment. The car responsible for the Mississauga incident was supposedly overhauled just three months 
earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the March 1980 edition of the United Transportation Union News Canada newspaper, 
and it is a fairly comprehensive report of the Mississauga railway accident inquiry. I would like for the 
benefit of the members present today, to read into the record some of the observations they make in this 
article. I quote: 
 

The derailment of the rail cars containing dangerous chemicals that resulted in the mass evacuation of 
Mississauga, Ontario last November could have been prevented according to the brief being presented on 
behalf of the United Transportation Union before the Mississauga railway accident inquiry. The brief being 
delivered by the Canadian Railway Labour Association contended that inadequate standards of safety and 
the handling of dangerous commodities caused the derailment and might not have happened if the 
Canadian Pacific as well as other railroads were required to adopt safety practices that are desirable and 
technologically possible, (such 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2664 
 

as the hotbox detectors which the member for Moose Jaw North referred to in his remarks). 
 

The brief said that rail safety is now dictated more by cost factors than by consideration for the public 
safety. Canadian Railway Labour Association executive secretary, Mr. Abbott, speaking on behalf of the 
15 unions representing Canadian railway workers, also strongly criticized the railway transport committee 
of the Canadian Transport Commission for what he described as the abdication of its responsibilities to the 
public. He said that the committee instead of rigidly enforcing railway safety measures in the interests of 
the public and railway workers simply permits the railways to police their own operations and write their 
own rules. Abbott recalled a safety inquiry conducted by the CTC’s railway committee in 1970, had 
revealed several crucial areas in which Canadian railway companies were operating below an acceptable 
level of safety. Unfortunately, he said the CTC did not act affirmatively to correct these inadequacies. The 
union chief cited several specific safety flaws in the railway’s operations, including the failure to install 
sufficient hotbox detectors and to convert unsafe friction bearings in boxcars to safer roller bearings. Both 
the railroads and the CTC were aware in 1970 of the need for hotbox detectors to prevent derailment, 
Abbott said. 

 
And yet 10 years later we have a potentially disastrous derailment that could have been avoided if 
technology known and perfected in the 1960s had been installed. Abbott said the 1970 inquiry had also 
clearly established the increased margin of safety provided by converting from friction bearing to roller 
bearing wheels. But again the CTC has not put pressure on the companies to convert to the safe type of 
wheel bearing. 

 
(I continue, Mr. Speaker.) The level of safety at which Canadian railways have been allowed to operate, 
said Abbott, has been dictated not by what is needed and is technologically feasible but solely by the 
economics of the individual companies. The union brief continued that if the railways could prove that 
safety levels now required by society are beyond the company’s financial capability, it may be necessary to 
provide government subsidies to ensure the public is not subjected to the dangers of railway accidents. The 
most urgently needed reform, however, the brief stressed, is a much stricter enforcement of existing safety 
regulations by the CTC’s railway committee. 
 
The CTC has a duty to regulate the railway system too ensure the maximum level of safety possible. Safety 
must override the company’s balance sheet approach to their operations. The CTC has the responsibility to 
make sure that is the case. The union brief criticized the CTC’s shortage of inspection staff and its 
tendency to allow the railways to set their own levels of safety, especially in the transportation of toxic 
materials. 

 
The Mississauga derailment was entirely predictable, Abbott said, in light of the findings of the CTC’s 
1970 inquiry. The only question left unanswered in 1970, where regulatory action was not taken by the 
CTC’s railway committee, were simply when and where the derailment would occur and how bad it would 
be. The union official hastened to add that the safest method of transporting bulk commodities, including 
dangerous chemicals, is by rail. Any attempt to ship the transportation of dangerous goods from rail 



 
May 6, 1980 

 

2665 
 

to road transport on the assumption that it would be safer would be suicidal. Our highways are already 
dangerous avenues for such transportation and hundreds of additional tank trucks would multiply the risk 
of major accidents a thousand times. 

 
The only feasible answer to the Mississauga derailment, he added, is to take the steps we have 
recommended to ensure that rail safety is raised and kept to a level that will reduce the chance of another 
such accident to a minimum. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I hope the members took that article to heart and would consider it in their decision to 
support this motion. I think we must also recognize that no matter how good our safety practices are, some 
accidents are unavoidable, as the member opposite commented. Wherever possible dangerous goods should 
be rerouted around residential areas. A long-term solution must be to reduce the volume of dangerous goods 
we transport. We cannot risk another Mississauga in my opinion. Evacuation of 225,000 people alone cost 
the country millions of dollars for emergency relief and lost productivity. If the derailment had resulted in an 
explosion, many lives would have been lost and the costs increased many times. It is false economy to 
balance budget cutbacks in the area of rail safety against potential disaster. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to summarize my three main concerns. first, federal government 
cutbacks have reduced enforcement of rail safety regulations. Second, the railways themselves have 
drastically reduced the number of staff whose jobs directly affect safety. Examples were provided by the 
member for Moose Jaw North in his remarks. Third, only by increased safety precautions combined with a 
reduction in the volume of dangerous goods transported can we hope to avoid an increasing number of 
incidents like Mississauga in the future. 
 
I am in support of having hearings held in major terminals across Canada so that experienced workers and 
those who have been involved with derailments in other rail disasters can present briefs to ensure that the 
movement of hazardous goods is much safer than it already is. 
 
The Canadian public must be informed of the real dangers that railway workers are all too well aware of. For 
that reason and for those put forward by the member for Moose Jaw North I believe all members will want to 
support this resolution and I am pleased to second it and urge those opposite to bring it to a speedy and 
affirmative vote. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. W.J.G. ALLEN: — Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of remarks I would like to make on this topic. I see 
the hour is getting close to 5 o’clock so I wonder if I might be able to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre) moved second reading of Bill No. 01 — An Act to repeal 
An Act to Incorporate Consumers’ Co-operative Refineries Limited. 
 
Motion for second reading agreed and bill referred to the select standing committee on 



 
May 6, 1980 
 

2666 
 

private bills. 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre) moved second reading of Bill No. 02 — An Act to repeal 
An Act respecting Federated Co-operatives Limited, being an Act to amend and consolidate An Act to 
Incorporate Saskatchewan Co-operative Wholesale Society Limited. 
 
Motion for second reading agreed and bill referred to the select standing committee on private bills. 
 
MR. P.P. MOSTOWAY (Saskatoon Centre) moved second reading of Bill No. 04 — An Act to amend 
and consolidate An Act respecting Co-operative Superannuation Society. 
 
Motion for second reading agreed and bill referred to the select standing committee on private bills. 
 
MR. W.J.G. ALLEN (Regina Rosemont) moved second reading of Bill No. 05 — An Act to provide for 
exemption from taxation of Property of The Canadian Red Cross Society Saskatchewan Division. 
 
He said: Mr. Speaker, this particular bill deals with the exemption from taxation for the Canadian Red Cross 
Society. Members will recall, the last couple of sessions we have had similar types of bills. The agreement, I 
think, of the committee was to stick with the rule that this Assembly had set some years ago that we would 
require that people proposing these bills have the written authority of the local municipality involved. I 
informed a solicitor for the group of this rule of the Assembly. At this time there is one municipality which 
is involved and has given this written assurance. There are two that have not. So it will be my intention to 
move amendments in the private bills committee to exclude those two communities which have not. I 
thought I should give the members notice of that. 
 
With those few remarks I move that Bill No. 05 be now read a second time and referred to the select 
standing committee on private bills. 
 
Motion for second reading agreed and bill referred to the select standing committee on private bills. 
 
MR. J.L. SKOBERG (Moose Jaw North) moved second reading of Bill No. 06 — An Act to Incorporate 
St. Anthony’s Home of Moose Jaw. 
 
Motion for second reading agreed and bill referred to the select standing committee on private bills. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


