






















































Hansard: April 21, 1980


1969 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Second Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
April 21, 1980. 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
On the Orders of the Day. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and 
through you some 14 Grade 12 students seated in the east gallery, from Avonlea High School. They are 
accompanied here today by Mr. McKeller, their teacher, and bus driver Mrs. Phillips. I will be meeting 
with them at about 3 p.m. for refreshments and to take pictures in the rotunda. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, seated in the east gallery I have another group of Grade 12 students from the Yellow 
Grass High School. They are 10 in number and are accompanied by their teacher, Allan Wagner and 
their bus driver, Mr. Dietz. I would like at this time to advise them that the air conditioning is not 
working in here. If they can stand the heat during the introductions and during question period, I have to 
commend them. I hope they find their visit informative and perhaps educational. I would like all 
members to join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly. I wish them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. N.E. BYERS (Kelvington-Wadena): — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to you and 
through you to the members of the Assembly, 26 Grades 11 and 12 students seated in the west gallery. 
They are from the Foam Lake Composite School. Their trip today is sponsored by the Foam Lake Co-op 
and Foam Lake Credit Union. They are accompanied by Mr. Elvin Toews, the manager of the Foam 
Lake Co-op, and Mr. Ernie Latoski, the general manager of the Foam Lake Savings and Credit Union. 
They are also accompanied by one of their teachers, Mr. Nick Pentluke, and their bus driver, Mr. Paul 
Bencharski. I am very pleased to introduce this group. I spent a number of years as a teacher on the staff 
of the Foam Lake Composite School. I have many pleasant memories of my teaching career there. I 
hope their visit today will be informative and educational, and that it will enhance their understanding 
and appreciation of our parliamentary process. I ask all members to join with me in welcoming this 
group from Foam Lake. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

NOTRE DAME HOUNDS WIN HOCKEY TITLE 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — Mr. Speaker, before we attempt to turn the heat onto the 
government today, I hope all members will join with me extending congratulations of the Assembly to 
the Notre Dame Hounds who, yesterday afternoon, won the national Midget hockey championship in a 
televised match. I am sure many members had the privilege of watching a very fine hockey team in 
action yesterday afternoon. I think it indicates, Mr. Speaker, the new direction that Notre Dame at 
Wilcox has taken in attempting to balance academic excellence with athletic skill. We see the fruition of 
one program this year and an admirable job done by the Notre Dame Hounds. I ask all 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1970 

members to join with me in congratulating them. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS AND OPEN LINE RADIO SHOWS 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — A question to the Premier. Last day in question period you drew 
an analogy between the recording of open line radio shows and the clipping of letters to the editor in 
newspapers. Would the Premier not agree that there is a material difference, and that the radio stations 
by CRTC (Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission) regulations are not 
required to maintain the recordings of those shows, therefore there is no check and balance against the 
recording being inaccurately represented at some future date, which is perhaps not the case with respect 
to newspapers? 
 
HON. A.E. BLAKENEY (Premier): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any CRTC regulation or any 
other government regulation which requires anyone to keep a copy of the newspaper. Accordingly it 
seems to me there is no legal requirement that either tapes or newspapers be retained. I don’t see the 
difference the hon. member is drawing. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Is it not possible, let’s say the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose is on an open-line show (perhaps regarding the medical system), that 
portions of that tape recording could be taken out of context so that it could portray the member as being 
in favor of something which is in fact not the case? Now that tape could then misportray that to the 
public. Unless there is some means to check that, the member would not have a vehicle by which to 
counter that attack. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any way of denying that all of that is possible. I don’t 
know what stems from that, but clearly it is physically possible. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Premier, would you admit to this then — there is perhaps an unjust procedure 
whereby the government, at public expense, is totally the custodian of political recordings? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition, at public expense, can record those if they wish. 
 

TABLING OF TRANSCRIPTS BY INFORMATION SERVICES 
 
MR. J.G. LANE (Qu’Appelle): — At public expense — I’m not sure whether the Premier is extending 
an offer to the opposition or not; but I am sure the Premier understands the significant difference 
between newspaper clippings, which in most cases, are microfilmed and kept by libraries and various 
sources, and tape recordings of the news, which they are required to keep only for 30 days under 
CRTC’s regulations. After that 30-day period, in fact, there will only be one source available to the 
public or to the opposition or to the press to check tape recordings of previous news broadcasts, and 
that’s your government. Would the Premier not admit this is a highly improper position to be in, where 
the government is the sole custodian of political tapes? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the government is not the sole custodian. If anyone 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1971 

else wants to make copies, they are free to do so; in exactly the same way as they are free to store 
newspapers, they can store tapes. There are, in fact, a good number of libraries around with tapes in 
them and we certainly have no knowledge that our tape is the only tape in existence. Indeed, any 
government or anybody else who recorded a radio show, it seems to me, would be very foolish to 
assume that his tape was the only one in existence. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary to the Premier. Would the Premier be prepared to table this afternoon 
before he goes to Lethbridge all the transcripts of the recordings to date by the information services 
branch made under the new tape recording or timing system that has been installed? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, while the member is laboring under a misapprehension that the 
system is in any sense new, it has been going on for a fair number of months and years with respect to 
open-line shows and the rest, and it seems to me again entirely appropriate for a government to make 
records of what citizens are saying, either on open-line shows or in newspaper letters to the editor. I see 
no particular reason why the hon. member should suggest that somehow this is new, or different, or 
sinister. 
 
MR. LANE: — The Premier very pointedly has refused to answer my question to supply the transcripts 
which have been typed up. Reports the other day indicated that some of the broadcasts were transcribed 
by a secretary. You have pointedly refused to supply those transcripts. I am going to ask you again to 
supply the transcripts. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a little difficulty with the hon. member’s language. I will 
check what I said a moment ago and if I have pointedly refused anything, we will attempt to find the 
words which add up to a pointed refusal. I don’t think they will be there. I invite all hon. members to 
read them with care to see whether or not those words can add up to a pointed refusal. The hon. member 
knows full well how to get material tabled in this legislature. He knows full well that it is quite 
impossible to expect a minister to come into the legislature with his files and be able to table everything 
which hon. members opposite may ask for. He was very careful in saying, would I table it this 
afternoon? He wouldn’t be satisfied with the tabling tomorrow as he made perfectly clear. I can only ask 
the hon. member, if he wishes to have anything tabled, to use the rules of the House in the appropriate 
way. I know he has some difficulty with the rules of the House in the appropriate way. I know he has 
some difficulty with the rules of House, but he can attempt to use them in the way designed by the 
members who made those rules. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — The Premier seems to have some difficulty with the political morality of a government 
that is taping (and I say secretively because you are very reticent to give out the information) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, I’ll take the next question. 
 

MAILING LIST RE LANDS FOR LEASE NOTICES 
 
MR. R.H. PICKERING (Bengough-Milestone): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. On the provincial lands for lease posting notices, the mailing lists under MLAs lists a Mr. 
Jim Liggett, Box 516, Radville, who is a defeated NDP candidate and is also on the pay roll of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Agency. Would the minister 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1972 

inform this Assembly why he is on this mailing list? 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of the mailing list 
that is used to send out the postings. I will be glad to check for the hon. member and provide a response 
to his question. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister aware that this was brought to the 
attention of the former minister of agriculture and at that time was deleted from the list? What is the 
reason for it reappearing? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I am sorry to say to the hon. member, I was not aware that this 
was brought to the attention of the former minister. He did not convey this information to me. I indicated 
to the hon. member I will pursue the issue and respond to him. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree that by putting 
a defeated NDP candidate on the mailing list keeps him informed as to the applicants and lets the NDP 
apparatus advise the government as to who is politically acceptable? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member knows that there is no political 
interference with respect to the operations of lands branch. Lands branch and the appeal system of lands 
branch has been in effect for a very long time. I think all hon. members will agree that it has done an 
outstanding job outside of the political arena. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

REQUEST FOR COPIES OF TAPE RECORDINGS 
 
MR. LANE: — I will direct a question to the Premier. The Premier has been highly evasive about my 
question asking for a copy of all of the transcripts of the tape recording done today under your system 
wherein you’re taping news broadcasts, public affairs and whatever. Now would the Premier be 
prepared to turn over the matter of your taping to the privileges and elections committee so this 
Assembly may monitor your activities and ensure there is a permanent public record of the tapings so 
that the sole custodian is not the government in power? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would, of course, agree to turn over this or anything else to the 
committee on privileges and elections if the House so decides. It is neither the committee of the hon. 
member for Qu’Appelle nor mine — anybody who wishes to move that anything be referred to the 
committee of privileges on elections is free to do so. The hon. member for Qu’Appelle ha snot done so. I 
can only assume that he doesn’t want it before the committee of privileges and elections. 
 
MR. LANE: — Final supplementary to the Premier. I will ask you for the fourth time this afternoon, 
will you turn over the transcripts before you go to Lethbridge — the taping that you have done to date 
through information services? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member asks the question in a rhetorical way knowing 
that I am going to leave for Lethbridge in perhaps three-quarters of an hour knowing that I can give him 
no assurance that those transcripts (all of them) would be available by then and knowing also that the 
hon. member is not making any motion before the House to have the transcripts made available to the 
House but is using the 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1973 

question period to attempt to get the tabling of documents, which as the hon. member knows, is not the 
purpose of the question period. 
 

CLAIM FOR WORKERS’ COMPENSATION 
 
MR. G.S. MUIRHEAD (Arm River): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of the 
workers’ compensation board. In 1978, one Gerald Meshke, who resides in Craik, Saskatchewan, was 
injured in a construction accident in Manitoba. He subsequently returned to Saskatchewan where the 
Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board became the mediator between the two provinces. As a 
result of the lack of communication on the part of the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board, Mr. 
Meshke has been without funds since December. He is at the point of losing his home and has no money 
to feed his family. My question to the minister is, will you assure this House that he will review this case 
and see that Mr. Meshke receives remuneration for the money he has lost due to this lack of 
communication? 
 
HON. G.T. SNYDER (Minister of Labour): — Well, in response to the hon. member’s question (I 
think obviously he will concur in my view), I suggest to him that the floor of the Assembly is hardly the 
place to make any kind of a judgment with respect to the validity of the claim. And obviously there are 
appropriate mechanisms that the hon. member can pursue; a letter directly to the workers’ compensation 
board or through the advocates who are employees of the Department of Labour. This is the most 
appropriate way of getting at the facts of the case. I can’t begin to assure him that I will personally check 
his file but certainly, if it’s drawn to my attention and the file number is given to me, I’ll make sure that 
somebody in the department or the workers’ compensation board responds to his inquiry. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I have tried all these channels, Mr. Minister. I 
consulted the Manitoba board and have a letter in my possession from the Manitoba Workers’ 
Compensation Board stating they have sent $500 as a good-will gift while they determine why the 
Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board has not communicated. There was no reason for lack of 
communication because I have in my hand a doctor’s certificate stating Mr. Meshke is unable to work. 
My question is, will the minister consult Mr. Frank Sotski (whom I have already consulted, having been 
through your channels; he is assistant director of vocational rehabilitation) to determine why there were 
no reports from the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board with regard to Mr. Meshke to the 
point where he became financially strapped. Will the minister report back to us what caused this 
bureaucratic runaround? 
 
MR. SNYDER: — Mr. Speaker, I am not going to become embroiled in a discussion with the hon. 
member with respect to an individual claim in the same manner in which the member for Regina South 
involved himself in an embarrassing discussion — embarrassing to him when the facts of the case were 
known. The matter will be dealt with when it approaches the proper channels. In the event that you 
indicate to me the file number and the claim, and provide me with the benefit of the correspondence to 
me the file number and the claim, and provide me with the benefit of the correspondence you have 
available to you, then I’ll do all those things that are necessary in order to bring the file to the attention 
of the board or the advocates. 
 

HOME DIALYSIS PROGRAM 
 
MRS. J.H. DUNCAN (Maple Creek): — A question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. In the past, 
Saskatchewan was the leader in pioneering new and bold approaches for the treatment of kidney 
ailments but today we stand with Prince Edward Island as the only 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1974 

two Canadian provinces that do not have an operative home dialysis program. Mr. Premier, why is it that 
we have fallen behind in this very important aspect of health and now find ourselves in a catch-up 
situation? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to concede the facts given by the hon. member nor do 
I want to deny them. I’m simply not aware of them. I know we have a renal dialysis program. It has been 
expanded significantly in the last short while. I have personally met a number of people who have been 
congratulating us on the fact that there now is a renal dialysis unit down at Rockglen when there wasn’t 
before. I simply am unable to assess whether or not the hon. member is right in suggesting that our 
program is better or worse than that of New Brunswick. But I will certainly ask the Minister of Health to 
respond to the general thrust of your question when he is in the House. As all hon. members will know, 
he is down at a hospital opening with, I suspect, the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps you could ask the Minister of Health to also 
take notice that home dialysis was not included in the budget and he could maybe inform this Assembly 
as to why a home dialysis program was not given very high priority. 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know home dialysis is, in fact, in operation in rural 
Saskatchewan. But I don’t know the extent that it is in operation. It is suggested that it is not home 
dialysis but they have to go into the hospital. I think it varies. I can name homes (I don’t know whether I 
can remember the name) but a home in a particular community where there is a unit supplied by the 
Department of Health. I believe some of the smaller hospitals now have them. I know that at an earlier 
time there was some resistance from the urologists to the idea of home dialysis on the grounds that the 
treatment works better under the direct care and supervision of a urologist. I believe that objection has 
now been overcome or balanced off against the fact that it’s very difficult for patients to have to travel 
150 to 200 miles to get renal dialysis treatment. It is my understanding that the program is expanding. 
Again, I cannot give the hon. member details of the extent of the expansion and will ask the Minister of 
Health to do that. 
 

GRANTS TO ROSETOWN SCHOOL DIVISION 
 
MR. H.J. SWAN (Rosetown-Elrose): — Question to the Minister of Education. Almost three weeks 
ago, Mr. Minister, I asked you a question with regard to the grants for the Rosetown School Division. I 
am going to repeat the question because I haven’t received an answer. In 1979 the Rosetown School 
Division took a grant cut of $47,000. And if the grant this year is adjusted to take into account 
underpayments carried forward and the employment of a locally appointed director of education, the 
1980 grants are down an additional $93,836. Are you aware of this, and are you aware that the cost is 
being passed on to the local property tax base? 
 
HON. D.F. McARTHUR (Minister of Education): — Mr. Speaker, grants to school divisions in the 
province are provided under the foundation grants system. The foundation grant system is designed so 
that similar school divisions (that is to say, similar with respect to local assessment; similar with respect 
to student population) will receive the same level of grant. If, in the case of a school division the school 
population should decline or the assessment should increase, this can affect the distribution of the grants 
and therefore the change from one year to another. 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1975 

I believe in the case the hon. member has mentioned, there has been a decline in the student population. 
There has also been a relative change in the local assessment. As a result of that, relative to other school 
divisions, the change in the grant is lower. And I think, in fact, in the particular case the member is 
correct. The grant has declined somewhat. That is a fundamental part of any system of equalization that 
recognizes the principle of student population and assessment. I think the hon. member will find that as 
a result of this system all school divisions are pretty well assured an equal level of revenue for a given 
level of assessment in student population. I think equalization of this principle is something that has 
been supported by the trustees of this province, by the teachers of this province, and is certainly 
supported by the government. That is the explanation for the grant coming out as it did. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary to the minister. The Rosetown School Division has set its mill rate at 
76 mills. This is 12 mills higher than the computational mill rate being recommended. Do you not agree 
that the formula you are using needs adjusting to recognize declining enrolments and the rising 
inflationary trends? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker the hon. member is making a suggestion that we change the 
foundation grants formula. I should point out to him, first of all, with respect to one comment he made, 
that we have made an adjustment in the formula so as to cushion the impact of declining enrolments and 
that factor does, to a certain extent, alleviate any changes in grants in the fashion indicated. 
 
But I do want to indicate to the hon. member that I would have very grave reservations about, in any 
hurried way, moving forward to alter drastically the foundation grant system that operates in this 
province. It does provide an opportunity for school boards to receive, on an equalized basis in terms of 
students and assessment, grants on an unconditional basis. School boards are provided the opportunity 
under that system to make their own decisions with respect to programs. It is therefore the responsibility 
of school boards to make decisions about what level of local revenue they would like to raise, having 
received their grants. That, of course, is related to the program they want to provide within that school 
division. I do not think it would be proper for the Minister of Education to comment on the program 
being offered by a school division or on the level of mill rate increase supplied in that school division, 
because that is a decision the local school board has made. 
 
I will certainly look at changes in the foundation grants system if the school trustees, for instance, as an 
organization should ask for that, or other important groups within the education community. At the 
moment it is not my understanding that any of them wish me to undertake a major change in the 
foundation grants formula, so therefore I have no plans in that direction. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SWAN: — I believe indeed there have been a number of boards writing to you and asking for a 
change. I’m wondering if this is the method your government is using to bring in a balanced budget this 
year, by simply passing all the additional costs back to the local property tax base? 
 
MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member well knows that under the foundation grants 
formula, and under the allocation system within that, the level of grant that applies to any particular 
school division because of the equalization 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1976 

principle does not reflect the overall level of financing and change of financing for schools in the 
province. The hon. member well knows that in the case of the particular school division he mentions, 
because of changes which are inherent in the whole principle of equalization, you have the kinds of 
results that are shown for that school division. It is not correct for the hon. member to attempt to leave 
this House with the information that all school divisions are affected in a like manner. That school 
division is affected in this manner because of the equalization principle. I say to him that it is not true 
that we are having this impact in all school divisions and indeed many, many school divisions have 
received very, very substantial increases in school grants this year. 
 

LAND BANK PAYMENTS DURING SGEA STRIKE 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. Why was it your policy 
not to take payments for rent on land bank during the SGEA strike? Why did you not take payments in 
Regina where the office was open? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I will check for the hon. member. I would assume likely the 
reason is that there wasn’t staff available to take the payments. But I will be glad to check for the hon. 
member and confirm my answer. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Could you also check why they refused to 
accept payments and then when the same people came back shortly after they were charged interest for 
making late payments? You wouldn’t accept the money originally; they came back later and you 
charged them interest for late payments. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will have to take notice of the question as I really did in 
the first case and respond to the hon. member. 
 

ELECTORAL BOUNDARIES COMMISSION REPORT 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to direct a question to the Premier. I understand that the electoral 
boundaries commission report is ready and has been tabled with, I believe, the Clerk of the Executive 
Council. Would you have that document distributed prior to going to Lethbridge? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, frankly I don’t know whether copies are available. I’ll be frank in 
saying that I saw a copy an hour ago. I don’t know whether there are copies available to members; if 
there are we will certainly make them available. I guess they are obviously back from the printers and 
we will certainly try to make them available as soon as possible. I don’t know where they are. 
 
MR. LANE: — I’m standing on a supplementary, Mr. Premier. The 250 copies in the normal course are 
distributed or available for distribution at this time? 
 
MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly don’t want to hold any hon. member in suspense and I 
suspect this will be a document which will get an early perusal by all hon. members. Accordingly we 
will attempt to make them available as soon as possible. 
 

SUBSIDIZED INTEREST RATES FOR FARMERS 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of 
Agriculture. I am sure the minister is aware that as the result of high interest rates, the farming 
community is in a real financial bind. Your refusal to help in any way 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1977 

seems to be aggravating the problem. The only avenue they had to raise capital to put in this year’s crop 
was to sell a quarter section of land. Now, by your own admission, you say there are no land bank funds 
available. The other avenue is dried up because you threaten to kick out the foreign investors. Will you 
now take a serious look at providing some help by way of subsidized interest rates to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to hear the hon. member give his support to the 
land bank program and to our legislation as it relates to non-resident ownership. I will say to the hon. 
member, with respect to interest rats, I have a meeting with the federal Minister of Agriculture on 
Wednesday in Ottawa and I will bring this issue of interest rates on behalf of the primary producers of 
Saskatchewan to his attention at that time. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

FEDERAL ACTION RE FARM ISSUES 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, I sent the following Telex to the 
Hon. Eugene Whelan, the Minister of Agriculture, this morning. Mr. Speaker, the Telex reads as 
follows: 
 

In view of the serious situation facing primary producers and the lack of reference to this in the federal 
Speech from the Throne April 14, I will be requesting action from you at our meeting April 23 as 
follows: 

 
1. Interest rates. 

 
(a) That current federal Farm Credit Corporation program be continued and extended as necessary. 

 
(b) That interest rates on farm improvement loans be lowered to the level of loans available through 
Farm Credit Corporation; 

 
(c) That operating loans be made available to primary producers at the same interest rates as Farm 
Credit Corporation loans. 

 
2. Grain price. 

 
(a) That the federal government increase the initial price of wheat for 1980-1981 crop year to current 
level of approximately $4.25 a bushel; 

 
(b) That the federal government guarantee farmers a final payment equal to pre-embargo levels. 

 
3. Orderly marketing. 

 
(a) That the federal government implement a national marketing system for beef and hogs. 

 
(b) That the federal government implement meaningful stabilization plans for beef and hogs. 

 
5. Two-price system for wheat. 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1978 

(a) That the federal government immediately adjust the minimum and maximum prices under the 
Two-Price Wheat Act; 

 
(b) That the minimum price should be based on the cost of production currently estimated at $5 per 
bushel; 

 
(c) That the maximum price be adjusted upwards to $6. 

 
It’s signed by myself, Minister of Agriculture for Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. E.A. BERNTSON (Leader of the Opposition): — I would first ask the minister if he would 
forward a copy to me, and then by way of response to his statement, I would just say that the first half of 
this statement was motherhood and we would have no trouble supporting that. Then he got into a great 
philosophical slant on national marketing systems for beef and hogs, etc. The question still is, Mr. 
Speaker, when are we going to do something in Saskatchewan? The problem is here; the problem is 
now. We have young farmers facing foreclosure. You have refused to do anything. You’re going to wail 
on old Eugene down there till the cows come home, and nothing will happen. It never has in the past. 
It’s not likely to in the future. Alberta has taken the initiative and helped their farmers with 6 or 8 per 
cent money. Manitoba has revised their views to help their . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. Any further statements? If the member’s not finished, then I’ll warn 
the member that the response must be brief, factual, and specific. Order, order. And when the member is 
attempting to engage in a debate and drawing in examples from other area sin a debatable manner, it 
puts me in the position of having to arrest his statement, or his response to the statement. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, to be brief, factual and specific, the Government of Saskatchewan 
has done nothing to date as it relates to helping the young farmers in the province. That’s brief. It is also 
factual. Specifically, what should be done is provide some sort of interest subsidy to help them get 
through the crunch they’re facing today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think members should not misinterpret what I say when I say that statements 
should be brief, factual, and specific. The response should be brief, relevant and on the subject, which 
means that the member who’s responding can deal with the statement the member brought forward and 
not create a debate. Any further statements? 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

NOTRE DAME HOUNDS WIN HOCKEY TITLE 
 
HON. E.B. SHILLINGTON (Minister of Culture and Youth): — I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if I might, 
just before the orders of the day, on behalf of the government benches, join with the members opposite 
in extending congratulations to the Notre Dame Hounds. This does, indeed seem to be a banner year for 
sports in Saskatchewan. We’ve taken everything but the world series so far, and it’s enlightening for us 
all. On behalf of the 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1979 

government benches I want to join the members opposite in extending congratulations to the Notre 
Dame Hounds. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Koskie (Minister 
of Social Services) that Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Computer Utility 
Corporation Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN (Rosthern): — Mr. Speaker, before I start on this particular motion. I understand 
that the air conditioning is off in the buildings. Is it feasible in the Chamber, as we did about two years 
ago, to either take our coats off or have the doors open so that we can get some air movement in here? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would respond to the member, we must maintain proper decorum at all times, and 
I have never allowed members to take off their coats in the Chamber to the best of my knowledge. I’ve 
instructed the Sergeant at Arms to do as much as possible about keeping certain doors open so there will 
be some movement of air. 
 
MR. R. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, the act to the Saskatchewan Computer Utilities Corporation has 
a few problems with it as far as I can see. The two things that this amendment really does it, first of all, 
instead of having to go to the Lieutenant-Governor or cabinet for approval, the corporation can make 
decisions to do many different things itself. 
 
It also cleans up the language of the former bill and makes it a little simpler. I agree with that, but it also 
allows one other thing. It is basically 7(a)(iv) which indicates that they can do business with any other 
person, or any public or private agency or organization which means the Government of Saskatchewan 
Computer Utility Corporation can now go into the business of tying their computer into all the private 
industry and go into competition, basically, with all of the private corporations. 
 
The original intent of the computer utility corporation was for the service of the government and Crown 
corporations. The facts are that anybody who is hooked into a computer, if they have the knowledge and 
the ability of people available to them, can pirate information off a computer. Therefore, by opening it 
up again they stand a very strong chance of getting pirated for information off their computers, both 
government and private industry. 
 
It gives them the power like Bill No. 13 does, to get into private business. I understand for an example 
that one of their competitors will be Sask Tel which is now selling computer equipment in their systems 
and therefore, as much as this improves many aspects of the bill, there is another problem. I’m really not 
sure if it means what it says or not, but it basically means that the cabinet minister is not responsible for 
the actions of the corporation. 
 
The way it reads (I would like the minister to correct me if I am wrong), as well as an amendment in one 
other bill, seems to indicate that the minister is not responsible for the Crown corporation. He can 
correct me if I am wrong. He is giving me a look; I believe 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1980 

it is in the revision of section 5 where that happens, where you change the board of directors of the 
corporation. Where it used to be everything was appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, it is 
now the board, and it indicates that the responsibility is not to the minister, as the old bill said it was. 
 
The old bill said, the Lieutenant-Governor in Council will decide which cabinet minister the corporation 
is responsible for. This one removes that, so I don’t know where you find which minister is responsible. 
 
The other thing it does is make it easier (I assume) to remove a member from the board if so required, 
and to accept and make replacements without having to be appointed by an order in council, which 
means it doesn’t become information until the list of the board of directors is published the following 
year. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I realize it will make some of your meetings easier; it establishes quorum a little more 
easily for you and puts more authority, but the final line of the whole thing is section 7, powers of the 
corporation, and basically if Bill 13 from Sask Tel is any indication of the powers you’re given, I’m 
very, very hesitant to see this bill go any further. Hopefully, in the minister’s closing remarks, he will 
comment on that particular issue. 
 
Second, under 7(a)(iv), would the minister consider amending that one, which basically puts the Crown 
utilities corporation back doing the job it was meant to do, serving government, government boards, 
government agencies, and Crown corporations. That one allows you to go pretty well everywhere 
without going to the Lieutenant-Governor and to cabinet for permission. It allows the board to do it. I 
realize there are some benefits there. I personally believe you should be serving the government, 
government agencies, Crown corporations, and that area only. That was what you were originally 
developed for. You’ve done good service there. You’re complimented for it. But you shouldn’t be 
branching further and that’s what you indicate you’re going to do by that 7(a)(iv). I wonder if the 
minister would take it back to his officials, discuss it with them, and maybe they can remove that clause. 
That would put you back into what you were originally supposed to do and not give you a whole new 
field of endeavor. I suggest to the minister that he take a solid look. The people of Saskatchewan 
suggested to you: for government, yes; to get into competition with every little company in the province, 
no. But for government (because of secrecy of documentation, because of pirating which is now 
happening in the computer industry), you should stay within your own circle. Therefore nobody can get 
the information that’s in your computer. Therefore I would suggest that 7(a)(iv) be looked at very, very 
closer. I will comment in other departments where I am the critic. I’ve found clauses along this line. I’ve 
got an agreement with the minister that he has written the amendment in such a way that it meant only 
government departments. I would ask you to consider doing the same thing so that your service be 
strictly for government agencies. Crown corporations and those types of ventures rather than the private 
sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will have more to say on this particular bill when we get into committee of the whole on 
the clause by clause, but I thought I’d give the minister my one or two arguments on specific clauses so 
that hopefully in winding up he can either relay the fears, or maybe be able to get House amendments to 
cure some of the problems this bill will create. I don’t think the minister really wants to get into them 
anyway — it’s maybe bad draftsmanship. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, until I see revisions, I will have to 
hold which way I will vote on this bill. 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1981 

HON. M.J. KOSKIE (Minister of Social Services): — Mr. Speaker, in addressing the concern of the 
hon. member, I just want to say that the essential substantive change in respect to section 7 was first of 
all that it recognize the Saskatchewan university at Regina as a legal entity. I think that is necessary 
because of the change in the status of the university. The second thing it does in changes — the only 
substantive change — is that it now allows a corporation, without having to go to the Lieutenant-
Governor in Council or cabinet, to take up or enter into contracts with users. I think that since the 
corporation has matured and the management has been built up, we don’t need to go to the Lieutenant-
Governor for every contract we enter into. So those are the two essential substantive changes that have 
been initiated. I merely want to say that as I understand it, and I’ll review section 7 before it comes into 
the committee of the whole, those are the only substantive changes. The powers existing under the 
former section 7 did provide the corporation entering into contracts to provide services to private 
organizations and private businesses. I don’t see how this really alters it substantially in that regard. I 
will take a look at that before it comes into committee of the whole. But those were the substantive 
changes. 
 
In respect to section 4 of the act as amended, as I said, initially we really allowed for the appointment of 
the board. We didn’t specify in this one that it had to be a particular number between 7 and 14 (which I 
think makes sense); and secondly, we further provide that the board now can have executive committees 
(which makes eminent sense) to carry out certain duties. So those are the substantive changes as I 
indicated to you. 
 
I will take a look at section 7(4) as you indicated, but I don’t foresee any problem with that relative to 
where it was before. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Robbins (Minister 
of Revenue, Supply and Services) that Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend The Education and Health 
Tax Act) be now read a second time. 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Speaker, there have been several people who have 
spoken on this bill and I would like to add just a few comments to it. I would suggest to the minister a 
few changes which we will probably discuss at greater length in committee of the whole and suggest 
certain amendments. However, at the present time in the explanatory notes of this bill, I refer to no. 20: 
 

Farm implements and parts where they are purchased by a farmer for use solely in the operation of his 
farm. 

 
No. 21 has the same terminology, for use solely in the operation of his farm; as does no. 22. 
 
I would like to suggest to the minister that rather than having the words for use solely in the operation of 
his farm, that this bill should read for agricultural purposes. 
 
In no. 29, under the exemption for fuel petroleum products under The Fuel Petroleum Products Act, we 
note that agricultural airplanes are not exempt under this act and we feel that should be included. I am 
sure the minister would agree that agricultural airplanes are today very much a part of farming. The 
same would apply as well on page 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1982 

9 of the explanatory notes no. 2, the expansion of the exemption to non-farmers engaged in agricultural 
activity such as crop spraying and brush clearing. Perhaps a better wording to that would be aerial crop 
spraying as well. The final suggestion I have on that bill, appendix A, summary of items added to the 
exemptions, no. 32, ‘aircraft specially designed and licensed for farm spraying only,’ should read 
‘agricultural aircraft specially designed and licensed for agricultural purposes.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of my colleagues have already spoken on this bill. As I said earlier, we approve of 
this bill with a few minor changes. We believe that there are some exceptions which I have indicated 
and we will bring in an amendment at a later time, during committee of the whole. 
 
HON. G. MacMURCHY (Minister of Agriculture): — Mr. Speaker, this bill is under the Minister of 
Revenue. He is not here but I take note of the suggestions put forward by the hon. member and other 
members this afternoon. I indicate to the hon. member that while most of his suggestions relate to 
wording, the agricultural aircraft one requires some consideration. We had, as a government, some 
consideration of it. There is a suggestion that we have more. I am sure we will follow up any debate with 
respect to that and any possible changes suggested can come forward under committee of the whole. I 
therefore believe, Mr. Speaker, that the bill can proceed into committee. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second time. 
 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 
Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Loans Act 
 
Sections 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
Section 3 
 
MR. P. ROUSSEAU (Regina South): — Mr. Chairman, I spoke earlier to the minister of this bill and 
he indicated to me that the bill was of a housekeeping nature. I am concerned about section 3, with the 
added clause: 
 

for ordinary expenditures by way of temporary loans, where it appears to the Minister of Finance that 
the consolidated funds would be insufficient to meet the disbursements authorized to be made from it, 
in any amounts that the minister considers necessary, but at no time shall the principal amount 
outstanding exceed $250 million in the aggregate. 

 
On one hand he tells me that there is no change from the previous act. In this bill with the maximum of 
$250 million, I am concerned for the reason that I don’t know what the maximum was previously. I 
can’t understand why the addition of this clause is necessary. Unless the minister can come up with 
some relatively sound logic and answers to my question, I would suggest we would not be supporting 
the bill. With that, Mr. Chairman, I would like to hear from the minister with respect to those comments. 
 
HON. E.L. TCHORZEWSKI (Minister of Finance): — Mr. Chairman, in response to the member’s 
question — simply put, there has not been before this amendment (should it go through) a provision for 
the government to borrow money by the means that is being suggested here; that is, by the means of 
promissory notes. Because there ha snot been that provision, therefore there ha snot been this kind of 
limit established. The 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1983 

Saskatchewan Loans Act does not allow the government to take full advantage of the financial 
instruments available in today’s Canadian money market. We think it’s wise and prudent to take 
advantage of that more sophisticated money market which does now exist in Canada (which in past 
years has not). Therefore, we are proposing the amendment, under which we will be able, if the need 
should arise, to borrow through this process up to $250 million. 
 
Section 3 agreed. 
 
Sections 4 to 7 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, I think that we had expected to do some bills for Mr. Robbins. 
He has not yet arrived. I wonder if we could call The Agricultural Implements Act . . . We’ll do The 
Time Act; Mr. Kaeding is ready with his official. We’ll do The Time Act and The Agricultural 
Implements Act. If Mr. Robbins is here then . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We’re calling it, Paul, O.K.? 
We’ll do The Time Act followed by The Agricultural Implements Act and if Mr. Robbins is here then 
we’ll do government insurance, public service superannuation and superannuation (supplementary 
provisions). 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — May I just ask permission, since the minister is not here — I have to excuse 
myself for a few minutes to the Speaker’s office. If he should come in with these bills could I be called? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Agreed. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you. 
 

BILL NO. 73 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE TIME ACT 
 
Sections 1 to 11 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

BILL NO. 32 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE AGRICULTURAL IMPLEMENTS ACT 
 
Sections 1 to 3 agreed. 
 
Section 4 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Minister, you’re not in any way, according to this clause . . . I 
say, on this bill you are not in any way trying to interfere with the auctions method of selling farm 
equipment — either a farmer selling direct to another farmer . . . I say, you are not in any way trying to 
interfere at all? You’re taking the recommendations of the board? 
 
Sections 4 and 5 agreed. 
 
Section 6 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, are you in any way going to use the board or the moneys 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1984 

collected from farm machinery to assist a customer that’s in trouble through a dealer bankruptcy? Are 
you intending to use board money where a dealer goes bankrupt? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — No. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Where’s the money going to come from then? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, I might introduce Don Lehman who is the executive director of 
the agricultural implements board. Mr. Lehman reports to me that the legislation exempts compensating 
farmers where there is in fact a bankruptcy. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would mind asking Mr. Lehman . . . I think he and I 
had a little conversation on an amendment (I don’t believe it’s this act, but I wonder if it does appear 
here, and if it does I can’t find it), whereby they were going to exclude the prairie machinery 
manufacturing firms from obligation as far as the dealer close-out. Could you ask Mr. Lehman about 
that? Have they gone any further on that? I just want to make sure it doesn’t appear in this act. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — There’s been no change. 
 
Section 6 agreed. 
 
Section 7 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, you mentioned the other day that there was a possibility you could 
provide me with a formula regarding how you arrive at assessing the various machinery companies and 
distributors for the fund. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, what we will do is we will write it down and send it over to the 
hon. member as well as indicating to the Assembly what it is. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, you know my concern on this is regarding experience by the fund or 
whoever administers the fund on certain machinery companies. I was talking the other day about a 
machinery company which may build, for want of a better word, a lemon, and you go through a period 
where really this machinery company should be paying the shot for a good part of that fund. Where you 
are assessing them all on the same basis, it might be very, very unfair at times. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I am going to send this over when I am finished trying to explain it to the hon. 
member, Mr. Chairman. But the formula is as follows. There is a basic charge of $25 plus $300 plus 
assessment. Now the $300 plus assessment category comes about as a result of a hearing or hearings 
where the distributor was found responsible for the problem of the machine. If they were found 50 per 
cent responsible, or a certain assessment responsible, it would be $300 plus the assessment. If they were 
found 25 per cent responsible, if they were found zero, there wouldn’t be any charge under this category 
and they would in fact pay the a basic $25. Now I don’t know how clear that is to the hon. member but I 
will send this across to him. Perhaps my explanation plus what I send over will clarify the formula. This 
is the formula that has been developed by the board this year and is now just going out to the 
distributors. 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, the limit on any single claim — is it $5,000? 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1985 

MR. MacMURCHY: — Yes, any single award is $5,000. 
 
MR. LARTER: — I’m curious, Mr. Minister; I don’t know how you arrived at a $5,000 figure when 
your tractors are $100,000 and your combines are $100,000 now. If a man does without a combine, for 
instance, for a week during harvest, how would you arrive at a $5,000 figure? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, this is the figure that was in the original legislation. The board has yet to 
award the maximum. Therefore, they feel there is no pressure on increasing the maximum. The highest 
award was $4,000, it is reported to me, and it is being appealed. So there is room in the maximum in the 
legislation now. 
 
Section 7 agreed. 
 
Section 8 
 
MR. LARTER: — Just one question on sections 8 and 9, Mr. Minister. It says that there has been an 
increase in penalties here, but there is an indication of more infractions. What do you mean by increase 
now? What percentage increase? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — We don’t have the accurate figure with us, Mr. Chairman. It is roughly a 10 
per cent increase. 
 
Sections 8 to 10 agreed. 
 
Section 11 
 
MR. LARTER: — On section 11, I think Mr. Lehman knows exactly what happens on repair parts. 
There are some dealers guilty (or possibly in the past have been guilty) of adding on to their suggested 
list price on repair parts. I realize the act states you have to put it separately on the bill; you have to add 
for freight or for a phone call. But I believe the dealers have been caught in a very bad situation where a 
good customer comes in, orders a $2 piece and it ends up costing them $15 with a phone call and freight 
(before they ever get that piece to that customer) and maybe a good will service call. I think the dealers 
have said, let’s build in our freight and phone calls on some of these suggested list prices. I don’t think 
the government should be too harsh on the dealers. I realize they can get carried away on that but I think 
some of the dealers who have done it, have done it out of necessity because they have been giving away 
too much and there may be a problem. I can see this new piece is going to take that out completely 
though. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I think the hon. member has raised a good point. The response of the board 
has been that the actual additional costs are very legitimate — the telephone calls, the extra express, etc. 
But the board has found that some dealers just put on an extra 10 per cent or an extra 15 per cent, 
whichever comes into their minds. It is an attempt to get at that problem they are addressing. They 
accept the more or less legitimate costs but not the piling on, I guess is the best way to put it. 
 
MR. LARTER: — What brings things like this about is on certain things such as wood items or canvas 
belts where implement wholesale companies buy from outside sources the markup is minimal but the 
wholesale company still makes its markup. Say you have an average markup of 30 per cent on parts but 
your parts markup on wood parts or canvas parts or other things will be 12 per cent or 14 per cent and 
the company doesn’t pass it on to the dealer. All I’m trying to do is point out that if you as a customer 
come in 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1986 

and I’m selling you $100,000 worth of equipment, every second year or something, I have one heck of a 
time putting down $10 for a phone call and freight. I think you know what the dealers are going through 
and yet I don’t approve of the overall adding. I never did it and . . . 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — I think your last comment is a legitimate comment and the board is aware of 
this and takes it into account. 
 
Section 11 agreed. 
 
Sections 12 to 14 agreed. 
 
Section 15 
 
MR. LARTER: — Mr. Chairman, I think most of your long line legitimate dealers over the years — if 
a customer has signed a note or signed an A contract or B contract on a piece of equipment and then the 
customer backs out of it — almost without exception lets him back out of it. I think what this could do 
— by stating that if the dealer hands the customer or by registered mail sends him a signed or a 
registered contract signed by the dealership as well — it sometimes holds a customer. I think what 
you’re doing here is you’re binding the customer into something where the dealer used to let him off the 
hook. What I’m saying is that you’re creating a tighter situation between the customer and the dealer. 
You’re creating a situation that has to prevail from then on. It used to seem strange to us that a customer 
could sign a contract and we never could hold a customer to a contract. Yet is a dealer signed that 
contract, you could always hold the dealer to it. At least, this is what the customer felt, I wonder if you 
aren’t maybe creating something by even putting this clause in. 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — All the amendment attempts to do is to make sure that the farmer has a legible 
copy or a copy that he can read. There were copies given to farmers which were poorly written so you 
couldn’t read them. All this amendment does is make sure the farmer gets a copy that can be read. It 
doesn’t change anything that was previously in the legislation based on the point that the hon. member 
makes. 
 
Section 15 agreed. 
 
Section 16 agreed. 
 
Section 17 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, I might perhaps speak to the amendment before the hon. 
member gets to his feet. Our interpretation here is that what the wording does in the amendment is the 
same thing as what we wanted to do in sections 48(1) and 48(2) in the legislation. It merely came from 
the lawyers who came up with a different wording to do the same thing. I think that’s really the only 
explanation that I can offer. 
 
Section 17 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 18 and 19 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1987 

BILL NO. 55 — AN ACT RESPECTING SASKATCHEWAN GOVERNMENT INSURANCE 
(CONTINUED) 

 
Section 12 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — In reply to the inquiries of the member for Regina South, I couldn’t get a legal 
counsel person today. He is away. He had given me some information which I think will satisfy the 
gentlemen opposite. They are talking about section 12 and he points out that The Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Act is a separate incorporation. It is somewhat comparable, if you want to use the 
example, to the Hudson’s Bay Company, which has its own charter. The Hudson’s Bay Company is not 
governed by the Companies Act in Canada. Government insurance is not like other insurers in the 
province because it is separately incorporated by an act of the legislature. The legislature saw fit to 
incorporate it as a separate act. 
 
I want to point out that the powers and capacities of Saskatchewan Government Insurance are set out of 
course in The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act and not in The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 
But a good bit of the material for the administrative detail is set out in The Saskatchewan Insurance Act 
for the direction of the insurance business generally and it quite logically is also applicable to the 
business of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Corporation. It makes no sense to duplicate such 
provisions and for convenience and in accordance with good drafting practices generally, section 21 of 
this bill simply incorporates those provisions of The Saskatchewan Insurance Act (which is the one we 
are dealing with) by reference. I will give you some examples. As you look at the bill, on section 12, for 
example section 97 of The Saskatchewan Insurance Act provides for payments to agents. There is no 
reason for a different procedure in so far as Saskatchewan Government Insurance is concerned and 
therefore it is excluded from that coverage. Section 443, also referred to here, of The Saskatchewan 
Insurance Act speaks about the trust relationship between agent and insurer. Since that is already in The 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act, there is no reason to have this portion applicable. 
 
If you look at part III — it makes reference to part III there — of The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, it 
sets out the rules governing the making of insurance contracts in Saskatchewan. Those rules ought 
logically to apply to contracts made with Saskatchewan Government Insurance too. But (I refer you 
again back to the bill) section 119, which is part of part III that is excepted, requires that contracts be 
signed by the agents. There is no reason for that provision as it affects contracts with Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance and the reason for that is that SGI is close to the scene. It’s right here in the 
province, whereas many insurers writing insurance may have head offices in Montreal or New York or 
London or Zurich or wherever. That’s section 12, if you refer to part III it says — section 12 except 
section 119. In reference to it, part III of The Saskatchewan Insurance Act sets out the rules governing 
the making of insurance contracts in Saskatchewan. 
 
Those rules ought logically to apply to contracts made with Saskatchewan Government Insurance too, 
and they do, but part III within that section 119 is excepted because it requires all the contracts to be 
countersigned by agents, and Saskatchewan Government Insurance does not require their agents to 
countersign. 
 
On the other hand, I have to point out that part I of the Saskatchewan Insurance Act does not apply to 
The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act because it deals with the duties and functions of the 
superintendent of insurance. It is not acceptable that 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1988 

such a functionary should have any administrative control over a publicly instituted body such as 
government insurance, which is a creature of this legislature. Therefore, the superintendent’s duties and 
functions all outside of that. 
 
Part XI of The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act, for instance, deals with mutual insurance 
companies, a subject which is not apropos to Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
 
Part XII, the last section named in that subsection, deals with fraternal societies and therefore is not 
applicable. 
 
Now, I hope that will satisfy the member with respect to application of The Saskatchewan Insurance 
Act, in subsection 12, related to Saskatchewan Government Insurance. 
 
Section 12 agreed. 
 
Section 13 agreed. 
 
Section 14 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I had expressed some concerns earlier on section 14. I wonder if the minister has 
taken any notice of those concerns and whether or not he is prepared to make any changes in that bill on 
section 14? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the member would refer to any specific part that he is 
concerned about? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I don’t have it underlined because I don’t have my copy of the bill. However, in 
there you are concerned that SGI has to borrow funds from the consolidated fund which places the 
corporation in a non-competitive position. Can you explain your position on that? Why would that place 
you in a non-competitive position, by borrowing from the consolidated fund? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Are you reading right from the bill? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, I’m reading from Hansard. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — And who was supposed to have said that? Me? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well, perhaps I could make some reference to . . . Paul, I think what you’re saying 
is, if they borrow money and pay interest (and they may from time to time have to do that in terms of the 
short-term) it places them in a non-competitive position. Is that your comment? I think you will fully 
understand that insurers, generally, have an equity base. I can think of insurers selling insurance in the 
province of Saskatchewan who have equity bases in excess of $300 million and, as you are aware, 
insurance companies get their revenue from investment income and underwriting income. Often they run 
into periods where they have investment income and underwriting losses. That is very common in the 
insurance industry. They offset their underwriting losses by investment earnings. However, if they 
haven’t a broad equity base, they are not likely to have very much investment income. It is amazing 
really, when you look at the history of 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1989 

it, that Saskatchewan Government Insurance has been able to write the quantities of insurance it has 
written (and I’m speaking now about the general insurance, totally outside The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act) in this province over the years without a substantial equity base. 
 
In the initial stages they really had no equity base at all. The government of that day loaned them 
$12,000 in 1945 or 1946, and that $12,000 was paid back before the end of the year. Then they simply 
operated on the basis of surpluses accrued for many, many years with no equity base at all — at least 20 
to 25 years with no equity base. Then they received an advance from the government of $4 million in 
terms of equity, which is still a very tiny base related to the size of the corporation. Now, currently, as 
you have looked at the financial statement you will see a further advance of $30 million. But $34 million 
is still a relatively light equity base for the quantity of insurance which Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance writes. 
 
I’ll just give you one example to illustrate this. I know of a company (and I don’t suppose there’s any 
harm in my naming it). Commercial Union of Great Britain which is a very large insurer, and has an 
equity base in excess of $300 million. In the current year that company will have revenue flows of about 
$42 billion in terms of investment income and underwriting losses in excess of $25 million. It is not 
uncommon for an insurer to come into a market and cut rates pretty drastically in the hope of getting 
into the market and be willing to take underwriting losses on the assumption that somewhere along the 
line they will be able to hold the market and raise their rates to some degree contingent on the condition 
of the market. But often they will come in and take underwriting losses because they can use such losses 
to income tax advantage. This is often true in terms of a private insurer. I mentioned Commercial Union 
of Britain; Royal Insurance, another large one from Britain and Home Insurance in New York are other 
companies which follow the same practice. 
 
I’ll just cite one more example if I may to illustrate. I know of a case of a fairly large commercial 
contract in Saskatchewan last year, where a 10 cent rate per $100 was considered a normal rate. 
Somebody came in on a 5 cent rate; another company came in on a 1.5 cent rate. There is simply no way 
any company will ever have underwriting gains or profits on the basis of 1.5 cents per $100 coverage. It 
just can’t be done. They know this. But they will use that underwriting loss as a means of offsetting very 
substantial investment income now, because they have a large equity base and are getting their money 
into short-term rates at very high rates. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The minister refers to an equity position being very low all through these years 
starting out with $12,000, then you added a $4 million equity some 10 years later and now $30 million. I 
don’t have the most recent statement. But your equity position one year ago was over $26 million. Of 
course that took a beating this year because of your losses, I agree. However, I think the minister forgets 
or chooses not to take into consideration the fact that SGI is not like an average, ordinary insurance 
company, inasmuch as you have an automatic built-in market by virtue of the fact that you have a 
compulsory insurance policy through your automobile insurance business. 
 
When you started with SGIO many, many years ago, the main reason for SGI was the insuring of 
automobiles on a compulsory basis. Any company which has such a monopoly, that kind of built-in 
market, really doesn’t need much of an equity base. Only through an experience such as you had last 
year is this kind of amendment to this bill necessary. Once in 30 years, or whatever the case might be, 
does not justify your reason for wanting to change and add that section to the bill. You questioned who 
had 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1990 

said that. I read from Hansard exactly what you said on the point, Mr. Minister. 
 

This brings me to another important section of the new legislation, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance doesn’t have the same power as other Crown corporations to borrow funds to 
support its activities. If it becomes necessary to borrow funds they will have to be taken from the 
consolidated fund. This puts an unnecessary burden on the consolidated fund and places the 
corporation in an uncompetitive position. 

 
I just can’t fathom an uncompetitive position from being able to borrow from the consolidated fund. 
Many insurance companies would love to have that advantage. 
 
The subsection 9 of section 14 gives you the power to have temporary loans from banks or others. I see 
nothing wrong with that. I think this could be a very legitimate need of the corporation. That’s the place 
you would want to be borrowing without placing unnecessary burden, as you put it, on the consolidated 
fund. 
 
But for you to try to convince me or members on this side that borrowing from the consolidated fund 
places you in an uncompetitive position or is necessary at all or that you’re trying to justify it by your 
low equity position in SGI, which it should be . . . It should be given the market and the monopoly you 
have. There’s no need for a high equity position. I don’t know what the original charter of SGI said but 
I’m sure it would have said something like it is a non-profit type of corporation, that it wasn’t there to 
make a profit but to provide better rates for the motor vehicle owners. But now you’re not saying that. 
Now you’re saying we need a high equity position. 
 
Well, I suggest to you that your only justification for wanting a high equity position is the loss you 
experienced last year. Whether it was through mismanagement or whether it was through unforeseen 
circumstances, I don’t know. Certainly your report doesn’t give us that information. But that section, 
Mr. Minister, is just impossible for us to support. We’d like to see you make the changes in that section. 
 
I think you would agree with me that insurance companies are really not the borrowers of money. They 
are lenders of money, generally speaking. Those insurance companies that have to borrow have a 
financial institution market they can borrow from on a temporary or short-term basis. So, our concern in 
that section of that bill is very simply the powers it gives to the corporation and the abuse it could create 
in due course. The section other than that one part of it, subsection 9, is certainly unacceptable to the 
opposition. If the minister would see fit to making those changes we suggest, leaving in subsection 9, is 
certainly unacceptable to the opposition. If the minister would see fit to making those changes we 
suggest, leaving in subsection 9 for the short-term borrowings and short-term loans then we would 
certainly be pleased and happy to support it. But we can’t support it as it stands now given the reason 
that SGI, not necessarily insurance companies per se, does not need a high equity position. Perhaps 
you’d like to respond to that. We can’t support it as it is. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I’d like to respond to the member and simply say SGI does not have a high equity 
position, even after the $30 million. It has a very low equity position in relation to the total amount of 
insurance it carries. I would disagree with the member when he says we have an in-built market. It’s true 
with regard to the general insurance, and we are much the largest general insurer in this province, we 
have no monopoly whatsoever. We have no monopoly with regard to the extension policies on 
automobiles; we have no monopoly in terms of insurance, casualty insurance or anything of that kind, or 
bonds or anything else. We do have a monopoly in terms of licence insurance under The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act. But you must realize 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1991 

that The Automobile Accident Insurance Act is kept totally separate from the general insurance. It is a 
totally separate fund. It’s true it had $15,320,000 in reserves and they were all wiped out in the year 
1979. 
 
Now the member says he doesn’t know whether it was due to mismanagement, but it’s due to 
mismanagement of people driving on the highways. That’s what it really is. It’s a fact of life that you 
can’t have a 30 per cent increase in your accident frequency in one year and not find yourself in trouble. 
Any and every insurance company would find themselves in that difficulty and we’re completely 
convinced that a lot of those accidents are totally unnecessary. In fact I’ve seen some of them myself 
where it’s contravention of the law or some temporary negligence which creates that situation. What I 
am saying is that the equity base of SGI, even after the $30 million advance, is small in relation to the 
total amount of insurance they write. And you can relate that to any of the insurers around the world, if 
you have a look at them in relation to their equity bases and the insurance they write. I don’t think we’re 
prepared to withdraw the section from the bill that the member wants to have withdrawn. I can see his 
point with respect to going to outside financial institutions to borrow temporarily funds that are required 
on a short-run basis, but you still must have some kind of an equity base simply because the reserves are 
gone. They’ve gone for two reasons: an accident frequency which is unbelievable, but true nevertheless, 
and secondly, an inflation rate. 
 
The cost of repairs for automobiles increased 17.6 per cent in the last three months of 1979. We’re 
looking at an inflation rate of 9 per cent averaged throughout the year. A lot of that is related to the 
Canadian dollar in relation to the yen and the mark and other currencies in which products have come 
into the country. I saw (and I don’t know whether you’ll believe this or not) a bill the other day for a nut 
on the wheel of a Volkswagen Rabbit that cost $6.25. One nut. Part of that is because the mark is high in 
value and the Canadian dollar is low in value. We’re finding that very severe in terms of claims in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m simply saying that we must have some kind of rationale with respect to asset-liability arrangements. 
And I am saying that the $30 million is still not a high equity base at all in relation to the insurance 
written. The reserves in The Automobile Accident Act were wiped out and there is a $13 million deficit 
in that particular fund. It will have to carry itself over a period of time and wipe out that $13 million 
deficit. If the accident frequency went down or if the inflation rates went down, we would soon be in the 
position where we would be reducing premiums. There is no doubt about that. That has to happen only if 
the accident frequency declines very precipitously and whether that’s going to happen or not . . . We see 
some evidence in the first part of this year of some improvement. Last month I think the claims in 
relation to the previous year were down a fair bit. Now whether that trend can be continued . . . 
 
I definitely don’t agree with you that it was mismanagement. It’s true that SGI knew in the spring of 
1979 they were getting into a difficult situation with regard to the claims. But winter is always a bad 
time for claims. The assumption was that in the summer, as happened in all other summers, the ratio 
would improve. It didn’t last summer. It got worse and worse throughout the summer and fall, even 
when the weather was good. WE have to face the fact that more than $15 million in reserves is gone and 
there is a $13 million deficit in that AI (accident insurance) account. If you say that’s a monopoly, that’s 
true. The general insurance is not, but we must have an asset-liability ratio with some margin in it. All 
the $30 million gives us is about a 115 per cent to 100 per cent ratio. It simply must be there for the 
continuous operation of the corporation. 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1992 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I know I’ll be wasting my time in debating this particular subject 
with the minister. I would like to comment on a few of the points he made. He is saying that the equity is 
not high. I know it’s not high. I don’t think you understood what I said. It doesn’t have to be high. 
That’s my point. SGI does not need as other insurance companies do, a high equity position. I gave you 
a reason why you have a monopoly on automobile insurance, the compulsory part of the licence 
insurance you buy. 
 
He says there is no monopoly on general insurance. If you mean by a monopoly that you don’t have it 
all in the province, you re right. However, you have a built-in market that many insurance companies 
would love to have. Few have. In fact none do. The built-in market is in your own insurance, for 
example, of the different departments and Crown corporations of the government. It includes all of the 
municipal insurance policies you write, such as the city of Regina, city of Saskatoon and all the other 
towns and cities in the province. 
 
I presume you have most or all of the buildings the government owns insured by SGI. So that is a built-
in market. It’s a monopoly on those because nobody else, as you have admitted, no one else . . . You 
don’t tender and no one else is allowed to bid. 
 
The city of Regina last year found out it could save $180,000 by buying insurance elsewhere. How long 
has this been going on? How long have you been getting these kinds of premiums from the 
municipalities, Crown corporations, agencies and so forth? There is a built-in market there as well. 
There is automatic renewal of insurance premiums year after year after year, that you don’t have to go 
out and pay commissions for or solicit as does a private insurance company. 
 
You indicated the problems you have with accident rates. You indicated that because of the increase 
(and I think you said 30 per cent) in accident costs . . . Well, I can give you a few suggestions on how to 
save some money on that. Do what other insurance companies in the world do. When a driver is to 
blame he pays a higher premium. He does here to a point. You can have a dozen accidents here and still 
not be paying more. 
 
So those drivers in this province who are good drivers, who are safe drivers, are really paying the 
premiums for drivers who don’t care. You shake your head as if you disagree. The fact of the matter is 
that the penalty, if you want to call it that, which you impose on the careless driver is insufficient to 
meet those high costs. Secondly, the good driver is now being penalized because of the ratio of poor 
drivers. 
 
Also, you referred to the costs of repairs. Well, I’m aware of the cost of parts for Japanese and European 
vehicles and so on. However, I am curious and interested in knowing what the ratio of imported cars to 
domestic cars is in this province. I don’t think it’s very high. I’d like you to respond to this. I might be in 
for a surprise, but I don’t believe the ratio of imported automobiles in this province to domestic vehicles 
built in North America is very high. 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1993 

The other part is that you now have experimental stations in your corporation. You established those 
experimental stations for the sole purpose of finding better ways of estimating. There was another word 
I was looking for and can’t find. That was the idea behind the experimental station both her, and I think 
you have one in Saskatoon as well. There is just the one here in Regina? Well, obviously that one hasn’t 
performed very well, again by the virtue of the fact you’re concerned about the increase in accidents and 
the increase in costs. I don’t know if you have been able to reduce any ways of repairing or finding 
better ways and cheaper costs in that. 
 
With those few comments, I still say the section of the act is unnecessary. There are other areas SGI 
could be looking at for better administration and better policy within the corporation. With the loss that 
you experienced last year, I think it is high time you took a look, in one form or another, either through 
the package policy system or the compulsory insurance system (I am not suggesting this is the way to 
go) at whether or not those reckless drivers, who are creating this kind of a cost, should be paying a little 
more money for their premium thereby reducing the cost for those people who are safety conscious and 
good drivers. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Well, I appreciate the member’s remarks and his concerns. He makes some 
incorrect assumptions, for example, the assumption that hazardous driver shoots the rate way up. It is 
true it has some impact. It obviously has but it is a very small proportion of the total. The fact of the 
matter is that last year 80 per cent of the 125,000 accidents were first-time accidents. They had never 
had an accident before. Of the remaining 20 per cent, 80 per cent of them were on their second accident. 
The assumption that the hazardous driver drives the rates way up is not true. It is true it has some 
impact. The assumption that we do not penalize them is not true. We have drivers in this province . . . 
One fellow I can think of has a $2,893 surcharge on his driver’s licence. I think that is pretty severe. He 
has a surcharge on his driver’s licence. No, he is not a commercial driver. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Passenger licence? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — That’s right. His regular rate would be $10. I know of another one that is $1,000. I 
heard of another one the other day, $483. The guy was berating me very strongly because he was 
surcharged. We do have a problem in this province. I hope the members opposite realize that if you get 
surcharges heavy (and they are heavy), some of these guys go out and drive without having a licence. If 
we catch them the next time, of course, we hit them again. But the real problem arises when that fellow 
gets involved in an accident and there is no insurance coverage. 
 
Really one of the key points in the SGI in this province or the automobile accident insurance fund, I 
think, has always been the fact that when I’m driving down the road I know the member for Regina 
South coming towards me is also insured. I think that is important, far more important than people 
generally realize. I think it is true we need to make some alterations. If you go to Quebec, the Quebec 
people, in my view, are doing a better job in terms of protecting people against injury and liability 
claims. But they do nothing in protecting people with respect to having insurance on their individual 
cars. Now maybe that is not necessarily all bad. I wouldn’t argue it as all bad. 
 
I is important when you are driving in Quebec to realize that hundreds of those drivers 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1994 

coming down the road at you have no insurance at all. They just do not. They will not put it on because 
of the costs. The costs are very severe in some parts of Quebec; Montreal, for example. I think that is 
important. Please don’t get into the public mind the idea we do not surcharge drivers heavily. We do, but 
that is not in the final analysis, a complete answer. 
 
I think we must somehow educate people to have a responsible position behind the wheel. I’m going to 
cite a person, for example, whom I witnessed less than a month ago. I was walking across the bridge in 
Saskatoon. There had been snow. It was slushy. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Did you fall off? 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — No, I never fall off. I always walk a straight and narrow path. There was a line of 
traffic stopped with a new van at the end of the line. I heard this fellow coming up to the bridge; I 
realized he was coming very quickly. By the time he realized he was going as fast as he was and put on 
his brakes, the car went one way and then the other. He smashed into the back of the van. I know the 
damage to those two vehicles would exceed $5,000. There was absolutely no reason for the accident to 
have occurred at all. If the fellow had been travelling 25 miles an hour or 30 miles an hour the accident 
would never have occurred. He was driving 50 miles an hour or 60 miles an hour. 
 
We could look at all the arguments, but I think it is fair to say you must have some equity base. Now 
you are saying you had an equity base which has been wiped out by an extremely bad accident rate. I 
want you to realize that in 1978 the position of the corporation was very good, but the anti-inflation 
board said we had to reduce those rates. They didn’t just say it to us; they said it to other insurers in the 
province as well. But I must point out we are not the only ones who lost. I read The Co-operators’ report 
the other day. They had a $10 million loss on their underwriting and expect $35 million this year unless 
rates improve. So I disagree. They have an equity base supplied by 34 large co-operatives. It’s much 
larger than the equity base supplied to SGI and they are not creating as much insurance. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, let’s not belabor the point. The minister has cited some statistics I am 
curious about. I would like to know a little more about them. You indicated that out of 125,000 claims 
last year 80 per cent were first-time accidents. Maybe you can tell me what age group these accidents 
represented? I further suggest you should do a very in-depth study of where these occurred and the cause 
of these accidents. Are we not providing sufficient driver education in this province? Are we not 
providing sufficient safety clinics in this province? 
 
If you are telling me that 80 per cent of the accidents you handled last year (in other words, you are 
telling us almost 100,000 claims) were for first-time accidents, I find that very difficult to understand 
and accept. I would like further statistics, further information on the total analysis of what you have 
come up with in those 125,000 claims. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — The 16 year old to 19 year old group which people think of as bad is not; it’s good. 
The 20 year old to 24 year old group is poor. The 24 year old to 35 year old group is not good. Beyond 
there it drops off again. The best groups are the senior citizens and the teenagers. I can get the statistics 
and hand them to you. I’ll get them for you. I will be glad to give them to you. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I would like the minister to provide me with those. I 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1995 

appreciate it very much because I think this is important if SGI is going to do a job. We over here want 
to know what is going on. Perhaps we can give you some suggestions on how to improve these. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — I would appreciate those. Mr. Chairman, I would like to make one further 
comment. He suggested that maybe we are not spending enough money. Last year, through SGI, we 
spent $1,066,000 on driver training in the high schools. We spent $530,000 on a safety program. Maybe 
it can be made more effective. I don’t know, but we are trying, and trying hard. But we must have some 
change in public attitude. All we need is a bit more courtesy on the highways and we would cut out an 
awful lot of accidents. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I would make one final request of the minister. As long as you are 
going to be providing me with some statistics and information on the accident rate and age groups and 
so on . . . You have distracted me. I have forgotten what I was going to ask you. I will come back to it 
later on if you don’t mind. I had it here but I was distracted by the members, Mr. Minister, I will pass it 
on to you later. 
 
Section 15 agreed. 
 
Sections 16 to 18 agreed. 
 
Section 19 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I would just like to comment. I’m not too happy when I receive a 
report as late as we received the SGI report this year. If we’re going to do a credible job in the 
opposition to scrutinize those reports, Mr. Minister, I suggest to you that it should come out perhaps a 
month or so sooner than it did. This is ridiculous to get a report as late as we got the SGI report this year. 
Let’s face it, we have a lot of work to do. You have 44 members; we only have the 15. With the number 
of portfolios I’m carrying right now, it is difficult. I would suggest the report be in our hands much 
sooner in the future. 
 
MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Chairman, the member has a good point. We’ll do our best to get it out earlier. 
You’re lucky to get it when you did this year. They told me they wouldn’t have it ready until the last 
possible day, the 22nd, and we beat it by four, five or six days. 
 
Section 19 agreed. 
 
Sections 20 to 24 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

BILL NO. 52 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE PUBLIC SERVICE SUPERANNUATION ACT 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Would you just give me about two minutes here, please? I’m a little bit behind in 
my work here. 
 
Sections 1 to 5 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

BILL NO. 50 — AN ACT TO AMEND THE SUPERANNUATION (SUPPLEMENTARY 
PROVISIONS) ACT 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1996 

Sections 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Is section 3 agreed? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, hold it. I have an amendment coming in on this. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
MINERAL RESOURCES 

VOTE 23 
 
HON. J.R. MESSER (Minister of Mineral Resources): — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce 
my officials to the members of the committee: to my right, Mr. Bob Boncur, deputy minister, whom you 
have met on various occasions in the past; directly behind me is Ms. Janice Rathwell who is the director 
of administration; to her right is Fred Heal, the director of the office of energy conservation. 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. R.A. LARTER (Estevan): — Mr. Minister, it goes without saying, I know the Minister of Mineral 
Resources would be very disappointed if I didn’t give my usual little speech on philosophy and what we 
think of . . . It goes without saying that members on the government and opposition side of the 
legislature differ dramatically in their attitudes about spending priorities in many departments of this 
current government. The expenditure of the Department of Mineral Resources is probably one of the 
more long-standing an dramatic areas of this philosophical conflict. 
 
As members, we are well aware and we have stated many times in the past and will continue to state, the 
Progressive Conservative party does not and cannot support the concept of government participation and 
ownership in the resources field. That surprises you, doesn’t it, Mr. Minister? We feel that government 
run ventures are just less well managed and tend by and large to lose money. When government run 
operations lose money, there is only one place to go to pay the bills, Mr. Chairman, to the citizens of the 
province through taxation. You either have to tax them directly or to borrow on the money markets thus 
creating interest charges and possibly international exchange payments to cover the losses. 
 
The Progressive Conservative Party believes the government serves the citizens’ interests in a more 
effective and economically efficient manner by regulating and not participating in the development of 
the resource industries. The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan is a prime example. We hear the 
Minister of Mineral Resources boast of PCS profits last year of $48 million. But we very seldom hear of 
the $500 million it has cost us to buy the industry, much of which has come from the Saskatchewan 
Heritage Fund, a matter which I will deal with in a moment. 
 
We haven’t heard too much lately of the $2.5 billion that will be spent there by 1990, money that will 
likely have to be borrowed from New York or Toronto, at 17 per cent interest in Toronto and 20 per cent 
interest and 16 per cent U.S. exchange on U.S. dollars borrowed — to say nothing of the higher taxes 
and prices that are likely to follow as well. On the same note, we hear the minister and the Premier boast 
about the number of head office jobs PCS now has in Saskatchewan. I will concede that PCS has kept its 
head-office people in Saskatchewan, at least temporarily. 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1997 

But there are two brief comments I would like to make while I am on the topic of job creation — first of 
all the government’s announcement it will spend $2.5 billion on PCS expansion until 1990. With the 
government’s predisposition to continuously dip into the money markets of eastern Canada and the U.S., 
I shudder to think of the number of head-office jobs in this borrowing is creating in Toronto or Montreal 
or New York. An secondly I shudder to think of how many private bank accounts in Saskatchewan will 
be drained to pay the tax bills of this government when cash is required to expand. 
 
PCS, as we are all only too well aware, Mr. Chairman, has been acquired by spending the majority of 
revenues contained in the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. The government said it acquired equity in the 
corporation for its cash investment. Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess that is one way of viewing it. But as I 
understand the term equity, it means shares which are non-interest bearing. That to the Progressive 
Conservative Party is an area to which we take great exception. The government, Mr. Chairman, has 
expended a great portion of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund to acquire this so-called equity in PCS and 
the uranium industry. 
 
If I am not mistaken, the purpose of the heritage funds, with which I am familiar, is to provide some 
continuous economic activity to substitute for non-renewable resources when they are gone. To take the 
majority of the revenues from our rapidly depleting oil and gas reserves and then buy potash which is 
also finite and non-renewable seems to defeat the whole idea. The purpose of a positively managed 
heritage fund is to cushion the provincial economy from the boom and bust nature of an economy based 
on non-renewable resources. 
 
Governments in many cases are short-sighted and we have a perfect example in the current 
administration in Saskatchewan which spends today and makes long-range spending commitments for 
tomorrow based on the boom side of the resource cycle we are currently experiencing. 
 
But what about the inevitable tomorrow when the resources begin to rapidly deplete as our oil is doing 
today and we no longer have the cash inflow to pay for the expensive programs we started yesterday 
when we had the money? Do we drop our social programs? What will happen to our agricultural and our 
forestry industries, our renewable resource bases that are being ignored while we spend our diminishing 
non-renewable resource revenues on more non-renewable resources? We are caught with no money, Mr. 
Chairman, and no resources to generate it. The answer to extricate ourselves from this crazy, vicious 
circle we are in, Mr. Chairman is to direct much of our heritage fund wealth into renewable resources 
such as agriculture and forestry. 
 
Investing in renewable resources logically, Mr. Chairman, means having a renewable source of annual 
revenue. The hon. members opposite will argue that agriculture and forestry are characterized as well by 
boom and bust cycles, and no one will argue that fact; but for my money, Mr. Chairman, I would feel far 
more secure in knowing that my money was invested in an industry which was annually renewable, 
rather than waking up one morning to find I had sunk all of my money in a resource that had gone and 
that, from that point onward, I owned nothing but $3 billion or $4 billion worth of empty holes in the 
ground. 
 
Heritage fund money should be invested in ways to enhance agricultural productivity in this province. 
This could be done in many ways — the development of irrigation 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
1998 

systems; the rehabilitation of non-productive soils; the provision of a natural gas distribution network to 
allow all farmers a cheaper fuel source; and the processing of agricultural products in this province 
rather than exporting them. These are just a few of the ways in which we could help the agricultural 
sector and provide long-term continuous help to our economy. 
 
The forest industry is another renewable resource area that needs attention. Northern Saskatchewan is an 
area rich in forests which could be utilized in a variety of ways — enhanced pulp and paper 
development, lumber for construction, the raw materials for furniture manufacturing; these are only a 
few of the ways that we could stimulate this sector of our economy, provide for our own needs and 
increase our exports. But, Mr. Chairman, I do not want to dwell too long on potash. There are several 
other areas on which I would like to touch before I begin our question period to the minister. 
 
Mr. Chairman, a recent headline in the Regina Leader-Post read: SaskOil’s Profit Drops. My immediate 
reaction was, how could their profit drop at a time when other major oil companies are chalking up 
record profits? It would seem to me that only a socialist government would find a way to have the profit 
come down at a time when others in the same industry are making higher profits. Surely, Mr. Chairman, 
with ever-increasing demands for oil, and it being a crucial part of our non-renewable resource, we 
should expect more from SaskOil. Surely we should have seen a higher profit. The people are entitled to 
an answer. 
 
The province of Alberta is in a position where it gets a good return on its oil, and Saskatchewan should 
be in the same position. I contend that surely we can do better in the development of our oil resources. 
The minister should give us an account of how this came about. 
 
With respect to uranium development, Mr. Chairman, I would like to make a few observations on it as 
well. For the record, I would like to note that on February 9, 1980, the Progressive Conservative Party of 
Saskatchewan called upon the present government to stop the expenditure of public funds for uranium 
development. At that time it was obvious, as it is now, that the people of Saskatchewan are losing 
confidence in the ability of the current administration to objectively manage our resource revenues. 
 
It is essential that an all-party resource development heritage fund committee be established, with the 
power to examine all pertinent information before any additional tax dollars are invested. The whole 
matter of uranium development, Mr. Chairman, should be carefully reviewed. The present government 
is not providing the taxpayers of Saskatchewan with comprehensive information on market forecasts and 
environmental safety considerations. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Chairman, the split in the cabinet over uranium issues adds to the concern of taxpayers and 
confirms our lack of confidence in the present administration. In light of the recent announcement on the 
Government of British Columbia that there will be a seven-year moratorium on uranium exploration and 
development in that province, I believe it will be necessary for the present government to make clear its 
policy of using public money for funding uranium development in Saskatchewan. 
 
The public in this province have been very vocal in their concern over nuclear development. And when 
one takes into consideration that the present government has already spent over $300 million in public 
funds for uranium development and by 1981 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
1999 

the total investment will exceed $500 million, then, Mr. Chairman, I believe the current government of 
this province has a moral obligation to the people to provide answers. 
 
We, on this side of the House, Mr. Chairman, believe the current administration is guilty of three crimes 
with regard to uranium development: (1) it has chosen to ignore the fears of the public, (2) it has already 
spent so much money (public money) that it is in so far over its head it cannot reverse its position, and 
(3) it has gone against the policy of the federal NDP which it claims to be strong supporters of, Mr. 
Chairman, you could call it hypocrisy or probably mugwumping. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the present government has had a very bad record in dealing with the incidents of 
environmental contamination. We need only to remember it has been four years since the PCB spill at 
the Federal Pioneer Plant in Regina. They are absolutely stumped in resolving and quickly deal with a 
disaster of such immense magnitude as a nuclear accident? How can the current administration possibly 
protect public health and the environment from nuclear hazard when it is so intimately involved in the 
development of the very thing against what it is supposed to safeguard us from? 
 
It is now very clear this government must tell the people of Saskatchewan what its plans are for uranium 
development. The days of secrecy must end. The full speed ahead attitude for uranium development 
taken by the current administration is sad testimony to the fact that the current government either has 
chosen to ignore the fears being voiced by the public or, as I stated earlier, is so financially committed to 
the uranium development contracts it cannot withdraw. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it is easily seen this government is not living up to the responsibilities vested in it by the 
people. It is now time for this government to clarify the following issues. The people want and expect a 
clear statement of the Saskatchewan government’s present and future involvement in the uranium 
development. There is a need for a clear, detailed outline on how the Saskatchewan government plans to 
dispose of al wastes resulting from uranium mining and refining in Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, I 
believe this government should provide a complete statement on how much money has been invested in 
uranium development by the Government of Saskatchewan, including its Crown corporations, since 
1971. There should be a committee of this legislature, a full House committee with a research budget 
and staff, to fully investigate the whole question of uranium development in Saskatchewan. 
 
Questions such as: what is the estimated return on investment for tax dollars invested in uranium 
development? Would the clean-up from an incident of environmental pollution from uranium 
development be paid for by the public as a consequence of financial involvement of the Saskatchewan 
government in the uranium development? Must be answered. Indeed, Mr. Chairman, we call upon the 
government to stop all further investment of tax dollars into uranium development. I wonder if the Key 
Lake Commission brings back a report to the government suggesting uranium development is 
dangerous, will the government stop any further uranium development in this province? 
 
Mr. Chairman, that is where we stand on uranium development. Now let the government make its 
position clear. In closing, Mr. Chairman, it goes without saying the Progressive Conservative Party and 
this current administration are philosophically miles apart on the subject of government intrusion into 
the resource development sector. I have a funny feeling the currently observed trend of government 
intervention 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
2000 

into this sector will not change. Likely the opposite is true until there is a change in government. I hope 
for the sake of the heritage of the people of Saskatchewan this change will not take too long in coming. 
 
MR. MESSER: — Mr. Chairman, that speech is not much different from last year’s or the previous 
year’s speech. The member started off admitting that there is a significant difference in philosophy in 
respect to resource development in Saskatchewan — the government’s vis-a-vis the Conservative 
caucus, here. He closes on those words as well. I guess one could simply say, well what’s new with the 
Conservative position on resource development? — at least the Conservatives in Saskatchewan. Because 
they very much differ from Conservative philosophy and resource development strategies compared to 
other Conservative caucuses in opposition or other Conservative governments in Canada, Mr. Chairman. 
 
He informs us that we can best develop our regulations . . . I wonder, Mr. Chairperson, if you can have 
the motor-mouth for the constituency of Moosomin allow me to respond to his colleague’s remarks, 
which I have taken seriously. I expect the member for Estevan will take mine seriously, as he has in the 
past. I think he would like to hear them. Well, Mr. Chairman, if I may return to them. We can look at 
experiences in the past that all walks of government have been confronted with in the workability of 
regulations and non-direct participation or the lack of participation in the development of resources. And 
we’ll find out that in many instances under unfortunate circumstances the provinces, the people and the 
resources that were in the process of being developed suffered significantly. The best example for the 
province of Saskatchewan has to be the activity the potash sector was confronted with during the 1960s 
when we had an oversupply. Certainly the government did not come in as an ownership entity at that 
time but they did take significant direct action — which up to that point in time had been criticized, or 
where similar actions would have been criticized by certain sectors of elected personnel — to correct the 
problem. So there are some very significant roles to government to play and some of them are drastic 
indeed. The regulations of the day certainly showed they were not able to cope with the problem the 
potash industry was confronted with during the period of time when there was overproduction, 
oversupply in respect of demand. 
 
Now the member states that there is no place for government joint ventureship whatsoever, or 
participation, in the resource sector. And he criticizes the Government of Saskatchewan for pursuing a 
joint-ventureship, public-participation role in resource development. I listened to a similar expose of the 
Conservative policy in respect to resource development in Crown corporations last week by the member 
for Moosomin. 
 
He chastised the government and its Crown corporations, especially the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, for involving themselves in the potash industry. I’m sure the member heard, on Friday or 
over the weekend, the Premier of the province of Manitoba indicating that IMCC (International Minerals 
and Chemicals Corporation) is going to spend some money on a preliminary survey in potash. I think 
that’s an indicator that PCS made proper decisions in extending its production capabilities some time 
ago. And now other entities are looking at the likelihood of expanding potash in other jurisdictions, not 
only in Saskatchewan but in other areas as well. I see that Mr. Lyons has reserved the right to own 25 
per cent of any potash operation which may establish itself in the province of Manitoba. I’m not arguing 
with them. I think probably the likelihood of a potash mine establishing in Manitoba is indeed very slim, 
but if it is, he has the foresight as a Conservative Premier to say that there is a very strong likelihood that 
he will want to participate in the development and the actual ownership and 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
2001 

operation of that resource. Clearly, that is a departure from the Conservative caucus in the province of 
Saskatchewan. When I look to Alberta I see Crown corporations involved in resource development; I 
look into British Columbia and I see the same thing; and certainly when I look into the province of 
Ontario I see the same thing. So these people should be identified as being very much different from any 
other Conservative caucus in Canada today. With all respect to the member for Estevan and his caucus, I 
suggest to them they are on the wrong track if they think we can develop these resources without 
participation directly and develop them in the best interests of the people we represent, in this instance, 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the member has made some comment with respect to answers he would like to have from certain 
Crown corporations, accountability of those Crown corporations. It is not my job, or my responsibility 
as the Minister of Mineral Resources, to defend the actions of a Crown corporation. We set down 
policies for them and believe they will be able to hire competent executive management in order to 
achieve those policies. Certainly the Crown corporation review committee gives ample opportunity for 
members of the legislature, who sit on that committee, to scrutinize the success of lack of success in 
respect to those Crown corporations. 
 
I believe the annual reports and the achievements of those Crown corporations speak for themselves. 
Members will have an opportunity tomorrow to begin to review the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas 
Corporation. So I am not wanting to get into discussing the Crown corporation per se. We will have a 
better forum; we have a better forum in order to do that. 
 
The member does, though, make some comment and alluded to a further line of questioning in regard to 
the heritage fund. He talked about the investment we are now taking advantage of during the boom 
cycle. He in fact criticizes us for investing in those resources which provide this boom in the province of 
Saskatchewan at this time. He suggests there is something improper in involving ourselves in the 
development of non-renewable resources. Well I don’t know what the member would do if he were in 
our place. But surely one takes advantage of boom cycles in order to prepare for times of depression or 
declining economic opportunities. That’s exactly what we are doing with our investments in the non-
renewable resources. 
 
When we started on an enhanced or escalated strategy so far as involvement in resource development 
was concerned, we stated quite clearly we were going to take advantage of those resources which were 
now in high demand, of which we had ample quantities, in order to generate larger returns to 
Saskatchewan people. We in turn could direct moneys to other areas which would give us a stabilized 
economy when those resources started to dwindle and dry up. 
 
We are concerned about renewable energy as much, or more so, than anyone else in North America. We 
also are very much concerned about our largest and most important industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The member for Estevan alludes to it — the farming industry, the agricultural industry in 
Saskatchewan. By and large we have made giant steps in giving assistance and encouragement to the 
farming community in the province of Saskatchewan. One only has to compare farms in Saskatchewan 
10 or 15 years ago to today to see an almost unbelievable progress having been made and certainly a 
stability in that farming sector (even though we are confronted now with troubled markets), a confidence 
which the farming community has quite likely never enjoyed in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
2002 

He mentions forestry. He knows we have a limited forestry potential in Saskatchewan. But we are using 
that to a greater and greater extent, certainly more so in the last five or six years than ever before. Again, 
we are doing that not only through private participation, but also public participation. 
 
The member moved on then and said we should be spending some of this heritage money on the 
establishment of natural gas lines to all communities in Saskatchewan and to all farms in Saskatchewan. 
 
Here again, I’m a little bit befuddled and I have to ask the member how he expects to have it both ways 
because he spends some time talking about the problem of development of a non-renewable resource 
and of how some day we’re going to run out of this, as he put it, rapidly depleting resource. Certainly 
natural gas is one of those; it will deplete much faster in Saskatchewan than it will in the province of 
Alberta because we just don’t have the reserves of it which they have. If we were going to turn on and 
encourage higher consumption it seems a bit difficult for him to say on one hand, these resources are 
going to be depleting very, very rapidly and we should be investing in other areas to bring economic 
stability, then on the other hand saw we should be building gaslines to provide gas to all of these people 
in Saskatchewan including farmers and then five, six or seven years down the road tell them well, that’s 
fine you’ve had five, six or seven years’ use out of your gas-lines, we are now out of gas and we’ve 
done a tremendous service for you. 
 
It just doesn’t work that way. We know we have modest reserves of gas and we want to develop them in 
a very regulated manner in order to always have a certain element of security for our Saskatchewan 
consumers. It may be unfortunate but we have to go out of the province to acquire 60 per cent or 70 per 
cent of our gas and it might be arguable as to whether we could adjust the percentage figure by 10, 15 or 
20 per cent one way or the other but the fact of the matter is that we are largely dependent on imported 
gas now and we will always be. We do not want to mislead people, as I suggest some members of the 
Conservative caucus are doing, by suggesting that it would be practicable and intelligent to attempt to 
service all farms in the province of Saskatchewan with natural gas. 
 
Now the member wants to get into the government involvement in uranium and I suggest to a large 
extent he will be able to do this in Crown corporations when the Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation appears before that committee. I do not know how much money has been invested in the 
Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation. It certainly doesn’t come from the Department of 
Mineral Resources and perhaps the member may ask the Minister of Finance or the minister responsible 
for SMDC when he is in Crown corporations. I disagree that we need a House committee to again 
review the uranium activities in the province of Saskatchewan. We have thoroughly investigated the 
expanded development of uranium in this province. I believe we have the most credible current reports 
that anyone could enjoy indicating the implications of expanded uranium development in Saskatchewan 
and on these we based our decision to continue to expand uranium activities in Saskatchewan, at least to 
the extent of mining and refining. 
 
The member mentions the Key Lake Board of Inquiry so he knows whenever there is going to be any 
major additional activity in the province there will be proper channels that have to be respected and 
followed by the government and by the developer before any decision is to be made, either affirmative 
or negative. We, through that process, have a conscience and a knowledge of what the implications and 
ramifications of 



 
April 21, 1980 

 

 
2003 

continued uranium activity in the province of Saskatchewan are going to be. 
 
We have structured, in our minds, the best possible means of being able to monitor and look ahead as to 
what the implications and the problems might be for uranium mining. I’m not suggesting to members of 
this Legislative Assembly that there are not problems with the expansion of uranium mining in 
Saskatchewan. There obviously are. There are obviously problems with any kind of resource 
development which takes place in this era because there are persons who are very much concerned about 
the consequence of the development in respect of environment an certainly people are concerned about 
the health and safety. I think we are leaders in recognizing those concerns and trying to contend with 
them. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m just going to conclude my remarks by briefly responding to the three crimes the 
member said we have allowed ourselves to establish, or allowed to continue in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The first was the concerns and fears of the public. I ask the member to try to find some 
other jurisdiction which has done more in trying to convey information to the public and allow public 
input into the development of resources. Certainly we have been standard-bearers in that respect. 
 
I don’t know what else can be done. There is always going to be a certain element of the public which 
will remain opposed to, if I may use an example, uranium development. That doesn’t mean one should 
not make a decision to continue development. We weigh the pros and cons very carefully and allow 
those people to have input and access to information. Then we make a decision as a responsible 
government should. 
 
The second was that we have spent too much money in respect of tat development. I suggest to the 
member that in many instances the money we spent on resource development has shown credible and 
legitimate returns. I suggest to him in the long haul that this expenditure, this direction of resource 
moneys to further enhance resource development in Saskatchewan, will prove to be the best investment 
we could make for those dollars we have at this point in time. 
 
He concluded that the third sin was to depart from the federal New Democratic Party policy on resource 
development and in particular uranium development. I convey to the member that we do not believe we 
have departed from federal policy in respect to uranium development. If he would take the time to look 
at the position established by the federal party at its last convention in Toronto, he would know we are 
consistent with the policy — much more consistent as a provincial New Democratic organization vis-à-
vis federal New Democratic policy than is the Conservative caucus here in Saskatchewan vis-à-vis the 
policies and actions of other Conservative governments in Canada. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, I conclude by saying that our philosophies differ very much in the development of 
resources. I say we’re prepared to stand on our record. We can look at the activity and the stability we 
enjoy in Saskatchewan. With the exception of Alberta no other province in Canada enjoys that kind of 
security. This was not always the case. By and large the government and its policies have played a very 
large role in giving this kind of stability and confidence to Saskatchewan people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. R.L. ANDREW (Kindersley): — To the minister, one of the big arguments in the constitutional 
crisis that’s presently going on is exactly what the western provinces are 



 
April 21, 1980 
 

 
2004 

going to, or will receive for their resources, in particular for their oil and natural gas at this point in time. 
Can the minister advise the House as to projected production of light and medium-heavy crude in the 
province of Saskatchewan over the next five years? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, I can’t break out what the member asked for, at last not at the particular point 
in time, when he asked for sweet, light, medium, heavy and what we assume to be the production this 
year is just slightly under 60 million barrels in total. We expect over the next four to five years the 
production will stay relatively static but what will happen is the sweet, light, medium crudes will decline 
because we feel we don’t have the pools or the resources there. Certainly, the accelerated activity in the 
South has not proven our assumption to be in error, but it will be offset by accelerated, expanded and 
enhanced production of heavy oils. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Would you be able to provide the sweet crude if we exclude that or put that as all 
other crudes other than the heavy crude? Would you be able to provide those figures for the Assembly, 
let’s say for the projection over the next five years or perhaps ten years? 
 
MR. MESSER: — Well, I am somewhat hesitant to do that. It’s not because I have any problem with 
the figures but when we talk about assumptions in respect of heavy crude production, we’re dealing now 
with new technology. We’re on the threshold of a lot of new technology. A lot of people are optimistic 
but in actual application, we don’t know whether it’ll come on. The heavy crude is difficult to provide 
and I know he’s not asking for it. In the medium, sweet, light or crudes, it can be done but who knows 
what the accelerated activity will bring about. On one hand, one might give what can be interpreted as a 
mildly pessimistic view in relation to production. A new discovery, a new method of extracting oil from 
the formation could accelerate that significant so I wouldn’t want the member to assume these figures 
really mean a lot. 
 
In technical terms, I guess we have to make some assumptions as to what we think is going to happen in 
the future. But there is so much that could take place it is just virtually unpredictable. Nobody would l 
put a lot of confidence in the figures. And if the member is appreciative of that, we’ll try to break 
something down for him and provide it to him at a later date. 
 
The committee recessed until 7 p.m. 


