






















































Hansard: November 26, 1981


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 26, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
MR.. SPEAKER: — I am directed by His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor to inform you that he will 
open the fourth session of the 19th legislature at 2 o’clock today, Thursday, November 26, 1981. 
 
 2:03 p.m. 
His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to open the session with the following speech: 
 
MR.. SPEAKER, 
 
MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 
 
It is my privilege to welcome you to the fourth session of the 19th legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
1981 has been a year of important achievements for the people of Saskatchewan. We have finally 
resolved disputes over the constitution and energy. Our province continues to prosper in a period of 
national recession. There are, however, many new challenges before us that call for a vigorous response 
from our people and their elected representatives. 
 
THE CONSTITUTION 
 
On November 5, 1981, the federal government and nine provincial governments, including my 
government, concluded an historic agreement on the constitution. This agreement heralds a new 
constitutional era for Canada and for all Canadians. 
 
For the first time in our 114-year history we now have the means to change our constitution without 
recourse to the parliament in Great Britain. By providing for a Canadian constitutional amendment 
formula, this agreement secures our total independence as a country. In that sense it can be said that 
Canada’s present-day leaders have concluded successfully the task of nation building begun over a 
century ago. 
 
My government believes that the new amending formula is a good one for Canada. It confirms and 
maintains our federal system of government. It ensures the appointed Senate cannot block indefinitely 
constitutional reforms desired by Canadians and their duly elected governments. It combines flexibility 
and protection of provincial jurisdiction. 
 
The November 5 agreement also provides for other substantive constitutional changes. It guarantees the 
protection of individual rights and freedoms while recognizing that in some cases that protection remains 
the ultimate responsibility of parliament and the legislatures and not the courts. 
 
The agreement constitutionalizes the principle of equalization, one of the crowning achievements of 
postwar co-operative federalism which commits governments to maintaining reasonably comparable 
levels of public service for all Canadians wherever  



 
November 26, 1981 
 

 
2 

they happen to live. It also clarifies and confirms provincial jurisdiction over natural resources, an 
important cornerstone of Saskatchewan’s economy and a vital part of the confederation bargain for 
western Canada. 
 
My government is proud of the role it has played in the events and negotiations leading up to this 
agreement. Saskatchewan was the only province to argue before the Supreme Court of Canada that 
constitutional change could be achieved other than through unilateral action on the one hand or 
unanimous agreement on the other. In confirming the constitutional convention of provincial consent 
and in adopting my government’s contention that a broad provincial consensus was sufficient to 
safeguard the federal principle, the supreme court broke the constitutional logjam and made agreement 
possible. 
 
My government deeply regrets that the government of the province of Quebec was unable to support the 
agreement; we wish it had decided otherwise. The participation of Quebec in the building of our country 
has been and will continue to be of vital importance. 
 
My government is pleased that the proposal put forward by Telex from the Minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs, the Hon. Roy Romanow, to the Hon. Jean Chretien of the federal government 
on Wednesday, November 18, has now been accepted. This called for section 28 of the constitutional 
resolution now before parliament, dealing with equality rights between men and women, to be removed 
from the ambit of section 33 of that resolution and for the inclusion of a section recognizing treaty and 
aboriginal rights. My government has been advised that its proposal has been accepted by the other nine 
governments which were parties to the November 5 agreement. 
 
It is clear that there is still work to be done. Governments must honour their moral and constitutional 
obligation to Canada’s aboriginal peoples. Other constitutional issues including such important matters 
as the Supreme Court of Canada and Senate reform will also require our attention. 
 
ENERGY AND CONSERVATION 
 
On October 26, 1981, my government signed an agreement with the Government of Canada relating to 
the development of the oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan and the division of gross revenues among 
the producing companies, the Canadian government and the Saskatchewan government. Under the terms 
of this agreement increased revenues will flow to producers to provide a much needed stimulus for 
Saskatchewan’s oil and gas industry. The agreement will also provide a stable framework within which 
governments and the industry can plan for the future. 
 
The agreement has removed some of the negative aspects of the national energy program and will help in 
achieving long-term energy security for all Canadians. My ministers have negotiated special provisions 
which will assist in the orderly development of Saskatchewan’s vast reserves of heavy oil. My 
government is confident that this agreement will ensure continued development of the province’s oil and 
gas reserves and a fair return to the people from this resource. 
 
Energy conservation continues to be a priority of my government. You will be asked to consider 
amendments to The Power Corporation Act which will more clearly set out the authority of the 
corporation to encourage energy conservation and promote the development of alternative forms of 
energy. 



 
November 26, 1981 

 
3 

FEDERAL-PROVINCIAL RELATIONS 
 
While my government welcomes these important agreements, there are alarming signs of new efforts by 
the federal government to cut back funding for essential health and educational services. As part of its 
recent budget, the federal government finally tabled its long-awaited proposals for new cost-sharing 
arrangements between Ottawa and the provinces. These arrangements provide federal financing for key 
social programs and institutions in Saskatchewan and other provinces, including medical care and 
hospitalization insurance, universities and technical institutes. The provinces were assured by Ottawa 
that these new arrangements would be the outcome of meaningful consultations. These consultations did 
not take place. 
 
My government will strive to assure that Ottawa maintains adequate finance funding for key social 
programs. This is not just a fight over money, but also a struggle to maintain nation-wide programs in 
fields such as medicare which were pioneered by Saskatchewan people and of which we are justifiably 
proud. 

 
THE ECONOMY 
 
The recent decline in interest rates is indeed a welcome development. Nevertheless, my government is 
concerned that the decline will not be sufficient to prevent a worsening of the current slowdown in the 
economy that will ease the burdens on farmers, home-owners and small businessmen. 
 
The federal budget of November 12 will do little to improve the economic situation. Indeed, it will likely 
cause increased unemployment and wasted productive potential. Current federal policies to counter 
inflation have failed. Despite the fact that the national economy has entered a recession, no weakening of 
inflationary pressure is apparent. 
 
My government regrets that the federal budget failed to provide a clear strategy to combat inflation, 
stimulate economic growth and increase control of the Canadian economy by Canadians. Over the 
coming months my government will be developing proposals for tax and spending initiatives to promote 
economic development in Saskatchewan and to assist the people of this province to take full advantage 
of the opportunities before us. These proposals will be placed before you in next spring’s budget. You 
will be asked to approve The Saskatchewan Home-owners’ Security Act to give temporary protection to 
people threatened with loss of their homes through foreclosure, because of unusually high mortgage 
interest rates. 
 
AGRICULTURE 
 
Saskatchewan’s 1981 grain crop is well above average in yield and quality. Agriculture still contributes 
the largest part of the gross provincial product — $4.3 billion in 1981 and $5 billion projected for 1982. 
 
To meet the challenge to produce more grains needed for world markets, my government will continue 
the five-year, $25-million commitment to agricultural research begun in the FarmLab program this year. 
 
High interest rates and low prices have meant difficult times for cattle and hog producers. In 1976 my 
government introduced SHARP, which has provided valuable  



 
November 26, 1981 
 

 
4 

assistance to hog producers, especially in the last two years. 
 
Last year my government announced the beef stabilization plan which will come into effect on January 
1, 1982. My government believes that the only long-term solution to problems in the livestock industry 
is a national stabilization plan for hogs and cattle. My ministers will continue their efforts for the early 
implementation of such a plan. 
 
My government will continue its fight to protect the Crow rate for prairie producers and to secure 
improvements in the grain transportation system. One thousand Saskatchewan hopper cars are now fully 
operational within the transportation system, moving prairie grain to export positions. 
 
You will be asked to consider amendments to The Agricultural Incentives Act and to The Crop 
Insurance Act. 
 
TRANSPORTATION 
 
The decision of the Government of Canada to make major cuts in passenger rail service has serious 
repercussions for Saskatchewan. My government stands with communities such as Melville and Watrous 
in their attempts to retain this important transportation service. 
 
Improvements to the public highways and rural roads continue to be a priority for my government. Work 
is under way to extend the construction of four-lane highways west of Swift Current and west of North 
Battleford. 
 
Over 30 communities with populations of 50 to 100 people are eligible to participate in Open Roads II 
which started this year. In 1981 access roads to nearly half of the eligible communities were oil treated 
and access roads to the other communities will be completed in 1982. 
 
In the last six years, as a result of an intensive traffic safety campaign, injuries and fatalities in 
Saskatchewan have decreased by 35 per cent from projected levels. This year my government will begin 
a program to encourage the formation of local community traffic safety groups across the province. 
 
In the course of this session you will be asked to consider amendments to The Highways Act. 
 
MUNICIPALITIES 
 
In 1982 a number of Saskatchewan municipalities will celebrate their 100th anniversary of settlement. 
To those communities my government offers its congratulations. 
 
In recent years my government has responded to the changing needs of Saskatchewan’s municipalities 
with a number of new and expanded programs: revenue sharing, expanded transit assistance, urban 
parks, downtown revitalization, assistance for railway relocation projects, a new community capital fund 
and many others. 
 
My government will continue to work with local governments and their associations to build on this 
record of progress to ensure that Saskatchewan municipalities, both urban and rural, share fully in our 
province’s economic development. 



 
November 26, 1981 

 
5 

You will be asked to consider a new Urban Elections Act which will provide for revised and uniform 
election procedures for school boards and urban municipal councils. 
 
You will also be asked to consider amendments to The Rural Municipality Act and The Municipal 
Employees’ Superannuation Act. 
 
INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE 
 
Saskatchewan is entering an era of growth and will provide exciting challenges to business and industry. 
To help meet those challenges, my government will strengthen its efforts to assist businesses to improve 
their marketing and management capabilities. A new pilot program has been implemented to provide 
support to locally organized groups in promoting economic development in their communities. The 
activities of the Saskatchewan Research Council have been extended to provide research and technical 
assistance to businessmen and manufacturers. 
 
Earlier this year, my government introduced the well servicing assistance program and the temporary oil 
field support program to assist small businesses suffering as a result of the national energy program. To 
date there has been $2 million in direct assistance made available to this sector of the economy. 
 
THE NORTH 
 
In the past year my government has been consulting with northern people to determine the best way to 
reorganize local government in the North. Legislation to establish northern municipalities will be placed 
before you. This Act will restructure municipal government in northern Saskatchewan to enable local 
governments to increase their responsibility and authority. During 1982 my government will expand 
school training programs for Northerners to give northern residents the job skills needed to take 
advantage of new employment opportunities in the North. These opportunities have been enhanced 
through the surface lease agreements associated with northern mining projects. The most recent 
agreement, with the Key Lake Mining Corporation, sets new Canadian standards for employment, 
training and business benefits for northern people. 
 
Legislation to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act will be introduced. 
 
ENVIRONMENT 
 
As part of the continued commitment by my government to play a strong role in protecting 
Saskatchewan’s environment, legislation will be introduced to amend The Department of the 
Environment Act. These amendments will strengthen the department’s authority to control the storage, 
transportation, treatment and disposal of hazardous substances. 
 
The transportation of dangerous goods is an issue which has attracted increasing public concern in 
Canada. With industrial expansion and increased chemical usage in agriculture, the risks will continue to 
grow and preventive action must be taken now. New federal legislation regulates the interprovincial 
movement of dangerous goods and provides for the appointment of inspectors to ensure compliance with 
safety regulations. My government intends to introduce complementary legislation gover- 



 
November 26, 1981 
 

 
6 

ning the handling and movement of dangerous goods within Saskatchewan, and will train existing 
provincial inspection staff to act as dangerous goods inspectors. 
 
JUSTICE 
 
My government is pleased that an agreement has finally been concluded with the Government of Canada 
to provide for the cost of services for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police in the province. Amendments 
to The Police Act will be placed before you. 
 
Three years ago, the governments of Saskatchewan and Canada established the unified family court in 
Saskatoon as a pilot project. This court has jurisdiction over family law and matters relating to 
maintenance, custody, separation and divorce. It is presided over by judges experienced in all aspects of 
family law. The project has proven very successful, and my government intends to set up a similar court 
in Regina in the near future. 
 
Plans announced earlier for the integration of municipal court services will be completed by March 
1982. This will ensure more uniform administration of justice in all parts of the province. 
 
You will be asked to approve a new Court Order Interest Act and amendments to The Jury Act and The 
Legal Profession Act. Amendments to The Election Act will also be introduced. 
 
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES 
 
1982 is the 35th anniversary of Saskatchewan’s hospital insurance plan and the 20th anniversary of 
medical care insurance. Our province was a pioneer in the introduction of these critically important 
services, and my government is committed to maintain the highest standards of hospital and medical 
care. 
 
But health care encompasses more than hospitals and medical services. Today, ill health is often the 
result of individual lifestyles — smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, lack of exercise, poor 
nutrition, stress. In this session the government will take steps to strengthen its preventive health 
programs, to inform Saskatchewan residents about habits which result in health problems, and to 
improve preventive programs for groups within the population which are most at risk. Mental health 
services will also receive increased attention. At a time when social services are being curtailed in many 
jurisdictions, my government reaffirms its commitment to this important area of government activity. 
 
Last July the charge for residents of special-care homes was substantially reduced. My government has 
further demonstrated its longstanding dedication to the needs of the elderly and disadvantaged by 
increasing its financial support for the home care program, sheltered workshops and activity centres, the 
child protection program and the province’s foster parents. You will be asked to consider amendments to 
The Medical Care Insurance Act and The Prescription Drugs Act. 
 
LABOUR 
 
My government takes pride in its record of progressive labour legislation — legislation which benefits 
all the working men and women in this province. The provincial  



 
November 26, 1981 

 
7 

minimum wage will be raised to $4.25 an hour January 1, 1982, maintaining Saskatchewan’s leadership 
role. My government has appointed a committee of review to study and make recommendations on all 
aspects of workers’ compensation in the province. My ministers will give early consideration to 
recommendations to improve benefits for injured workers and their dependents. 
 
In this International Year of the Disabled my government is pleased to announce it will give prompt 
consideration to the enactment of accessibility standards in public buildings based on the 
recommendations of an advisory committee which has been established to consider a uniform building 
code. This committee is reviewing the comprehensive standards proposed by the provincial accessibility 
committee and already adopted by the Department of Government Services as guideline specifications 
for all new and renovated provincial government buildings. 
 
EDUCATION AND LIBRARIES 
 
My government reaffirms its commitment to provide, in co-operation with school boards, teachers and 
parents, a sound educational system for all Saskatchewan children in both urban and rural areas. 
 
In addition, it will continue to address the special needs of adults who have not traditionally had access 
to the education and training system. Decentralized Outreach programs through the community colleges 
will provide increased opportunities for technical and vocational education for people throughout the 
province. 
 
As part of my government’s effort to increase the employment and training opportunities for native 
people, the native career development program and the non-status Indian and Metis program will be 
expanded. Along with the new technical-vocational institute planned for Prince Albert and new training 
programs in northern Saskatchewan, these will provide the training necessary to ensure that native 
people will be able to take advantage of the growing job opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
My government will also proceed with the construction of the new geological sciences building at the 
University of Saskatchewan. The modern facility will make an important contribution to the 
development of the province’s mineral resources. 
 
You will be asked to consider amendments to The Education Act. 
 
My ministers believe that a strong provincial library system with grass-roots support is fundamental to 
the quality of life we enjoy in Saskatchewan. You will be asked to consider amendments to The Public 
Libraries Act. 
 
CULTURE 
 
My government is dedicated to the maintenance and enhancement of the Saskatchewan culture and 
multicultural heritage. This year over 1,200 Saskatchewan citizens have attended public meetings in the 
province to respond to the report of the cultural policy secretariat. In coming months my government 
will be advancing important new initiatives resulting from those public consultations. These initiatives 
will be designed to promote and assist the development of our society’s cultural expression in the 
preservation of our cultural heritage. Amendments to The Arts Board Act and The Heritage Property Act 
will be placed before you. 



 
November 26, 1981 
 

 
8 

COMMUNICATIONS 
 
My ministers recognize the importance of communication technology and its potential role in 
strengthening education and cultural initiatives. My government takes special pride in the fibre optics 
network which will carry cable television, telephone and other telecommunication services to over 50 
Saskatchewan towns and cities. When completed in 1984 this network will be the largest of its kind in 
the world. The manufacture of fibre optics in Saskatchewan will help provide the base for a high 
technology industry in this province. I am sure the people of Saskatchewan will welcome the 
announcement that effective January 1, 1982, the service connection charge for farm telephone 
subscribers will be reduced from the present rate of up to $400 to a flat rate of $100. 
 
CO-OPERATION 
 
Co-operation has long been a part of the Saskatchewan experience. The results are reflected in a wide 
variety of co-operative organizations in the province. My government strongly supports the co-operative 
movement and stands ready to serve those who choose the co-operative way. The government has 
recently entered into agreement with Federated Co-operatives to establish an experimental ethanol plant. 
 
In the coming months the Department of Co-operation will be embarking on new initiatives involving 
Indian and native agricultural and day care co-operatives. 
 
PENSIONS 
 
My government recognizes that people living on fixed incomes have been particularly hard hit by the 
failure of federal government policies to counter inflation. Accordingly, legislation was introduced to 
supplement public service pensions and to increase the pensions paid to the spouses of deceased 
superannuates and employees under the public service superannuation plan. 
 
The public accounts for the last fiscal year, together with estimates for the year beginning April 1, 1982, 
will be submitted to you. 
 
I leave you now to the business of the session with full confidence that you will favourably discharge 
your duties and responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide this legislature in all of its 
deliberations. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:29 p.m. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — Mr.. Speaker, I move that a Bill respecting the administration of oaths of 
office be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 



 
November 26, 1981 

 
9 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
Introduction of Sergeant at Arms 

 
MR.. SPEAKER: — I beg leave to inform the Assembly that Linton Alexander MacDonald, Esq., has 
been appointed Sergeant at Arms of the Legislative Assembly. 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
MR.. SPEAKER: — I also beg to inform the Assembly that Blair Butterfield, Brent Christensen, Kevin 
Kemp, Carmen Layton and Therese Stecyk will be pages during the present session. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 
TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 

 
MR.. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to prevent mistakes I have obtained a 
copy of the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
Speech from the Throne 

 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — Mr.. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr.. Romanow: 
 

That the speech of His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor be taken into consideration on Monday, 
next. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — Mr.. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr.. Smishek: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed after first having been perused by Mr.. 
Speaker, that he do appoint the printing thereof and that no person but such as he shall appoint do 
presume to print the same. 

 
Motion agreed to. 

 
Members to Compose Lists for Select Standing Committees 

 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — Mr.. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr.. Snyder, the member for 
Moose Jaw South: 
 

That Messrs. Banda, Birkbeck, Lusney, McLeod and Miner be constituted a special committee to 
prepare and report, with all convenient speed, lists of members to compose the standing committees 
of this Assembly provided under rule no. 86: 

 
That the said standing committees be severally empowered to examine and  



 
November 26, 1981 
 

 
10 

inquire into all such matters and things as may be referred to them by this Assembly and to report 
from time to time their observations thereon with power to send for persons, papers and records and 
to examine witnesses under oath. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Election of Deputy Chairman of Committees 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — Mr.. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr.. Bowerman, the member 
for Shellbrook: 
 

That Lloyd E. Johnson, Esq., member for the constituency of Turtleford, be elected deputy chairman 
of committees of this Assembly. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — Mr.. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:37 p.m. 


