






















































Hansard: March 23, 1981


1269 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 23, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. BYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce to you, and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, 50 grade 12 students from Foam Lake Composite High School. They are seated in the Speaker's 
gallery. They are accompanied here today by their teacher, Mr. Ian Cooper, and Mr. Popowych and their bus 
drivers, Mr. Stobbe and Mr. Andrusiak, and, I believe, Mr. Labas from the Department of Co-ops. 
 
I am particularly delighted to introduce this group from Foam Lake to this Assembly. I served for many years as a 
member of the staff of the Foam Lake Composite School. I draw to the attention of members of the Assembly that 
three of the members of the Saskatchewan ladies' curling championship team, who recently represented 
Saskatchewan in the national Lassie curling classic at St. John's, Newfoundland, are graduates of the Foam Lake 
composite school. 
 
I am pleased to introduce this group of students to this Assembly and I hope that their visit will enhance their 
interest in our system of parliamentary democracy. I will be meeting with the students some time after the 
question period and I hope that all members will join with me in welcoming this group from Foam Lake to the 
Assembly today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — Mr. Speaker, it give me great pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
this Assembly, a group of grade 8 students from Weyburn Junior High School, some 71 in number, accompanied 
by their teachers, Jim Nedelcov and J. Buzowetsky, and their bus drivers, Grant Hanning and Carl Borshowa. This 
is the 15th consecutive year Mr. Nedelcov has accompanied grade 8 students from Weyburn Junior High to this 
Assembly, so I think that's somewhat of a record. 
 
I look forward to meeting with these students after question period and I know that all members join with me in 
welcoming this group of grade 8 students, their teachers and their drivers. It is our wish, I am sure, that their visit 
here may be informative and that they all have a very safe journey home. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my good friend and colleague, Dennis Banda, the member of the 
Legislative Assembly for Redberry, it is my pleasure to introduce to you, and to this House, representatives from 
the Hafford High School, 44 in number, from grades 10, 11 and 12, accompanied by Mr. Dennis Taylor and Ms. 
Linda Erlandson. It is indeed a pleasure for me to be able to fill in for Dennis Banda, who, for interest of the 
students, as I am sure you will know, is a hard-working member of this Legislative Assembly and respected by all 
of us. Unfortunately he is first vice-president 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1270 

of the Churchill Development Board and was called away to Yorkton for an emergency meeting of that board, and 
therefore I am filling in on his behalf. 
 
It is my pleasure to welcome you and to tell you that it is not from unfamiliar territory that you come. My farm is 
very close to Hafford. In fact I attended the school there myself, and know it to be a school of very high quality, as 
are the people — friendly and very good from the area of Hafford. I might add that this is not the first time 
Hafford School has been represented in this Assembly. It has been here numerous times before, as has a busload 
or more of senior citizens from Hafford. Let me welcome you to this Assembly. May your visit here be both 
informational and educational. I will be joining with you later for pictures and for some drinks. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — On behalf of the member for Morse, I would like to introduce to the 
Assembly a group of 26 grades 8 and 10 students from the Cabri High School who are here visiting in Regina 
today and have a tour lined up. They will be spending part of an hour here with us today during question period; 
I'm sure they will be meeting at 3:15 with the member for Morse. I'm sure that all members will join with me in 
welcoming them here today and wishing them a safe return home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Alberta Gas Reference Case 
 
MR. ANDREW: — My question is to the Attorney General, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Attorney General, on Friday the 
Alberta Court of Appeal in a unanimous decision ruled in favor of the Government of Alberta on the Alberta gas 
reference case to that court. Although the federal officials, in particular Mr. Lalonde and Mr. Chrétien, have 
declined comment as to a potential appeal on that, Saskatchewan's contribution to the federal cabinet has left no 
uncertain terms, and in fact the matter will be appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada. Given the significance of 
that particular decision on the resource ownership of various provinces (and that particularly applies to the 
province of Saskatchewan), could the Attorney General advise the Assembly (if, in fact, that reference case goes 
to the Supreme Court of Canada) whether or not the province of Saskatchewan will be intervening on the side of 
the province of Alberta on that matter? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I fully suspect that if it does go to the Supreme Court of Canada, the 
province of Saskatchewan will be intervening on the side of Alberta. However, I would like to point out to the 
hon. member that in the Alberta case the court held unanimously that: 
 

The tax on exported natural gas under the proposed federal legislation would, to the extent that it purports to 
the tax of natural gas described in this reference and exported from Canada for use outside Canada, be ultra 
vires the Parliament of Canada. 

 
And the court also went on to note that: 
 

The narrow question is raised as to whether or not certain natural gas owned, 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1271 

produced, and to be exported by the Crown in the right of Alberta is subject to a levy which the Crown in the 
right of Canada proposes to impose. 

 
This reference, Mr. Speaker, as can be seen by these quotations, raises a much narrower question than the 
questions which have a direct applicability to the province of Saskatchewan. It does not have as direct an impact 
on our province as might be the case at first blush, because the province in its own right does not own and 
produce gas for export from the province of Saskatchewan. However, the reasoning used by the court in reaching 
the decision is important in our legal case, and notwithstanding the fact that it has a more narrow applicability to 
the province of Saskatchewan than to Alberta, in all likelihood we'll be standing with Alberta on this case if it 
goes to the supreme court. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary question to the Attorney General. Given the fact as well, Mr. Attorney 
General, that the case did involve a question of export tax — in this case on natural gas — and given the fact that 
60 per cent of the crude oil produced in Saskatchewan is for export to the United States, can the Attorney General 
advise the Assembly, given this particular decision, whether the province of Saskatchewan can now be looking at 
the possibility of added revenues from that export of heavy oil, particularly to the United States? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it would be improper and imprudent for me to make a comment 
on this today. The judgment only came down Thursday or Friday. I have only been back in Canada since 
Saturday. I've not had an opportunity to receive the advice of my legal officers to the extent of the detail I would 
want in order to make the opinion available to my colleague in the Department of Mineral Resources. All that I 
can say, as I did in the first question, is that the reasoning by the court of appeal is important — particularly the 
upholding and the applicability of section 125 of the British North America Act, which prohibits one order of 
government taxing another order of government. This has been the source of our complaints with respect to the 
PGRT (petroleum and gas revenue tax) and the other 30 cent per mcf tax proposed by the national energy plan, 
and all of these things may very well make it possible, as the member suggests. That will be announced in a very 
short while, either by me or my colleague, the Minister of Mineral Resources. 
 

Report on Meeting in London, England 
 
MR. LANE: — A question to the Deputy Premier. I understand that you will be making a statement later in 
question period, but as a result of your trip to London, England, subsequent news reports indicate that, basically, 
you ran into a thick brick wall. That was subsequently confirmed by CTV on Friday night, I believe, when it 
indicated that your efforts were in vain. Now, my first question is one that I directed to the Premier last week, and 
that is: will you table today the information that you received from your deputy minister when he went as the 
advance party some weeks ago, what specific recommendations he made to you, and what individuals he saw in 
regard to the constitutional position of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first of all, the two reports that the hon. member refers to (and 
there are only two), I think have to be qualified. First of all, the Globe and Mail report continually named 
unnamed sources. I, for my part, put little credence in reports which have unnamed sources. During the course of 
my statement, the hon. member will see that indeed I am more optimistic about the impact of the mission. No one 
can speak with certainty because, as the United Kingdom 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1272 

parliamentarians themselves say, they will not make their decision until they are forced to make their decision, 
namely, once the resolution goes from Ottawa to London. Accordingly, the certainty aspect will be determined at 
that particular time. 
 
More specifically, on the question of the trip by Mr. Leeson, I have no objection to tabling for the hon. member 
the agenda for Mr. Leeson's two-day visit to London, 10 days or so ago. Essentially, the recommendation of Mr. 
Leeson was that it was important that I attend as soon as could be conveniently arranged to meet with as many 
people, from the governing Conservative Party and the Labour Party, to communicate the legislature's unanimous 
opposition to what is taking place in the House of Commons. That was the sum and the substance of the recurring 
report by Mr. Leeson as a result of his preliminary, preparatory meetings a few weeks ago. 
 
MR. LANE: — Well, the agenda, of course, is not adequate and that information is not sufficient. Now, I don't 
want unnamed sources either, so I am asking you to name people. And I would like you specifically to name for 
me the individuals whom Mr. Leeson saw in regard to Saskatchewan and to your attendance in England. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to do this. If the hon. member wants to take up question 
period time, I'm prepared to do it. I'm prepared to also table the itinerary. But on Monday, February 23, Mr. 
Leeson saw Gilles Loiselle, the Quebec agent general; he saw Mr. Denzil Davies, member of parliament, the 
Labour front-bench spokesman on foreign and commonwealth affairs; he met with Mr. Alex Hart, the British 
Columbia agent general; he met with Mr. Jim McKibben, the Alberta agent general, and he met with Jean 
Casselman Wadds, the Canadian high commissioner. 
 
On Tuesday, February 24, he met with Sir Anthony Kershaw, chairman of the now famous Kershaw committee; 
he met with a member of parliament by the name of Joan Lester, a member of parliament by the name of George 
Foulkes, Mr. Martin Berthoud of the North American desk of the foreign affairs office, and one or two members 
of the British press. 
 
It was the substance of those meetings, and from the advice tendered there, that the recommendation was made 
that I should attend. I want to say clearly, Mr. Speaker, that the importance of the meetings with the agents of the 
other provinces should not be underestimated. All of the agents, particularly of Saskatchewan, Alberta and 
Quebec, have been doing considerable lobbying on an ongoing basis, and their intelligence to Mr. Leeson, as it 
was to me, proved to be very invaluable indeed. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A new question to the Attorney General with regard to the same subject matter. It appears 
that the federal government will probably move, by a form of closure, to close the debate on the constitution in the 
Parliament of Canada. During your trip to London, Mr. Attorney General, was there any talk in London with 
regard to a three-line whip being put in by the government party and by the Labour Party. My question basically is 
this: when I was there the view seemed to be if the whips were put on, the package would go through and there 
would be perhaps three or four days debate on the issue. Does that still seem to be the prominent view in 
Westminster? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — This is an important question. Regrettably, again, I am not able to say yes or no in 
response, because it depends on whom you talk to. Some members of the British House will say that this is an 
issue where it is impossible to have a three-line whip. A three-line whip, as you will know, is the highest form of 
party discipline. A three-line whip for example, was placed on Margaret Thatcher's budget 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1273 

debate a few days ago while I was there. As it so happened, for the first time in a long time in British history, eight 
government backbenchers broke the three-line whip. 
 
When we deal with Canadian constitutional matters, something which is not essential or intrinsic to the very 
policy or the existence of the government, I am advised it is not the kind of thing in which a three-line whip is 
used. You do hear talk of guidance and there are at least two other levels of whips which are possible. I think the 
best answer that I can give is the one which I received over and over again, "The government proposes, parliament 
disposes." And that's particularly important in this matter. 
 

Subsidies for Special-Care Homes 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I want to direct a question to the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, as 
you should well be aware of, the concern of people throughout the province with regard to the rising costs of 
residing in nursing homes is becoming very apparent. I wonder if you can give this House some assurance that the 
30 per cent increase recently announced in the budget for allowances for certain special-care homes will be used 
in the form of subsidies to offset all rate increases announced by nursing homes and to protect our elderly citizens 
from the tyranny of inflation? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I can assure the member for Moosomin that the 30 per cent 
increase in nursing home care announced in the budget will be used in terms of subsidies to the people in the 
homes. I would like to inform the member as well that we are looking at freezing the increases until the 
announcement is made in the near future of how that money is to be spent. I think we are well aware of the final 
implications of the rapidly escalating costs of nursing home care and to that end we hope to announce very 
quickly a freeze on increases until the date the 30 per cent increase can come into place. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I want to advise the minister and ask the minister if he agrees. Given my 
calculations on a specific nursing home (and I think you will find the figures quite consistent throughout), even 
with the 30 per cent increase, as announced in your budget, applied to the nursing homes (in this case level 2 care) 
the difference is only $50. The nursing home increases have amounted to about 37 per cent and your increase of 
30 per cent really only makes a change of about $50. In fact, the residents are having to pay in the neighbourhood 
of $150 to $200 more, even given your 30 per cent increase. 
 
My second supplementary is: will you make changes to increase that 30 per cent where it is warranted to make 
sure that the residents of nursing homes in this province will not be faced with any further increases? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the member that we are reviewing the 
total area of continuing care in the province at the present and how the moneys will be allocated will be 
announced in due course. 
 

Transfer of Level 4 Patients from Department of Health Jurisdiction 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to direct a question to the minister. Is it not true that effective June 1, level 4 is being 
moved from the jurisdiction of the Department of Health to the Department of Social Services? Would the 
minister confirm that fact? What hearings have you had with operators and the public, who are very much 
concerned about the 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1274 

proposed changes by the government? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, it is not true that changes effective June 1 will move level 4 
from the Department of Health to the Department of Social Services. I am not sure where the member gets that 
information. 
 
I would like to inform him as well that negotiations are going on right now with SHA (Saskatchewan Hospital 
Association) and with SASH (Saskatchewan Association of Special-Care Homes. The negotiations are going very 
well and we hope an announcement will be ready for July 1. 
 

Conduct of Judge King 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. In last fall's session I raised a matter 
with you concerning comments made by one Judge King about a drug ring operating in my constituency, 
specifically in the towns of Caron, Mortlach and Parkbeg. At that time, in response to the question, you indicated 
that the matter was being investigated, that you were checking with the RCMP drug squad and that your 
department would be making a full and complete investigation. Mr. Attorney General, as a result of a report by 
letter which I received early this year, it would appear that none of Judge King's comments have been 
substantiated or validated. In other words, the term which I referred to him as, on that day, would appear to be 
accurate. I note that Judge King is still on the bench in Moose Jaw; in light of the fact that he has been proven, at 
the very least, to be grossly, grossly inaccurate, may I ask when the individual will be removed from the bench? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure the hon. member will appreciate that under our system of 
government, judges, be they appointed provincially or federally, enjoy independence and autonomy. This is 
especially true in the Saskatchewan context, since some few years ago it was my pleasure to introduce legislation 
establishing the appointment of a chief judge of the provincial court. 
 
What has transpired is that this matter has been referred to the attention (I believe I am accurate in this) of the 
chief judge of the provincial court for attention. My recollection of the incident, while I do not have the papers in 
front of me, is that it was the conclusion of everybody that Judge King was trying to state in a dramatic way the 
importance and the dangers or difficulties of dealing (or fooling around with, putting it in those words) in drugs 
for the accused in front of him and generally, for the community at large. It seems that there may have been some 
words or phrases used which have prompted the hon. member's questions. The phrases have bee investigated by 
the RCM Police and have proven to be not as indicated by Judge King. 
 
On balance I choose to follow here, and have no choice but to follow, the judgment of the chief judge of the court 
and rest by the decisions that he has taken in this regard, namely, that the matter seems to be a closed issue. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question to the Attorney General. Would the Attorney General agree that 
probably the epitome of law enforcement would have to be the magistrate who is making these decisions? Would 
the Attorney General tell me, so that I may convey to the people in my constituency who have to face this judge, 
how a judge who has been called a liar and confirmed as one by the investigation of your department — how 
those people can respect that individual and the institution of law 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1275 

and order, when this man is confirmed that way by your own department and the RCM Police? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I must strongly take objection to the hon. member's categorization of 
or description of the words of Judge King as being tantamount to a lie, or to his being a liar. Statements are made, 
both in this House, on the bench, and elsewhere, in day-to-day efforts which do not intend to mislead and are not 
deliberately stated with a view to misleading people. I believe that is the category in which Judge King's 
comments can be placed. These were statements made by a judge who showed concern about the drug situation as 
he perceived it, not with the deliberate intention of misleading either the accused or any other members of the 
community, including the community which the hon. member seeks to represent. Accordingly, it's a tremendous 
quantum leap to characterize those kinds of statements to being tantamount to a lie. 
 
I believe Judge King has done a good job for the provincial bench. He has been on the bench now for quite some 
number of years. I think he has served the people of Moose Jaw and district well. On this occasion he would 
appear to have made a statement which is not fully backed by the RCM Police reports, but surely that cannot be 
carried so far as to call for the removal of this person for use of these words or phrases. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Final supplementary to the Attorney General. Mr. Attorney General, when a judge on the 
bench, as in the case of Judge King, has made statements which are untrue, and has lied in his own handwriting in 
correspondence to the communities involved, why would the Attorney General of this province continue to stand 
up for such an individual? My question to you, Mr. Attorney General, is twofold. Would you give a blessing to 
the constituents of Thunder Creek and perhaps transfer him to Saskatoon where your constituents can have a run 
at a man like this? Is the reason why you are defending Judge King because you know very well you made a bad 
appointment, and that basically we have an NDP activist on the bench and you are afraid of him? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I really regret very much the personal attack on Judge King 
mounted by the hon. member for Thunder Creek in a forum where the judge is unable to defend himself. May I 
say also, Mr. Speaker, that I particularly draw to the attention of the people of Saskatchewan the philosophy of the 
official Conservative opposition with respect to judicial appointments, as indicated by the question asked just a 
minute ago. This philosophy is that if the Attorney General of the day disagrees with the statements made by any 
particular judge, he shall unceremoniously and without any due care to compensation or other factors, move him 
to another area of the province in order to penalize him. Mr. Speaker, I say that is tantamount to the highest form 
of interference with the principle of judicial independence which no democracy can tolerate under any 
circumstance. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — And Mr. Speaker, may I also say that I find it particularly unfortunate that the 
lawyer-members of the Conservative caucus endorse this member's vision of the independence of the judiciary in 
our province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Mailing of Welfare Cheques 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1276 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Social Services. Mr. Minister, I have in 
my hand a cheque sealed in one of your envelopes, Saskatchewan Department of Social Services, made out to an 
individual in Saskatoon for $479.50 (I can see it through the envelope); it is a welfare cheque to an individual who 
did not use his own address. Now, my first question is: is it your normal practice to just mail out welfare cheques 
to anyone at any time they ask? Secondly, do you not do any kind of investigation to find out the residence of the 
individual to whom you are paying welfare payments? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I am sure it is the policy of the department to check out people 
to whom cheques are paid. Some of them are done centrally through a computer in Regina, and others are done 
through the region. If they are to a long-term Saskatchewan Assistance Plan person, who is being paid on a 
regular basis, it is done through the central office in Regina. On the other hand, if it is on a short-term basis, it is 
done through the regional office. I am not sure about the cheque. I don't have it to look at. The member should 
table it so we can check into it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, if I table the cheque I am afraid the recipient will never get it, so I will give it 
to the minister himself later. 
 
Mr. Minister, attached with the cheque was a letter from the firm who received it at their address. The individual 
had applied for rent of a premises, but had never received it. But when he went to your office to ask for social 
assistance, without any check by your department, he used the address of the real estate firm, and your office then 
submitted the cheque to that address without knowing whether the individual had this residence — knowing 
nothing about it. You just automatically . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — If the member has a supplementary, I will allow it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Will you, Mr. Minister, investigate the matter and investigate the total system so that no 
further abuse of this system will take place? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I'm not sure what abuse took place. Also, I would question the member's facts 
in light of the recent questions asked about a firing where many misrepresentations were made. But I will look 
into it. I'd like to know where the member got the envelope. If he would give it to me, we will look into it. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary to the minister, Mr. Speaker. About five years ago the same situation happened in 
the Department of Social Services. It led to fraud charges and conviction of an employee. I can rehash the case. 
The Attorney General and the former minister know full well of what I speak. One of the scams in that was the 
use of phony or false addresses and then the departmental employee picked up the cheques. It looks like your 
procedures have not changed at all. Would you now be prepared to advise this Assembly, when you advise the 
member, whether you have corrected your procedures which led to a scam five years ago, or whether exactly the 
same procedures are being used which cost the taxpayers some $40,000 or $50,000? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, it's interesting that the member for Qu'Appelle is again jumping 
in to pick up where someone else couldn't handle it. It's a normal procedure. I would like to say, as I mentioned to 
the member for Regina South, that we would look into the incident if he provides us with the envelope. 
 

Tabling of Reports re Circle 4 Feeders 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1277 

MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. On May 14, 1980, I 
questioned you in the Crown corporations committee concerning Circle 4 Feeders at Dundurn, Saskatchewan. To 
refresh your memory, Sedco (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) loaned Circle 4 Feeders 
approximately $1 million. They went broke and moved the steers out in the middle of the night. Mr. Minister, why 
haven't you tabled this complete report to me? You promised no less than six times that if we would leave the 
Department of Industry and Commerce and move on, you would table within 48 hours a complete statement 
regarding Circle 4 Feeders. When are you going to make this information available? 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, if I remember correctly, the same question was posed to us in the Crown 
corporations committee last year. I'm quite positive that the member received all the information in detail from the 
Crown corporations committee. If I stand to be corrected, then it's yet to be received. But that should have gone 
forward to the hon. member. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I absolutely did not receive this information. Also, a new 
question to the minister. We also questioned you as to whether or not Sedco was involved as an owner in Circle 4 
Feeders. With Mr. Speaker's permission, I'd like to make one quote. This was your answer when I asked you this 
question: 
 

The information we have is that our people think there was some involvement with Sedco. 
 
If that is the case, Mr. Minister, would you inform this Assembly as to what you will do with thousands of dollars 
of outstanding bills which are owed in the Dundurn community by Circle 4 Feeders? Would you inform this 
Assembly, if Sedco was a part-owner, that you will pay the local bills in Dundurn plus interest to this date? 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I think those questions were asked last year, again, in the Crown 
corporations committee. I'm not ready at this point in time to give the hon. member any commitment of any kind. 
If I do, it will come through the Crown corporations committee. I'm sure that he has already received that 
information, if we were involved. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Attorney General's Trip to London re Canadian Constitution 
 

HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I beg the indulgence of the House to make a statement which might 
be a little longer than normal, although it won't be, I hope, too much of an abuse of the practice of this legislature 
with respect to ministerial statements. 
 
I rise to report on my discussion last week in London, England, respecting the Canadian constitution. 
 
It was a very full week, indeed, with a very heavy schedule of meetings. Among others, I met with Nicholas 
Ridley, Minister of State for the Foreign and Commonwealth Office; Sir Anthony Kershaw, chairman, and other 
members of the House of Commons select 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1278 

committee on foreign affairs; the parliamentary all party group on the constitution, co-chaired by MPs Jonathan 
Aitkin and George Foulkes; Denis Healy, the Deputy Leader of the Labour Party; the parliamentary Labour 
Party's foreign affairs committee; several other members, both Labour and Conservative, of the House of 
Commons and the House of Lords; the agents general of the opposing provinces; the Canadian High 
Commissioner Mrs. Jean Casselman Wadds; and the Commonwealth Secretary General Mr. Ramphal. No one, 
who was asked to see us, refused to see us. 
 
In the course of my meetings I explained the nature and impact of the proposed federal resolution, the position 
taken by the Saskatchewan government and our Saskatchewan legislature and by the other opposing provinces, 
and the responsibility, as I see it, of the United Kingdom government and parliament. 
 
I put particular emphasis on the following points: (1) that the federal proposal, particularly as a result of the 
amending formula under the charter of rights, would significantly reduce provincial powers and upset the balance 
of Canada's federal system; (2) that the proposal does not reflect the wishes of Canada "as a federally structured 
whole" to adopt the language employed by the Kershaw report. It is opposed by 8 of the 10 provinces, by the 
official opposition in the Canadian House of Commons, by all major political parties in Quebec, Alberta and 
Saskatchewan and, according to the latest opinion polls, by 64 per cent of the Canadian people; (3) that by virtue 
of section 7(1) of the Statute of Westminster, the United Kingdom parliament accepted the role of trustee or 
guardian of Canadian federalism, and that it has an obligation to satisfy itself that any amendment request from 
the federal government is proper — that it has the necessary level and distribution of support within Canada; (4) 
that the present situation is unprecedented in terms of both the impact of the requested amendment on the 
structure of Canadian federalism and the extent of provincial opposition; and (5) that in these circumstances the 
U.K. parliament should reject the request, if and when such a measure is put before it. 
 
In addition, I pointed out that the constitutionality of the procedure has been challenged in Canadian courts, and 
that it would be improper for the Canadian government to transmit the request, or for the United Kingdom to act 
upon it, until the Supreme Court of Canada has rendered judgment. 
 
I also made clear our hope that some combination of circumstances, including the prospect of vigorous opposition 
in Britain, might force Prime Minister Trudeau to return to the bargaining table so that a revised package might 
ultimately go to Britain with the support of at least the majority of the provincial governments. 
 
On the whole, I can tell hon. members that I was very encouraged by my week in London. I was encouraged to 
find a growing level of awareness of this issue on the part of British parliamentarians. I was encouraged, too, by 
the clear indications that the British want to do what is right for Canada. They have no wish to interfere in our 
affairs, but they have an appreciation of their obligations under the Statute of Westminster. 
 
It is clear to me that the British are unhappy about the suggestion that they should simply "hold their noses" and 
act automatically to implement any federal request. In the face of such vigorous provincial opposition they will 
not be merely the rubber stamps that Prime Minister Trudeau expects them to be. 
 
Let me emphasize one point. There is a clear difference between the Government of the United Kingdom and 
what it will do, and what the Parliament of the United Kingdom will 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1279 

ultimately decide to do. I referred to it in the question period today — the government proposes; parliament 
disposes. 
 
There have been press reports about my meeting with Nicholas Ridley. (Only one, I am happy to report that was 
alluded to in question period, in the Globe and Mail.) While I am bound by our agreement with Nicholas Ridley 
not to say any details publicly about our meeting, let me indicate that it confirmed what we already knew; the U.K. 
government feels obliged to lay this matter before parliament and it will urge its adoption. How strongly it will do 
so, and how long it will continue in the face of any vigorous opposition was not so clear. That is why it was 
important, and is important, that we speak to individual parliamentarians; that we continue to do so; and that other 
provinces increase their efforts in this direction as well. I was, Mr. Speaker, the first minister over on this kind of 
mission by the opposing provinces. 
 
I shall be meeting tomorrow with ministers from other opposing provinces in Winnipeg. I will take the 
opportunity to share with them my observations on the situation in London. I will also be giving a full report to 
my cabinet colleagues at the earliest opportunity. I expect that we will be shortly in a position to indicate what 
further measures will be undertaken in an attempt to block the unilateral federal action proposed by the federal 
government. 
 
I close, Mr. Speaker, by saying that I will table a copy of my itinerary in London last week, copies of the two 
press releases which I issued there, and copies of some of the materials which I distributed to the British 
parliamentarians and the press in the course of my visit there. 
 
MR. LANE: — Reading the information submitted to me a few moments ago by the Attorney General puts the lie 
to the position which the government opposite has taken. I ask all members to read the one position paper 
attached, in regard to the effect of legal action in Canada. We, on this side of the House, have been urging the 
Government of Saskatchewan to join with the other provinces in challenging the unilateral patriation by the 
Government of Canada. We have asked for that, and all through, the Government of Saskatchewan has said it 
would basically have no effect. They won't join; they have refused to join. Yet, in a paper presented to parliament 
by the Attorney General, he uses the very fact that six provinces have gone to court as a justification for the 
Government of Great Britain not proceeding with the matter. On page 2 of that document, the Attorney General 
now says: 
 

It is especially unfortunate that Mr. Trudeau's government has chosen to press ahead with its unilateral action 
at a time when the matter is sub judice in the Canadian courts. That action adds the issue of legal uncertainty 
to the propriety of such unilateral action by one order of government in a federation. 

 
So, all through this whole debate he has refused to take legal action, and now that six other provinces are taking 
the action which he opposes, he turns around and says, "They are taking it; now Trudeau shouldn't proceed." So 
he is against the court actions but he is now for it as an argument to stop Trudeau from proceeding. 
 
If the Government of Saskatchewan, as we have said from the beginning, had taken court action, had shown a 
common western front . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I would just like to say something about ministerial statements 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1280 

and responses in this House. It has been a long established practice of this legislature for ministerial statements to 
be made upon orders of the day. It is traditional that cabinet ministers should, as a courtesy to the House if the 
House is in session, make any policy statement or announcement in the House prior to announcing the same 
outside the House. Such statements should be brief, factual and specific. 
 
It has been further established by the House to allow, by courtesy, a brief, strictly relevant comment to be made 
thereon by the Leader of the Opposition or some other senior member. But it must be understood that a debate 
cannot take place, no motion being before the House. 
 
I realize this is a difficult statement to deal with, but I have to hold the member for Qu'Appelle to the rules which 
say that a debate cannot take place since there is no motion before the House. I would interpret some of his 
remarks as clearly being debate. You may proceed. 
 
MR. LANE: — The papers presented by the Attorney General as part of his statement, Mr. Speaker, I think in 
fairness are part of that statement. I was replying to a very strange position for the Attorney General of 
Saskatchewan to have taken. 
 
It is interesting to note that in the position papers, again tabled by the Attorney General, there was no explanation 
to the people of Great Britain and their parliamentarians as to why Saskatchewan did not take a constitutional 
position and why the province of Saskatchewan, for some considerable period of time, was prepared to leave the 
impression that it would accept unilateral patriation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh yes, the Saskatchewan 
position, Mr. Speaker, was one of no position for some considerable period of time, which was basically an 
enticement for the Prime Minister of Canada to proceed. 
 
In reply, the Attorney General also very pointedly admits that the one hope that the people of Canada have to stop 
the actions of Pierre Trudeau is the attempt by the Conservative opposition in Ottawa to stall and delay the matter 
to give the opportunity to the Supreme Court of Canada to rule on the legality or the illegality. 
 
I would hope that the Attorney General's actions in going to London are not the only actions to be taken. The 
Attorney General today, Mr. Speaker, indicated that he is prepared to join in the reference to the supreme court on 
the oil and gas with Alberta. I would have hoped that today he would have announced that he is prepared to join 
the other provinces in their court challenge and, in fact, negate with the Premier has been saying. 
 
Unfortunately and with regret, the press statements that came from your trip to London, I believe, fairly stated the 
situation in London, England, and that the matter is going through, and Pierre Trudeau has that assurance. I say 
that with regret. The only problem we have (and again, it won't be debated) is that we won't know that until the 
actual action takes place. But I would hope that the people of Saskatchewan will judge the government opposite, 
and its constitutional posturing, by the actions it has taken in going to London, England. If the British parliament 
rapidly pushes the Trudeau package through, we will know, in no uncertain terms, that the government opposite 
failed, and that the government opposite took the wrong approach and made a tragically wrong decision in not 
opposing unilateral patriation from the time of its proposal by the Government of Canada. 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1281 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. What is the purpose of . . . 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I wonder if the Attorney General would permit a question . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — We are under an area of ministerial statements. It's an opportunity for a minister to make a 
statement and for a member to respond on the other side of the House. Given the serious nature of the matter that's 
raised by the minister, I'll put myself in the hands of the House. If the House wishes to allow a question, I will 
proceed. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — My question to the Attorney General is basically this. Mr. Attorney General (and I simply 
want to extend upon my question in question period today), given the fact that it would appear that closure is now 
going to be moved in the House of Parliament, and given the standard position of the parliament in Great Britain 
— Westminster — has been that we are not going to sort of kick the package back, if you like, and that probably 
the best that could be expected from the provinces of Canada would be the slow-shuffle that is practised by the 
British members of parliament, does the matter then carry on further until we are adjourned, or their House 
adjourns sometime next fall? Can the Attorney General advise the Assembly if the message was delivered to him 
while he was in Great Britain that in fact the slow-shuffle could be practised, and give us his assessment as to 
whether or not the matter will be delayed till fall? Or whether, given the fact that closure could be brought in the 
next two or three weeks, the package could be in Great Britain and the matter could be addressed probably before 
July 1 which is the target date of Mr. Trudeau? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, it is my conclusion that the majority of the parliamentarians who I 
saw concluded that they have two choices before them — either acceptance or rejection of that which comes 
forward to them from Ottawa. The question of amendment of that which comes before them from Ottawa to 
London, or if you will, delay, which I think is a variation of amendment, seems to get very, very little currency. 
One must appreciate, as I'm sure the hon. member for Kindersley does, that in the United Kingdom parliamentary 
scene, a debate of 48 hours or 72 hours (4 days) is indeed a very long debate. 
 
One must also appreciate that in the United Kingdom situation, like all countries of the world, they have their own 
public agenda. They have budget problems; they have economic problems; they have inflation problems, petrol 
problems, northern Irish and Scottish problems. 
 
When the resolution comes, and how it's dealt with, in my estimation will depend upon where it can work its way 
into the public agenda of the U.K. parliament, and all of the other confluences and forces which may bear some 
imprint on that. It is simply not possible for me or anyone to say with any degree of certainty that there will be a 
slow-shuffle or anything of that nature. I simply think U.K. parliamentarians will say: "We're either going to 
accept it or we're going to reject." Whether and how it gets dealt with will be dependent upon more their internal 
domestic timetable than any other objective. 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Speaker, am I entitled to make a statement with respect to ministerial statements? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Traditional practice in this House is that the minister makes a 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1282 

statement and the opposition responds. Any recognized political parties may also have an opportunity to respond. 
The way the situation is at this time is that I do not recognize that the member is a member of a recognized party 
for the sake of this Assembly and, as a result, response would not be allowed. As with the previous subject, I 
would put myself in the hands of the House. I'm not prepared to abridge the rule, but the House may at any time if 
it so sees fit, and then the member may speak. Is it agreed? 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Speaker, I think, as you stated earlier, this is probably the most serious matter this country has 
faced in its recorded history. In many ways I have to agree with the member for Qu'Appelle with respect to the 
role that the Prime Minister of Canada is taking in regard to patriation of our constitution. I think there is little 
doubt that no matter what efforts the Government of Saskatchewan, and the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take, no matter what efforts the eight other opposition governments in Canada take, unfortunately it 
will be futile, resulting in the fact that our constitution . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. There seems to be some cross-the-floor interference here. I'm having trouble hearing 
the member for Swift Current. Now that we've unanimously agreed to hear the member for Swift Current, I think 
we should unanimously listen to him. 
 
MR. HAM: — I'll start again. Mr. Speaker, as I said at the beginning, unfortunately, no matter what efforts are 
taken by the governments opposing patriation, and most especially the Government of Saskatchewan, we will see 
our patriation of the constitution come back to Canada in its present form. There is little doubt Mr. Trudeau 
intends to take his place in history by bringing home the constitution. It's very unfortunate for the people of 
western Canada in particular that these steps are being taken under present conditions. 
 
I commend the Attorney General for making an effort to lobby with British parliamentarians and officials in 
Britain. Again, Mr. Speaker, they will be futile attempts. Attempts should be made and I encourage attempts by all 
governments and by all members of all governments. We will regret, I am certain, that over a long period of time, 
especially in western Canada, we will remain forever the hewers of wood and drawers of water, as Mr. Trudeau 
will make certain the power in this country will remain in central Canada forever. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 45 — An act to amend The Registered Nurses Act, 1978 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Dinner 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day, I would like to draw to the attention of the members the fact that 
the 12th Annual Report of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association has been laid on their desks. In 
conjunction with that, I would like to remind the members of the annual dinner and meeting of the 
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, scheduled for Wednesday, April 8, at the Centre of the Arts. Be sure 
to mark your calendars accordingly, as we would like to have as full an attendance as 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1283 

possible at that meeting. I may say that at this point in time we have 22 associate members of the Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association. This is partly due to the fact that the MLAs' reunion was held last year. A number of 
those parliamentarians were encouraged by the fact that the reunion was held and wish to keep in touch with our 
association. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Consumer Products Warranties Act 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, this bill is intended to clarify one section of The Consumer Products 
Warranties Act, which deals with what must be included in the additional written warranties. This act, which was 
passed in 1977, is unique in Canada. Accordingly, a good deal of response to the present act has been received 
regarding its effect on long-established selling and buying and warranty rights and responsibilities. 
 
The proposed amendment is of a housekeeping nature to facilitate more effective administration of the act and to 
respond to an important concern about the act. The proposed amendment is viewed by the Canadian Motor 
Vehicle Manufacturers' Association as necessary for clear interpretation of the act by business and, in the case of 
litigation, by the courts. By way of example, a motor vehicle has a statutory warranty under the act which 
continues for a reasonable period of time. The Canadian Motor Vehicle Manufacturers' Association feels that a 
manufacturers' additional written warranty could, as the act is presently worded, be considered to begin after, or 
consecutive to, the period of the statutory warranty. This would be contrary to the intention of the act, and 
accordingly the necessary clarification is contained in this amendment. 
 
The principle of The Consumer Products Warranties Act is to provide a basic minimum warranty for all consumer 
transactions in the province. Any risk or loss for defective product is shifted from the consumer to the seller or 
manufacturer responsible for the defect. The act has proved helpful to consumers and been well accepted by the 
business community, particularly in terms of clarifying contractual relationships with respect to warranties. The 
proposed amendment will further clarify the responsibility of retail sellers and of manufacturers. No part of this 
amendment limits the civil rights of Saskatchewan citizens, no licences or permits are required and no additional 
administration is entailed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an essential amendment to a significant piece of consumer legislation. I recommend the bill 
for approval by all members of the House. I move, Mr. Speaker, second reading of An Act to amend The 
Consumer Products Warranties Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. McArthur that Bill No. 13 
— An Act to amend The Community Colleges Act be now read 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1284 

a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that Bill No. 
25 — An Act to amend The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Koskie that Bill No. 31 — 
An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act be now read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, the amendments introduced should have received the full support of the 
opposition because these amendments basically increase the protection to the people of Saskatchewan. They 
increase the public liability from $35,000 to $100,000. This provides the same basic protection to the residents of 
Saskatchewan from non-resident motorists as from Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
I was surprised when the member for Thunder Creek, the other day in debate, rather than supporting this, took off 
on a tirade against Saskatchewan Government Insurance. I want to say that he launched this attack on the basis of, 
first, an attack upon the dedicated employees and managers of SGI. This is consistent Tory policy. I want to say 
also that he attacked it on the basis that we constructed a new SGI head office. The opposition's position on this is 
very confused. On the one hand it says that SPC is making too much profit; on the other hand it's saying that SGI 
is not being run efficiently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at the whole philosophy behind the debate that was entered into by the member for 
Thunder Creek, one realizes he is speaking the Tory philosophy. I recall exactly the same type of attack back in 
1964. At that time the attack was that we should not have built the SPC building which had been erected in 
downtown Regina. Today they're saying we should not have built the SGI building. The same attack took place on 
management. Today they're attacking John Green who has pioneered SGI and government insurance across 
Canada. In 1964 they attacked David Cass-Beggs who had brought power to all of the farms throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say that this is a consistent Tory philosophy. We saw their stand on Petro-Can in the last election and 
two elections ago when the Tory party was elected. And what did the federal party say about Crown corporations? 
They said, "If we are elected, we'll get rid of the Crown corporations and Petro-Can will head the list." And this is 
consistent. The same attack upon the Crown corporations in Saskatchewan is happening today. That's what Joe 
Clark and the federal Tories would have done to the Crown corporations in the federal sector. In fact, the Tory 
party came to office dedicated to get rid of Petro-Can. Recently the leader of the Tory party had a change of heart. 
He said that if he had to do it again, what he would do . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. What's the point of order? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Can you tell me what this has to do with The Credit Union Act we're 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1285 

discussing? He's off on a tangent again. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Well, this is The Saskatchewan Insurance Act, not the The Credit Union Act. I'm glad that 
the member for Rosthern raised this point because he has highlighted a difficult situation in this House. 
 
When a member speaks on a bill and refuses to stay within the rules with regard to the content of that bill and the 
principle of the bill, then it makes it difficult for the Speaker, or whoever is in the Chair at that time, to make other 
speakers from that point onward adhere to the principle of the bill. Because some members don't adhere to the 
principle of the bill, then obviously all members should be given the same latitude and should not have to adhere 
to the principle of the bill before us. 
 
The minister, I take it, is responding to some remarks which were made previously in this debate. It's unfortunate; 
if those remarks were out of order and the House refused to keep their remarks in order, then the problem falls 
back in the lap of the House. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, I want to stay within the rules of the House, and obviously 
I was setting the record straight as to the position that the hon. member for Thunder Creek so viciously put before 
the House. 
 
I want to say, for the record, this government is very proud that we have a new modern office for SGI. I want to 
say that we are very proud that all of the money accruing through SGI throughout the years has remained in 
Saskatchewan. I want to say that we are very proud that through SGI we have been able to establish a large 
number of agents throughout the province providing service to the public at a level unequalled by any private 
sector. I want to say that we are proud, Mr. Speaker, of the expertise that we have developed in the insurance field 
by Saskatchewan people themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this amendment to The Saskatchewan Insurance Act is in the right direction and I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that Bill No. 3 
— An Act to amend The Trustee Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Koskie that Bill No. 36 — 
An Act to amend The Land Titles Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Association of School Business Officials of Saskatchewan Act. 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1286 

Sections 1 to 12 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Department of Continuing Education Act 
 
Sections 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
Section 3 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — In section 3(b), it defines "minister": 
 

the member of the Executive Council to whom for the time being the administration of this act is assigned. 
 
Is it not, in your view, Mr. Minister, advantageous that the ministry of continuing education and the ministry of 
education be encompassed in the same personage? I wonder why you would want to have another cabinet minister 
who perhaps doesn't have the total picture. I see a need in our modern society to streamline our education system 
to best suit the needs of the people who are going to be entering the job market. Modern society is very fluid in its 
changes. It would seem logical to me that there may be changes that are required in the field of continuing 
education or in education (it might be better put that way) that would have profound implications for necessary or 
corresponding changes in the field of continuing education. Would you not agree that there is merit in having 
those two ministries put together? I notice that many of the cabinet ministers opposite carry more than one 
portfolio; I think you, Mr. Minister, are a good example of that. Therefore I don't think we can argue that the two 
portfolios are too much of a burden for one person. So therefore it would seem a bit logical that the same person 
would carry both of these, so that he would have a global view of education, from kindergarten right through to 
the post-graduate level. He would have a global view of education for specials needs, right through; this person 
would have a global or an overall view of native education; he would have a global view of how the school 
system is fitting in to the continuing education system. It just seems logical to me that it is best handled when one 
person accepts that responsibility for that total package. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I think the question that the hon. member raises is certainly an 
interesting one. I'm not sure whether I understood him fully, whether he was suggesting that we should 
amalgamate the departments, or whether he was suggesting only that the minister should be the same minister for 
both departments. If it is with respect to the amalgamation of departments, I spent a very considerable amount of 
time with my counterpart from Ontario, who had undertaken just such a development, and her advice was that she 
did not think that it was really all that advisable to do the departmental amalgamation. I don't mean to be blaming 
her, but I found her advice was very helpful and useful in this, where Ontario had actually tried to do this. I think 
that one of the difficulties in departmental amalgamation is that you generate so much energy in terms of 
organization that you sometimes lose some of your energy for doing what you want to do. 
 
However, if we had two departments, which I think the hon. member is indicating he is prepared to accept, then it 
is certainly not traditional, and I think would not be standard provision in legislation, to suggest that the legislation 
should dictate who the 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1287 

Premier selects to be ministers of the departments. It is standard procedure that the minister is a minister over a 
department, and where you have separate departments, it is within the power of the Premier to assign those 
departments to the minister he chooses. If he chooses to do as he has done, and has the same minister responsible 
(which I think has many, many attractive features), that deals with some of the problems the hon. member raises. 
But I don't think legislation traditionally is designed in such a way, where you have separate departments, as to try 
to enforce upon the Premier a selection of certain ministers for those departments. So I don't think that that would 
be possible in the legislative way, but rather would have to be dealt with by the Premier. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I think, Mr. Minister, you realize I wasn't thinking of amalgamating departments. I think that 
wouldn't be the type of move we'd be suggesting. 
 
In your visits with other ministers of education, is it generally the trend that there are two departments and that 
those two departments are administered by the same person? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I don't think you could say there's a general trend. I would say, from my 
understanding, in the first half of the past decade of the 1970s it was a trend to have separate departments and, in 
most cases, separate ministers. I think in the last two or three years there has tended to be more of a move back to 
maintaining separate departments and to have the same minister responsible for those departments. But that is not 
true exclusively. I know it is certainly not true in British Columbia; it is not true in Alberta. I believe it is true now 
in Manitoba and Ontario. So I guess you can say it has come down to kind of half and half. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I think we could move on then. I perhaps agree with you to a certain extent, that maybe one 
wouldn't want to legislate and tie a premier's hands in whom he has to choose for these various ones, but I would 
hope in practice that this could probably be continued because I do think that it is very good to have a 
co-ordinating individual between the two departments. 
 
Sections 3 and 4 agreed. 
 
Section 5 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Is that where number 10 comes under — here in section 5? Well, Mr. Minister, I'm not going 
to go through the whole debate, and all the reasons that I and my colleague for Meadow Lake feel this is perhaps 
asking quite a bit. I think we on second reading put forth our case quite strongly in which we thought the fact that 
you have the power to make grants and "annual or other payments on any terms or conditions that may be 
prescribed in the regulations, to any person, agency, organization or institution" is a rather far-reaching power. I 
know on the explanatory notes you pointed out something about the handicapped, and I think we on this side 
would certainly support that. But the terms of any person under any conditions is certainly giving the Minister of 
Continuing Education a tremendous amount of power — making payments to almost whoever he would consider 
deserves a payment. And I think that kind of power vested in the hands of the minister is probably not in the best 
interests of continuing education. I think that as it previously was (that it would go before the Executive Council) 
gave a little bit of a check on an individual. I would wonder if there would be any possibility that you would 
consider taking a look at that particular clause? 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1288 

Maybe you could justify or try to justify why you feel you need that power, or the ministry needs that power, and 
how that will further or better the cause of continuing education? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, I think, Mr. Chairman, the problem the hon. member is partly raising has to 
do with terminology and drafting of legislation. I would say to the hon. member one might very conveniently be 
able to suggest that when the act says "to any person for any functions" it sounds very open. But I would invite the 
hon. member to suggest how he would propose to write a restrictive section of the act which would restrict who 
may receive grants. Do you want to say that the Frontier College receives grants under this section? Should or 
should not? Do you want that to be in the legislation or would you rather have us deal with Frontier College as it 
relates to the educational needs of remote communities when they come and make application? I think that just 
gives you an example of the difficulty. The Lester B. Pearson College of the Pacific, the Canadian Bureau for 
International Education, organizations that receive grants — you simply can't draft legislation to say which of 
those should and should not get grants. Clearly they must be related to the functions of the department, they must 
be active in the field of continuing education. 
 
This section prescribes that it shall be subject to the regulations, which is a further check, and it must be done by 
minister's order and, therefore, it must be a grant which is authorized and approved by treasury board through the 
budgetary review. It must be provided out of money provided through the estimates review here and approved in 
the appropriations; so there are many checks which take place. What this section essentially says is that for grants 
of less than $10,000, having gone through those various stages of checks and balances, the minister then may 
authorize the payments through minister's order. If it is in excess of that, it must take place through an order of 
cabinet. I don't believe that opens up a great deal of difficulty. It simply simplifies the administration of these 
grants. There is certainly no suggestion here that any minister has the ability to just throw money around without 
constraints on the use of the money or on the amount of money. It must go through all of those stages of review 
and approval. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I noticed in your explanation to me that you chose organizations. You didn't use 
individuals as the example, but in here it says, "to any person." There are persons as well as agencies. I can see 
that it might streamline grants somewhat, but I don't know if steamlining grants and making it very, very easy to 
hand out money here and there to individuals without approval, check or surveillance, or without the few 
questions asked by other colleagues, is really in the best interest. I wonder what was wrong with the section as it 
read: 
 

subject to the approval of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, and to such conditions as he may prescribe, the 
minister may make regulations respecting the paying of grants for the purpose of furthering any activities 
related to any aspect of education that is under the control of the department. 

 
Now, that gives it just that little extra check and balance. It is not going to prohibit any of these organizations, or 
any of these individuals from getting grants, but it is going to 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1289 

require the minister to bring it before his colleagues, the rest of the cabinet. I think, personally, that is probably 
better legislation than this, which seems to give all power to the minister to make annual or other payments (they 
can be semi-annual, monthly, or daily) on any terms (that means that nobody else has to have a look at it) or 
conditions that may be prescribed in the regulations to any person, agency, organization, or institution. I would 
like you to take another run at this. I may agree with you on streamlining, but I don't know if streamlining is 
altogether the goal that we are looking at. Is it departmental efficiency we want, or is it money spent to help 
people who deserve continuing education? That is what I want to see. I want to see the money spent where it is 
going to help those people. I just wonder what is so wrong with having your other colleagues as a little check and 
balance, instead of one minister having the power to give money on any terms or any conditions to anyone he 
wants. I would like you to illustrate to me how, other than streamlining, this is going to help. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am not sure what the point of dispute is here. I am having a 
little trouble. If the point of dispute is the change in the wording to allow provision for grants being paid to 
persons, as well as to agencies, organizations, and institutions (which is one of the points the hon. member raises), 
I would point out to the hon. member that we recently have been developing a native career development 
program. That program will have, as an important component, provision for training on the job or job-related 
training. As part of that, it would be necessary to make payments to employers which may be, in certain cases, 
corporations — but under the definition of The Interpretation Act, persons are corporations or individuals. It 
simply would not be possible for us to proceed with that program, or with a similar program with respect to 
people with disabilities, because we could not make those kinds of payments under the old wording. We need this 
change in wording to allow those kinds of payments to be made. In addition to that, under the native career 
development program, the individual trainees will receive certain payments to cover their costs, living allowances, 
and so on. We need this kind of amendment to make that possible. So if you are dealing with the question of why 
we are including persons in here now, in addition to agencies and organizations, the reason is that we are getting 
into programs, specifically the native career development program, that require that kind of wording in order to 
function. 
 
Secondly, the federal government (and it was true of the previous Conservative federal government as well as the 
current government) is talking about the federal-provincial agreements they have, making greater provision for 
industry based training, including training on the job. In order to participate in those programs, which are now 
developing, we need this amendment so that we can make payments. This is because the payments come through 
the province and are then paid to the employers and the individuals being trained. We simply can't participate in 
those programs. 
 
So, I certainly wouldn't suspect the hon. member is suggesting that we should leave the old act in place so as to 
hamstring our ability to undertake those important programs. 
 
With regard to the second question, which is a different question, as to whether the cutoff should be zero, or 
$5,000, or $10,000, before requiring cabinet approval. I will point out to the hon. member that it is our considered 
view that a cutoff of $10,000, with the kind of approvals we now have for grants, does streamline the process — 
that a minister's order, given the regulations giving the treasury board authorization, given the necessity for 
appropriation, is adequate to cover the final check on these. At over $10,000 you're starting to deal with a more 
substantial amount of money and it's good to have a further cabinet check on the payments. I agree, it's 
judgmental. I can't defend $10,000 as opposed to $15,000, or $5,000, by any particular argument, other than to 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1290 

suggest to you that when you look at the structure of grants, $10,000 seems to be not a bad breaking point. The 
ones below that figure tend to be the smaller grants and to be more numerous (for instance, making payments to 
individuals who participate in training programs). Surely, there's no point in asking cabinet to review all of those 
because they are under the regulations and there is no way cabinet can relate to those individual payments. 
 
Section 5 agreed. 
 
Section 6 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I think we have debated this one quite thoroughly, too. I would like just a few comments 
from you, Mr. Minister. I think you know my concern about the eligibility for loans. We've made that case pretty 
plain. I know that some of this is tied up with federal legislation. Would you give this House your assurance that 
you will try to negotiate, at the federal level, a loosening up of this so that these students, whose parents have 
assets (as I've pointed out) but probably don't have a lot of cash flow (and that may be the case again this fall) 
would be eligible for those types of loans? 
 
The other thing that concerns me is that the students in some cases are going out of the province to take the type 
of training they want. Can these students become eligible for loans? I know that if the courses are not offered in 
Saskatchewan, then I think they are, but there are quite a few cases of students who are not receiving loans. Those 
kinds of assurances are what we are most concerned with regarding the student loans. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I will reiterate what I said earlier. I certainly appreciate 
the support of the hon. member in the efforts that I have undertaken to try to see that we open up the terms of 
eligibility, because I do believe, as I've indicated to the hon. member, that some of the terms in the national 
program are too restrictive. I believe that, in particular, there are people in the lower-middle income groups to 
whom we should be providing a greater degree of access to this assistance. Even though they receive assistance, I 
think there is justification for looking at providing a better level of assistance. 
 
I would point out to the hon. member, as I pointed out earlier, that a little over a year and a half ago I was 
successful in convincing my colleagues from the other provinces and the federal minister to put together a task 
force to review this whole subject. If the hon. member would use what I know is his significant influence with a 
number of other Conservative ministers of continuing and advanced education, who are responsible for the 
administration of the programs in their provinces, in order to convince them to support my efforts to bring about a 
change in the national criteria, I would very much appreciate his support. 
 
I think it would be better utilized in that quarter, given the resistance that I have sensed in certain quarters to these 
kinds of changes, than directed at me. I am already a convert. In fact, I believe I was a convert before the hon. 
member was a convert. So I would ask him to use his considerable influence in that direction and I am sure we 
will 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1291 

then bring about some very significant changes in the national program — changes which are needed. The other 
question the hon. member asked was with respect to eligibility for loans by those students who study outside the 
province. Certainly, there is eligibility now for loans by students who study outside the province and we will 
continue to provide them. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Just on the comment of my using my influence, I think probably the easiest way I could do 
that is if we changed the government. You and I could trade places and that would be the way I could use my 
influence best. 
 
Sections 1 to 3 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Oil Well Income Tax Act 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I have a couple of questions, Mr. Minister, with regard to not so much the legislation as the 
situation as it relates to the oil and gas income tax act. Perhaps you would permit a couple of questions and then 
we can simply run through the rest of the legislation and get it off the paper, okay? 
 
The question I have is not addressed in the legislation itself but it is the issue that is presently of some concern to 
the oil producers in the province. Given the superimposition of the national energy program on the present rules, 
both in Saskatchewan and in Alberta, and the impact of that national energy program because of the manner in 
which it is deducted prior to other deductions taking place, we find the producers in Saskatchewan, in particular 
of marginal wells and in heavy oil, after all the smoke has cleared, are in a negative or minus position with regard 
to production. I believe the statements that you have made have been to the effect that you don't perceive or don't 
see any substantial changes in the royalty positions. Now that would tend to beg the question by the word 
"substantial." Are you anticipating some amendment or some changes to bring those producers to at least a plus 
position as opposed to the minus 10 or 15 cents a barrel levels they have now? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — No, I think that at present we have no plans of making that kind of adjustment. What I 
meant by "substantial" is that if at any time the industry or some other group approached us and said a particular 
part of this tax was applying in a way that wasn't intended, etc., obviously we are open to it. In terms of making 
some general changes in the tax, which is what you are talking about, we don't at this time have any changes. Our 
position is that we had this royalty structure in place last year; things were reasonably good in the Saskatchewan 
oil patch. It's in place this year; the problem is the national energy program. Any changes we might make of a 
substantial nature would have to be made in the context of some change in the national energy program as it might 
apply to Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Arising out of that comment, Mr. Minister, the point I would wish to raise with you is this. 
You are correct in your assessment that your system was in place and there was a fair amount of activity in the 
province prior to the implementation of the national energy program. In, let's say the Lloydminster area, many of 
the companies (or at least some of the companies) are not servicing their wells presently in production 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1292 

because of the negative situation. They are proceeding to produce where they are producing. Now, it seems to me 
in that given area that the Government of Saskatchewan is in fact probably in a better stead than it was prior to the 
national energy program, given the fact that now you are receiving a certain amount of the export tax on heavy oil. 
Given this fact, I would suggest that the revenues of the province are in fact increasing as a result of the national 
energy program, taken as a whole in that regard. 
 
Many people in the industry (and I think your department, like everyone else, is waiting for the decision of Husky 
as one of the major players in the Lloydminster field) and various publications speculate that 600 wells could be 
shut down once they have addressed their well-to-well assessment, or as many as 50,000 barrels could be shut 
down in production in the Lloydminster field. This is going to have a very serious impact on provincial royalties 
and the provincial budget, where we are seeing a $600 million revenue coming in this year. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is basically this: given the fact that the national energy program was not all negative 
factors to the provincial government, is there any thought of perhaps modifying the royalty taken by the province 
in the heavy oil area so that we don't have to face the very serious question of substantial shutdowns in the 
Lloydminster area? This could have serious implications, I suggest, both for provincial revenues and perhaps for 
the upgrader that is proposed to be built. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I don't have any quarrel with the member's comments with respect to the impact on 
provincial revenues. Obviously, if wells shut in, we, as a provincial government, lose the royalties we would have 
otherwise received. My arguments have never been that we are better off financially to not make adjustments. I 
think that the position of the federal government is the one which the member is putting, that is, that we do derive, 
at least temporarily, some benefits from the national energy program and, consequently, we should reduce our 
royalties to make way for the PGRT (petroleum and gas resource tax). 
 
I think the member should look at two or three things there. The PGRT is now at 8 per cent, which works out to 
about 24 per cent in terms of cash flow. The federal government was careful to say in its budget that this is not 
fixed for all time and so it could indeed be 12 or 16 per cent at some point in the future, near or far, depending on 
what you think of the federal government's need for cash. 
 
So I think any action on our part to reduce our royalties to take account of the federal government's PGRT has two 
effects: (1) it just encourages the federal government to follow through; (2) it puts our neighbour to the west in a 
somewhat awkward position by Lalonde's next comment which would be, "See, Saskatchewan has reduced its 
royalties; why don't you do the same?" I'm not sure that I want to put either them or us in that position. 
 
Secondly, with respect to the sharing of the export tax which we now have with the federal government — at 
least, we believe we have — we have yet to receive any of the money . . . Has the legislation entered parliament? 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It hasn't even entered parliament in Ottawa yet. Furthermore, there is no guarantee 
as to how long we'll receive any money from that. Half of the export tax on oil going out of Saskatchewan could 
be a significant amount of money, but if there was no oil exported, there wouldn't be any. Half of nothing is 
nothing. 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1293 

We saw in January the impact of an increase in the federal government export tax in the near shutdown of our 
exports to the U.S. Given what is occurring in Alberta with the Alberta government's cutbacks in production, 
there is the possibility that all of our oil may be diverted to eastern Canada, in which case there will not be any 
export tax for us to share 50 per cent of. So, to use the numbers, it's difficult to know, in both the short run and the 
medium term, what there will be for Saskatchewan in terms of revenue from the export tax. As I said before, both 
publicly and privately to the industry and to others, it seems to me that the federal government's national energy 
program is designed to force provinces to reduce their shares of the revenues. It seems to me not to be a wise thing 
for us to do because it simply invites further increases by the federal government with respect to the national 
energy program. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I have two comments with regard to that, Mr. Minister. I think the Premier has indicated 
several times in the Assembly that the provinces are anticipating substantial revenues from that anticipated rebate 
of that export tax. I appreciate your comments, as well, with regard to the impact that your actions might have on 
the province of Alberta. I would simply say that in the past it hasn't seemed to me that the province of 
Saskatchewan has ever been very concerned about the impact that its policy might have on the province of 
Alberta, whether it was in the field of oil and gas or whether it was in the field of the constitution or anything else. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, and the point I wish to make is simply this. Although I appreciate your caution (and I 
think everyone shares that caution equally), the one fact is that the province of Saskatchewan's take from the oil 
industry (for various reasons — maybe it's a smaller factor in our provincial budget or whatever it might be) is 
still substantially higher than the province of Alberta's. We are still looking at the situation where the producers on 
the Alberta side of the border are showing a profit on their production of heavy oil, and the producers on the 
Saskatchewan side are not showing a profit, although they have been carrying on for some period of time and 
some of them, in particular Husky, as a good corporate citizen, are addressing the question and may bite the bullet 
and hang on for a while. But we cannot expect even Husky to hang on for a long period of time. It would appear 
that what the minister is saying is that he will remain intransigent even if that period runs for a year to two years, 
and that we will face the shutdown rather than make that particular move. 
 
The second point which I see being made by the minister, and, I think, by the Premier, is that we are, in the words 
of the Premier, not really players in the national energy debate right now. "That's primarily an issue between 
Ottawa and Alberta. Saskatchewan can do very little except ride along with it." So, when you give those two 
factors, I wonder whether or not the points which are being made by you are bona fide, Mr. Minister. I wonder 
whether we are going to see a shutdown as the whole national energy program and debate drones on for another 
two years before we see any material change in it. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, obviously, one can interpret the discussions which are going on, the positioning 
of the various parties, the likely outcome, and the duration of it, in different ways and what is the best policy for 
the Government of Saskatchewan to follow in the short run and the long run is obviously open for debate. It is our 
position (the position we have taken) that since the problems are caused by the national energy program, the 
solutions should be forthcoming from that program, and that we should continue to hold our discussions with the 
federal government, which we are doing at the official level. I'm not optimistic about any particular outcome 
there. Alberta's minister, Mr. Leach, is meeting on April 13 with Mr. Lalonde. I don't know what the outcome of 
that will be. I presume that later we will have an opportunity to meet with Mr. Lalonde. 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1294 

We are in reasonably close contact with Alberta and its position. 
 
I think one can debate whether or not our position is right. I am simply giving you our position and the reasons for 
it. I recognize that there are other options which we could follow. For now and the foreseeable future, we don't 
propose to change our position. Obviously, 6, 12 or 18 months from now, we will be continually reviewing the 
situation. We may later decide that some other course of action is advisable, but for now, that is the course we are 
following. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, to expedite matters, I can advise the Chair that I will not be objecting to the 
lengthy legislative changes going through, and have no questions on them. I don't suspect that there are any other 
questions from the floor, and I'm now prepared to waive them through. 
 
Sections 1 to 15 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 16 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Chairman, a brief comment on that. That amendment takes us back to January 1. 
This is part of the agreement we worked out with the industry. This bill was introduced last fall. If it had been 
passed then, we wouldn't have made it retroactive. There is no particular problem, but we've done it. It simplifies 
everyone's bookkeeping if it starts on January 1, rather than having two systems which change over in the middle 
of the year. 
 
Section 16 as amended agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 
 
Sections 1 to 14 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Association of School Business Officials of Saskatchewan Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the hon. minister I move that the bill now be read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Department of Continuing Education Act 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1295 

HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 20 — An Act to amend The Oil Well Income Tax Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — I now move the amendments be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — By leave, I move this bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOWS 
 

CONTINUING EDUCATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce the officials, as you suggest. First of all, I 
would like to introduce Dr. Will Toombs, who is the deputy minister of continuing education, newly appointed 
January 1, 1980. In front of Dr. Toombs are: Mr. Lew Riederer, assistant deputy minister; Don Philippon, director 
of policy and program planning; behind me I have Doug McGuigan, budget officer; Mr. Frank May, who is 
director of administration; in addition to that, Mr. Matthes, Mr. Kutarna, Mr. Wilson, Mr. Campbell, and Mr. 
McKendry. 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I think the biggest concern facing the students of Saskatchewan and the people 
of Saskatchewan, in regard to continuing education, probably would be the question: are these students being 
given the training that they will need to take a part in what we view as the new Saskatchewan? I think we all 
realize in the decade of the '80s, and speculating upon what may come in the '90s, that the rate of change taking 
place makes one wonder if the existing programs and curricula, which are in place today in Saskatchewan, are 
what is needed to have these people fit in to share what we hope is a great future in this province. 
 
I think that is the number one question that is running through the minds of many 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1296 

people. I think people, as a whole, are quite willing to support education, be it at the school level or be it at the 
university level or the technical school level, if they feel that they're getting their dollar's worth and that their 
children are going to be equipped to take part in the mainstream of society. I think that is the one question the 
people who are involved in education today should be addressing. Are we attempting to meet those needs of what 
is going to be out there in 10 years or in 5 years? 
 
I wonder if your department, as a department, is gearing up for this highly technical age that we seem to be 
entering — the age of the computer. We hear every day in the House that the computer may have erred, or the 
computer did this. We're into the age of the computer, but are we equipping people to really understand and to 
realize the effect that that computer is going to have upon their daily lives, and certainly upon the way in which 
they take their part in the job market and in the future of this province? I think those are the areas which 
continuing education has to be addressing and has to be making adjustments. 
 
When you see programs and interviews at the universities in the province, where they're interviewing the 
graduates, you find that certain graduates in certain areas, even today, in 1981, are not being grabbed up in the job 
market and are not finding employment. In other areas, in the more technical type of area (let me cite engineering 
for an example), they are being offered 7 or 8 or 9 or 10 jobs, before they even graduate. Are we really looking at 
this in a whole comprehensive viewpoint? There is a danger, I suppose (being educated in the academics yourself, 
and having come through them as many of us have) that it probably is the only way to stardom and grandeur, and 
to understanding the world around us, and making our niche in society. This new society (I don't know what it 
will be like) has to look to see what type of people it will need to take part in it. I wonder if we are inclined to 
look at our own past track record, at what we studied and what we had to go through in our levels of continuing 
education, and make the false assumption that more of the same is going to satisfy the needs of the students today 
and in the future. 
 
I just think of the possibilities in the Lloydminster area in the heavy oil and the spinoffs that will come in the way 
of jobs, if and when we ever get our energy problems in this country worked out — that area of the province and 
the estimated number of jobs it will take and will provide for people. I wonder if we are, at this point in time, 
training our youth in Saskatchewan and equipping them adequately for this. I know in your budget you announced 
some new training facilities in Prince Albert, some new geological training at the university. I think that is good. I 
commend you for that. What I am asking is: is that enough? Are we really tackling the whole thing of technical 
education in the province? 
 
Then along with this new technology, this new Saskatchewan, and this new future that we can envisage to a 
certain extent, comes the thing of the new leisure of people. I don't know what the work week is now, but if I try 
to contact people on a Friday afternoon, many times I can't find them; they are out at the lake. That's fine and 
dandy. But the work week could even be compressed more. I wonder then, in the whole field, if people are not at 
their places of work, they will be taking part in leisure. When I think of leisure, I think of the journalism which we 
fought for in the campus (and I believe that school is operating now); I think of the radio arts, the television arts 
and the performing arts, these sorts of things. 
 
When I was teaching school, if a student came to me and said, "Where can I go to take this type of training?" 
Basically, I had to say, "Well, you want to go down to Ryerson in 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1297 

Toronto." Many didn't want to go that far away from home. Or there were some schools in Lethbridge, Alberta 
that offered some of these classes. I cite those as a couple of examples of the technology, the role of the 
blue-collared worker in this new technical type of society which we are entering into at a rapid rate. I also look at 
the whole field of communications, the performing arts and the type of people who will be taking part in 
providing some of the leisure entertainment for this new workforce. Then I look, as I say, at the recent stats on the 
graduates at the universities. I see that for many of the graduates there are not a great number of jobs available. 
 
Now, I know it is hard to plan, because things change very rapidly. But, I think, as a Department of Continuing 
Education, it has to be of paramount consideration in your planning. 
 
I'd like you to just comment a bit, Mr. Minister, on those things that I have laid out at this point. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member certainly raises a valid and important 
concern. There is no question that we are facing very, very rapidly changing circumstances with regard to the need 
and demand for trained, educated people in our society. I would say to the hon. member that I certainly agree that 
we must be doing some planning for the future. The hon. member mentions that while he agrees with providing 
for training facilities, such as the new provision for a technical institute in Prince Albert, and with the program of 
very major expansion of the engineering facilities at the University of Saskatchewan and now of the geological 
sciences and so on, such facilities are not the whole answer. I agree with the hon. member. I think we certainly 
must have the infrastructure or the facility to do what is necessary, but we recognize that facilities are not the 
whole of what's needed. I would indicate to the hon. member that, indeed, I think one has to start at some point to 
ask some basic questions about what the goals of education are and how one would relate education, not only to 
the academic skills and the basic skills — the three Rs and that sort of thing — but beyond that to the relationship 
of people who are coming out of our education system to the world of work. 
 
I think that applies equally well at the elementary and at the high school level as well as at the technical and 
university level. There is no question that the world of work, the word of life in the community, the world of 
citizenship — all of those things — are important considerations in the way you organize your programs. I will 
say to the hon. member that we have been undertaking, first of all, as part of the recognition of that, a very major 
review and redevelopment of the curriculum, both in the school system and in the post-secondary system — at 
least as it affects us directly. With respect to what the hon. member has been talking about more specifically — 
technical and vocational education — we recognize that the world is changing very rapidly and that the skills 
people are trained for today may not necessarily be the specific skills they'll need five years from now. Therefore, 
we are undertaking to redevelop the basic curriculum as it applies to all of our technical and vocational programs 
so there will be a greater degree of flexibility in those programs, they will relate more clearly to the demands we 
can project into the future and they do in fact provide within that training some high degree of flexibility, so that 
young people who are trained today will not be caught in job ghettos tomorrow. 
 
So, yes, I agree with you. I think the place to start, first and foremost, is with curriculum and we are doing a major 
amount of work with respect to that. Secondly, and related to that, is the whole question of scope of training — 
what kind of areas you cover. We have 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1298 

been making and will continue to make major provision for a widely expanded scope of programs. Certainly the 
communications technologies, the computer technologies, the computational technologies and all those related 
fields are areas where we have been expanding our capacity to provide education very substantially in the 
technical and vocational sectors. In addition to that, we recognize that, because education is so important to young 
people — and adults as well — in terms of their future work and life in the community, the access that people 
have to these programs is very important. I have been concerned that, to a certain degree, the highly centralized 
institutional-based programs have not provided the full opportunities they should have to as many people as 
possible because of the circumstances of people that limit their ability to travel to the larger centres to take the 
kind of programs that are offered — their ties to the community and to family or other social circumstances that 
detract from the ability of rural people to fully take advantage of these programs. So we are also looking at 
providing for a much more decentralized basis of delivery of our vocational and technical credit programs. We 
have in the budget this year a major commitment to training, in terms of decentralized, rural-based, vocational and 
technical training. 
 
The last thing I would mention to the hon. member in that respect is simply that we recognize the vast growth in 
demand for training and training spaces. We are providing that through major expansion in our programs — not 
just in our facilities but in the programs themselves. 
 
I would say to the hon. member that he may be aware that about a year, or a year and a half ago, we had a report 
produced by the Department of Continuing Education (it is in libraries, and so on, around the province) called 
VOTECH 90, in which, in the vocational and technical area, we looked at all of these questions. We have been 
working from that report to develop a comprehensive, integrated planning framework to deal with all of these 
changes, which, I agree, are very much with us as we go into the 1980s. 
 
The hon. member makes reference to university education. I don't fully agree with all of his comments. I recently 
received a report from the University of Saskatchewan that indicated that the last year or two, at least, compare as 
well with any other year in history, in terms of young people being able to take up job opportunities as a result of 
the university education they have obtained. That appears to apply very evenly across all faculties and all areas of 
training. I think that we are going to need, and it will be to the benefit of young people to take advantage of, 
vocational technical training. Likewise, it will be to their advantage to take the opportunities which fit their needs 
and interests and to take advantage of a university training. 
 
I think that our universities are doing a good job. I believe there probably are areas, in terms of the basic 
curriculum (just as we're doing in the other two parts of the system), that they could be looking at. Of course, as 
the hon. member knows, the self-governing nature of institutions in the university sector requires that they do that 
themselves. 
 
I have had some discussions with them. In fact, as recently as three weeks ago, I met with the senior deans, 
presidents and administrators of the two universities to discuss these and other related topics — about ways of 
planning our education system, integrating things and looking at certain questions of curriculum and the 
interrelationship between curriculums. 
 
But I don't think that things are nearly as bad as the hon. member seems to imply, with respect to the opportunities 
that university grads have open to them. 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1299 

MR. TAYLOR: — I was commenting on, and I think you probably saw the same television show, where there 
were interviews with the students at the campus. Obviously I'm not criticizing the social sciences (I'm a graduate 
of the social sciences myself), but the fact of the matter is that these people weren't getting jobs — whereas, in 
fields of engineering and technologies, there was a line-up for them. I think that we would agree that education is 
basically to broaden one's horizons, and one's understanding and to make one a more adaptable and understanding 
person — a person with a broader viewpoint. On the other hand, I think there is the utilitarian aspect of education. 
We have to take a serious look at that. In many people's minds, that is the priority. They will pay for the goods if 
they feel they are getting the goods. 
 
When I am addressing this, I am looking at the whole picture of the needs that have to be met to satisfy what may 
be developing now. I wonder how you are going to address and co-ordinate the problem of overlap. I know the 
two university campuses are autonomous, but we have to have some type of co-ordination. I am pleased to hear 
that you have met with these people, because that is just the type of thing I've been talking about. We have to look 
with a vision to where we're going and what's out there. You mentioned that as, perhaps, being the goal — that 
could be. But we cannot afford to have needless overlap because of various jurisdictions. We cannot be selling 
areas short because maybe they are not as glamorous or they are not what we came through in the past. We have 
to be addressing this question: what are the needs out there? When we talk about this, we must have the money to 
do it. That is the next important thing. We have to put together a package that will provide these types of 
opportunities and programs that are going to be demanded. 
 
For example, I don't know whether we have adequate training for day care workers. You announce that you will 
double the funds for day care. You must have the personnel. I see, as I go around the country, many people with 
two family incomes. I ran into a girl yesterday, who is a nanny, brought all the way from England. Do we train 
any domestics in this country? I don't see anyone coming out of our continuing education institutions who is 
trained as a domestic. Maybe there is a need. Maybe that's one of the needs and maybe we are coming to that 
situation. I don't know if we are today adequately training the day care workers. 
 
I will put that question to you. Do you feel that there are programs in place to train the people needed to man the 
day care centres which are going to be developing with these new funds? Maybe the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland would like to answer, but I will address it to you, Mr. Minister. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I am glad to answer that question. If the hon. member will check 
back in the review of the estimates last year in the budget debate, I believe it was about a year ago that I 
announced the introduction of a new day care worker training program. That program is now being fully 
developed and we will be admitting students, hopefully, at the beginning of next September. That program has 
been provided for. 
 
I agree with the hon. member that, certainly, we need to recognize the very important needs of day care centres for 
trained personnel. This program, I believe, will be the best that's available in Canada. It will provide for a 
one-year and a two-year program leading to certificates and diplomas. The program which is developing, the 
curriculum that is coming into place and the staff we have will certainly make it a program that is to be 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1300 

envied. I appreciate the hon. member's support. I was a year ahead of him on that one, but I still appreciate his 
support. I am looking forward to that program playing a very important role in meeting our day care needs. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — My question follows up on the questions by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. Mr. 
Minister, the statement that you have made is that you are moving away from what we might call the standard 
form of education, which we see in our high school system, into a more job-oriented system of curriculum. Is that 
what we are basically talking about — much in the direction, let's say, that takes place in England or in West 
Germany or even in some of the oriental countries where they are starting to address the question of technology, 
the question of being able to produce the manpower that we are going to need as we go into the next decade with 
regard to the whole field of high technology, electronics, energy and related areas? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, perhaps I should clarify that — I think the hon. member made reference to 
the high school system. One of the things that our review of the high school curriculum will be looking at to find 
is to recognize that many, many students do not pursue basically academic programs after high school. I think it is 
only about 30 per cent who pursue academic programs and 70 per cent who do not. What that tells me is that there 
is a need to recognize that there is another aspect of the world of work besides the academic kinds of pursuits that 
will impinge upon the needs of those students. But we are not suggesting that, at the high school level, students 
should become vocationally skilled for particular trades or occupations. I think that is perhaps a bit too early; there 
can be emphasis within the high school options which are provided such that students can become more familiar 
with the kind of knowledge and the kinds of skills which might relate to the general areas which they might be 
pursuing. My opinion at the present time is that it would not be wise to set up the school system as a prevocational 
training program, that is, in the sense of preparing young people to move directly into occupations with 
specialized training which is required for those occupations. 
 
Essentially what we are doing is recognizing that occupations require, as you mentioned, basic skills and 
understanding in the areas of technology and administration, and a lot of other areas, and that we should be trying 
to recognize the need to provide for literacy skills in those areas — an understanding of those areas and some 
grasp of how one can gain a better understanding and the basic knowledge which goes with those areas. It will 
provide an opportunity for those students to more readily move directly into the more specialized vocation 
preparation that comes at the post-secondary level through technical and vocational programs. So, we're looking at 
an integration without streaming students into particular vocations at the high school level. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — My question, Mr. Minister, basically is this: I think you would agree that certainly some of 
the European countries that have been successful in this area have, in fact, moved much earlier than the 
post-secondary school system to address the question of job needs. I think your statistics indicate that 70 percent 
of the students coming out of the high school system do not, in fact, go on to further forms of education — either 
to university or to the technical schools. It seems to me that the problem we're going to face in this part of the 
country over the next 10 or 15 years is a serious shortage of trained technical people in various areas of the 
technologies — because that's the area we will probably be able to address, and that's to our advantage in this part 
of the country. Maybe other parts of the country are not as fortunate and do not have the resources, etc., to be able 
to address that question. I think it's important we 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1301 

seize on that in this region of the country, because I think we can make a contribution to this country and to the 
world in that given area. 
 
It seems to me that one of the great problems we're going to be facing over the next decade is that in the past many 
of the trained people we were able to attract in given areas came from the European countries. It now appears, 
from the writings in the field, that those people (whether they come from England or from other areas of western 
Europe) are not interested in coming to Canada now because the standard of living is no longer the bright, shining 
thing, high above their own. In fact, they have comparable standards of living and they want to stay home in their 
own countries. Therefore, we face what I think is a massive problem in obtaining trained people. For example, if 
we were to commence the nuclear refinery in Saskatchewan, or address the question of the oil upgrader, or 
address the question of the tertiary recovery of oil, or if we were to proceed with the petro-chemical industry, with 
the tar sands, with coal development, etc., western Canada would have a very serious need for skilled workers and 
a very difficult time finding them. I think most people will agree that we're going to have to produce our own 
trained people. 
 
Given that situation, and given the situation of a fair amount of turn-around time before we have those people in 
place, it seems to me that we're not, in fact, addressing that question quickly enough. We are going to have to sit 
down and look very seriously at more job-creating or job-oriented educational systems, not only in our 
post-secondary schools, but also in our high schools. Nobody seems to want to make that extra step as they have 
done in some of the other countries that have shot ahead of Canada and the United States, as it relates to 
productivity and as it relates to being able to seize upon the high technologies. And given that, Mr. Minister, 
would you not agree with me that, in fact, we have to much more than we are doing now? I don't say that you are 
doing less than another province, but we have to do much more to address this question if we're going to survive 
in the '80s and on to the '90s. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I certainly agree that we have to recognize this need and deal 
with it, and that we're working under fairly constrained time frames, although it's not that we're starting from 
nowhere. We've had a very good system of technical-vocational training but the demands, I agree with the hon. 
member, are pressing on that system. I don't think, first of all, it's true to say that the European experience has 
been one of utilizing the secondary school system for specialized pre-vocational training, that is to say, training 
that leads people directly into specialized jobs in the workplace. The European system is converging much more 
to the direction to which we're converging, or making efforts toward converging, and that is providing our 
students who come out of the high school system with a good sophisticated level of basic literacy in the high 
technology and technology related fields. The post-secondary system and the employers themselves need to pick 
up people from that point and provide a further level of more sophisticated specialized training for specialized and 
particular work. But I agree with the hon. member. We certainly are moving very substantially in that direction 
with our curriculum programs that are under way now with respect to the school system. 
 
With respect to the post-school technical-vocation training, I would point out to the hon. member that a major area 
of emphasis in this year's budget deals with the whole question of providing exactly that kind of resource-related 
and technology-related post-secondary education in the technical and vocational fields. We have a major 
expansion of the STI (Saskatchewan Technical Institute) taking place. We have a major new institute developing 
in Prince Albert. We have a very large amount of additional 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1302 

resources devoted toward, in addition to that, providing decentralized training so that the training can take place at 
the North Battlefords and the Melforts and the Kindersleys or Lloydminsters or wherever. 
 
It is appropriate to take training to people who are going to be working in areas of employment that relate to the 
regional needs of those areas, and relate to the interests of the students from those areas. So this budget makes a 
very, very major commitment to that very kind of investment in those kinds of needs. I think we have to keep 
pushing forward. We simply have to recognize, as the hon. member said, how quickly things are changing and 
that for reasons of availability of people from outside the province, as well as for reasons of wanting to provide 
the opportunities for our own people (which I think is important), we should emphasize this area of education 
very strongly. And that we are doing. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I suppose it's not fair to raise these points in the estimates of continuing education, which 
stresses the higher level of education, but I think it's very important. It's difficult to look at the two in isolation. It 
seems to me one of the big problems that is being faced at least in rural schools, in the high school system, is quite 
frankly that the education system seems to be addressing itself to the average student. In fairness, I think perhaps 
the city schools address it much more because they have far more resources; they have far more students. 
 
But the problem that I see in the rural Saskatchewan schools is basically this: we address our whole program to 
the average student. There is very little in it for the over-achiever or the exceptional student. Probably equally as 
well, there's not that much for the under-achiever, the person who could be diverted into the technical fields at an 
earlier age and clearly has the problem with the standard forms of curriculum in the high school grades, 
particularly the last three or four grades of high school. If that person were able to gear himself, or channel his 
education more into the technical fields of the welding, the pipe fitting and the machinists, he is going to be very 
much in demand certainly in this decade. That's number one. Number two is that the question of the high achiever, 
to my way of thinking, is not being addressed by our school system. Those are the people who can go on further 
into advanced education and deal with questions of high technology, deal with questions of administration, etc. I 
think we have, by and large, as a country, a very well-educated group of citizens. But that is the area we must 
seize upon, it seems to me, if we are going to go into the future and make it count as an economic contribution to 
this nation. 
 
So, all I'm saying, Mr. Minister, is that it seems to me we have to go back and tie continuing education to the 
whole area of education. I'm far from being any kind of an expert in the field of education, but it seems to me that 
those are two areas which are not being addressed, clearly in our rural schools, and I think they are areas that 
should be addressed. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I think I have some disagreement with the terminology that the hon. 
member is using, and I will make reference to that. To be fair, I appreciate that you are not trying to argue a highly 
detailed point, but I would point out that we just recently, from the Department of Education, released a 
discussion paper on rural education which I think you have had an opportunity to review. 
 
In an important way, that paper addresses the questions you're talking about — recognizing that we do have 
certain kinds of interests and certain kinds of skills and 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1303 

requirements that we perhaps have not been meeting as well as we should have, particularly in the rural schools. 
We also discovered, in that report, that even though the opportunities seem to be there in the urban schools, we 
don't seem to be meeting the students' needs as well as we should in that area. 
 
I do want to take just a little bit of exception to your terminology, not to be argumentative, but to clarify a point. I 
wouldn't categorize these in terms of over-achievers and average-achievers and under-achievers. I think what we 
really are talking about is different aptitudes, different skills and different interests. I think you are probably 
referring basically to the academic versus the more vocationally-related areas of emphasis within the curriculum, 
if you like. 
 
I would say to the hon. member that I think, generally speaking, our schools (and certainly that study would 
confirm this) in Saskatchewan do an excellent job in terms of providing an educational standard for the academic 
orientation. I think in terms of the question of, say, the gifted student within that, there is a need for additional 
program support in our schools to meet those needs. But, I think, generally, in terms of the academic student, we 
do an excellent preparation job with those who are going to pursue academic studies. 
 
I do agree with the hon. member that we do have some very important questions which we need to address, 
particularly in the rural schools, in terms of those students who do not pursue an academic program beyond 
school, who go directly into the world of work, or who go into technical or vocational training programs. I think, 
as that paper points out, that there are some things we have to explore. It's not easy to do in the small schools, and 
it is a real challenge to try to put it together. But I think it can be put together, and I agree with the hon. member 
that if we do that we are going to meet the interests and needs of a whole group of students whose needs we are 
perhaps not meeting as well as we should at the moment. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, a comment to the minister. My colleague was mentioning the programs 
in the schools. I want to keep this on continuing education, but this relates to the discussion we had earlier this 
afternoon on the ministries. Really, the Department of Continuing Education in this province dictates to the 
students in the schools what subjects they will take. That's where you will have to have overall planning because 
basically the students in the schools of Saskatchewan take the "straight eight," as we call it. And although we've 
expanded in the fields of technical and vocational education, if you want to go on in continuing education in this 
province, you have to go back to straight academics, Mr. Chairman. I can't see that as being the type of planning 
we need to satisfy these new technological needs. I can't see why a student who comes through a motor mechanics 
course and then wants to get into a technical field at STI (Saskatchewan Technical Institute) or Kelsey Institute, 
has to have, for example, history. He has to have some history to be a well-rounded individual. But they are a 
technical kind of people. I say that we have to look at this whole situation. I know it's not an easy one to answer. 
Demands are made on many of our technical people, or so-called technical students to have social sciences, 
sciences, maths and English. I agree that you need a basic core there, but on the other hand, I don't think that these 
other things, which kind of dovetail into that, should be penalized. That's the situation. 
 
That's why I say that continuing education has, in the past, kind of been focused toward the university and the 
academics. I'm not knocking the academics in any way, shape or form. As long as we're going to be a culture in a 
civilized society, we're certainly going to have to have the academics, too. But we have to be looking at this 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1304 

other type of avenue. I think that's what my colleague was looking at and discussing. If you want to respond to 
that, I'll be glad to hear your views. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — If I might just briefly comment, this discussion almost scares me because I don't 
know whether I'm slipping the way of the old Tories or the old Tories are slipping the way of the new socialists. I 
really can't disagree with the basic assumption which you talk about there. 
 
Since becoming minister, I have had a lot of discussions, both with my officials in the Department of Continuing 
Education and with the universities. We have some major redevelopment work going on in our curriculum in this 
direction. It suggests, basically, that the very strict, rigid, academically oriented entrance requirements, with 
respect to certain parts of our post-secondary system (and even, perhaps, the strictness which applies to the 
university system), are something which we should be looking at. We can very well slip into restricting access for 
students who have abilities, skills and aptitudes which suit the kind of program we have there, but who, because 
of those entrance requirements, are denied access. 
 
So, I am very strongly in support of the view that we must be assessing that and providing more flexible aspects of 
entrance so that the students going back to school can pursue programs within the school system which have a 
broader base and are better geared to their aptitudes and interests. I agree with the hon. member entirely that we 
must not lead people to conclude from that that we want to discard the basic, liberal arts skills — reading, writing, 
and basic literary skills, We want that to be an integral part of the programs which those young people take. I 
agree with you that they should be able to broaden out that basic program to suit their needs and aptitudes without 
feeling that their access to technical schools or vocational institutes will be restricted as a result. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Just in reply to the minister, reading from the people I talked to out there, we're gaining and 
you're slipping, but we'll leave that. The other thing is, if we want to get these estimates over, please do not brand 
my seatmate here as a socialist or we may be here for quite some time. 
 
We've probably discussed the philosophical natures of this. I hope I've laid out to you my concerns, and I hope 
that you take those seriously and act upon them. They're offered to you with the sincere hope that we may try and 
improve the system. 
 
Let us get down to some of the more practical things, then, some of the actual implementation. I remember last 
year, Mr. Minister, you spoke in your address on the budget, I believe it was, about the decentralizing and going 
out into the rural areas with a module type of approach through the community colleges. I have been waiting with 
bated breath to see where this develops. I don't know if you mean the new school up in Prince Albert, if that is 
your idea of one or not. But that still is rather a large urban area. I am thinking of those people out in the areas of 
say, Maryfield and Wilkie and these outlying extremities. How are you going to be getting this type of module 
program? What progress has been made? How are you coming along with its implementation? 
 
It sounded exciting at the time, and I may have missed something. I think I have addressed this to you before. It 
fits right into native education. In my constituency I have five native reserves for this type of training. It is very 
imperative that we get it going quickly if we want to draw these people into the whole work force in this 
opportunity for the future which we have been discussing. What have you done to date, and what are 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1305 

you planning to do? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — First, we are not talking, in terms of this outreach or decentralized delivery, about 
the development of, say, a new institute at Prince Albert, other than that will support the carrying of additional and 
new programs onto an outreach basis into communities as well. 
 
We have appointed a co-ordinator in the department to work on the further development of this overall program. 
We have been experimenting with some pilot projects over the past year and utilizing primarily the vocational 
high schools around the province, because they have the facilities to which we can adapt most quickly if we want 
to move with some experiments and pilot projects. We have started, during this past year, with some pilot projects 
around the province. This year's budget makes a major commitment to 150,000 training days under that program. 
We will be moving ahead with some vigour, based on the experience we have developed with that program, 
concentrating primarily at this stage (it is not to say that that will be exclusively, or that that will be the case as we 
move down the road two or three years) on utilizing those facilities we have in those vocational high schools 
around the province in Yorkton, North Battleford, Swift Current, Estevan, Weyburn, and Melfort to provide 
training that is identified, through the community colleges and those communities, as being required for the needs 
of those communities and the students who are interested in pursuing those programs. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Will you give me an example? You said you had some pilot projects going on. Where was the 
pilot, and what type of programs were offered? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I think to get the 1980-81 figures in detail, I would have to give 
those to you later. But I can indicate that we were able, during the past year, to organize approximately 35,000 
training days on that basis. We're going to move that up to 40,000, hopefully, in this coming year as a result of 
expansion of these projects already under way. 
 
The concentration, roughly, would be distributed among the Yorkton area, the Lloydminster area, and the Prince 
Albert area, where up to this time we have not had an institute. The Prince Albert area has received a major 
amount of attention in this direction. Those are basically the areas where we have been concentrating our projects 
to date. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Within your project, what type of programs have you been offering? I would like just an 
example of some. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, primarily in the traditional trades-related fields at this time — truck 
driver training, carpentry, some basic welding, and steel fabrication. We have, in the newer areas, the emergency 
medical technician program as well. I don't have the details in each program, but most of them have been in the 
basic trades-related areas, and particularly in the areas I mentioned. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Last year we raised some concerns about the psychology department at the University of 
Regina. You pointed out that you did not care to interfere in any way, shape or form. In fact, you pointed out that 
you wouldn't take much action on it. There were some reports that came down. They were not public reports. 
There was some discussion of people being let go. I just wonder if you feel that the situation has improved in that 
department? Did you make any representation at any time, and if so, 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1306 

what type of representation, and what is the situation at this time in the psychology department of the Regina 
campus? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, without trying to evade the question, I do think that would be 
a question better addressed to the chairman of the board of governors or to the president of the university. Let me 
try to answer with the limited knowledge I have of the situation, but the member must recognize that decisions 
with respect to the program, staffing, and academic standards within the university are matters that the university 
itself maintains vigilance, control and direction over. On receiving the representation from the students last year, I 
did pass on the fact of the representation to, I believe, the president of the University of Regina. As well, I have on 
occasion discussed with the president of the University of Regina the progress, if you like, they have made, in 
terms of dealing with some of the difficulties they had there, without my being able to define exactly what the 
nature of the difficulties were, or what specific solutions were required. 
 
I do know that the University of Regina did take steps to deal with some of the problems it has been able to 
identify there, partly through the review of the reports the hon. member mentions. I should point out that those 
reports were not in my possession; they were not my property. They were not advanced to me by the university; 
they were the property of the university. But, on the basis of those reports, and its own internal reviews (which 
were very extensive), it did take some steps to deal with some of the difficulties that had arisen. 
 
They appointed an acting department head to deal with that situation. That acting department head, it has been 
reported to me, did a very good job. Since that time there has been a department head appointed. I understand, 
from reports I have had, that the situation is now very good. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — What about funding for secondary education? Am I right that Francis Fox made an 
announcement that the established funding program between the federal and provincial governments was due to 
lapse on April 1 next year. Now looking at the situation as it exists within this country at this time, and seeing the 
announcement of the federal Minister of Health the other day that if you don't eliminate extra billing they will cut 
off the funding, do you as minister see any movement on behalf of the federal government to perhaps pull back or 
restrict the amount of funding that they are presently putting into post-secondary education in this province? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, as a bit of background, the federal government starting, I believe, in 
1977 or 1978, redeveloped its program of fiscal transfers and support of social programs away from the earlier 
cost-sharing arrangements into what has become known as the EPF (established program of financing). Under that 
program they agreed through a formula to transfer to the provinces unconditional money to utilize in support of 
their social programming. There was no distinction in that agreement between health and education and aspects of 
other programs related to that, but rather it was unconditional and open to the provinces to use as they saw fit, 
according to their own priorities. The federal government did that in order, as they put it, to put some cap on the 
costs so that they could separate the provincial spending decisions from their own financial expenditures. 



 
March 23, 1981 

 

 
1307 

Recently the federal government, including Mr. Fox, at a meeting that I attended, indicated that it is now seriously 
considering restricting those fiscal transfers to the health field only, as a result very substantially reducing the 
amount of money that will be transferred directly to the provinces. What they are saying in their statements — 
which they have not announced, I agree, as formal policy, but certainly have given very strong indications to the 
universities and governments about — is that they, therefore, expect that the impact of those very serious cutbacks 
(and they are talking about cutting back $1.5 billion to $2 billion in terms of transfers to the provinces) should fall 
upon the post-secondary education system. 
 
The logical result, if that should happen, is that the universities and the technical institutes — but particularly the 
universities — would need to very substantially increase the money that they can draw from other sources, 
particularly from students through tuition fees. It is a movement in a very serious way, if the federal prescription 
were followed, toward a user-pay system beyond anything that we've ever imagined for our university education 
in Canada up until the present time. It seems that what they are talking about is providing some, although not 
nearly all, of the money that will be cut back to students through the issuance of vouchers, or certificates of that 
sort, through which the students can then go and purchase spaces in these much more costly programs that will be 
offered at the universities. Apparently the federal government feels in this way that they can get more direct 
control over the priorities within the universities, and at the same time, slot people into educational programs in 
accordance with some sort of national manpower plan. The result of that, I fear, will be very serious indeed. 
 
I have indicated my very strong objection to that. I object to it on a number of grounds, including the impact it 
will have on provinces, and particularly on have-not provinces, and that it will have on the universities. That 
would involved a very radical transformation of the way our universities function within Canada today. I think it 
amounts to a direct attack upon the very foundations of the public education system at the post-secondary level 
that we have in Canada today. I believe, Mr. Chairman, that the federal government is intent upon moving in this 
direction. I believe that it's imperative that we all take a stand against this kind of move, because it will have a 
serious impact in terms of the kind of educated citizenry we have in Canada, because the simple fact of the matter 
is that a lot of students who now go to university, if this all comes about, will not be able to afford to go to 
university in the future. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well, Mr. Minister, to sit here and listen to what you're saying, and I'm sure you're informed 
on this, is just shocking. You have attended a meeting, but I think there should be strong action taken, as Minister 
of Continuing Education. This kind of meddling by the federal government into part of the jurisdiction under the 
BNA Act which is exclusively a prerogative of the provinces should be fought with every weapon available to us. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think it's incumbent upon you to make this known to the people of Saskatchewan. I don't think 
there are many guys out there who even have an idea what an educational voucher is. I share with you the belief 
that educational vouchers or the voucher system would be a backward step in trying to achieve what we want to 
achieve in the education of the people of this province. I think we should join forces. And I ask you: would you 
join with me in sending a telegram to Francis Fox or Pierre Trudeau, or whoever is this master planner in Ottawa, 
to tell him that you're not going to do that to the educational systems in Saskatchewan? And you should come out 
and make these 



 
March 23, 1981 
 

 
1308 

things public so that the people realize the danger of the voucher system to the universities and the technical 
institutes which we have in this province. 
 
I don't think it's good enough to just go to meetings. Maybe you just found out about this, but I think we should be 
hitting them and hitting them hard because it is something we, in western Canada, don't want. We don't want some 
joker in Ottawa giving my son a voucher to go to take some kind of training which he thinks my son should take. I 
oppose that and so do you; so does everyone on this side of the House. I would like you to canvass the silent 
majority over there and see what their viewpoints are on this voucher system. I think we should fight it right now, 
tooth and nail, with every weapon available to us. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I certainly appreciate the hon. member's support for the stand which 
I have adopted on this matter. I would indicate to the hon. member that during Education Week I was able to take 
advantage of an opportunity to speak to a major conference in Toronto on this question. He may have read the 
reports in the Leader-Post and other Saskatchewan papers. I took a very strong stand on this point, as a starting 
point. This conference was attended by university administrators, teachers and other people associated with 
universities, as well as by federal government officials and provincial government officials. I made my stand very, 
very clear on this point, as a starting point; I had just then become informed of what was happening in this regard. 
 
In addition to that, my deputy minister, the chairman of the universities commission, and the presidents of the two 
universities, have formed a working group to put together a fight back, if you like, approach to this whole thing, 
because I think I'm speaking for both of the universities as well as the universities commission when I say that 
they equally share a concern about this. I would certainly look forward to an opportunity whereby this legislature 
or you and I could jointly make representation as well on this subject, so that we can better make known our 
position, as well as better educate the people of Saskatchewan about how dangerous this whole proposition is. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


