






















































Hansard: March 03, 1981


485 
 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
March 3, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

CONGRATULATIONS 
 

Forthcoming Wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the members of the Assembly to join with me in extending our 
congratulations to Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer on their forthcoming wedding in July to be held, I 
might add, at St. Paul’s Cathedral. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, since we are all joining in belated congratulations, I will join 
members opposite in extending our best wishes to the Prince of Wales and Lady Diana Spencer. If I may remind 
all hon. members, Sunday of this week was St. David’s Day, the day of the Prince of Wales, and I will add my 
felicitations to all people who are in any way associated with Wales on that happy occasion. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Increase of Insurance Rates in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — A question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. Mr. Minister, the minister in charge 
of Saskatchewan Government Insurance recently announced that the massive increases in insurance rates in 
Saskatchewan have been caused by Saskatchewan’s economic boom. Mr. Minister, I ask you, what economic 
boom is he talking about in light of today’s announcement by Simpsons of the closing of their store affecting the 
employment of 470 people in the city of Regina? 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think one has anything to do with the other really. I think the hon. 
member is talking about apples and oranges here. The closing of Simpsons is related to a conglomerate which has 
purchased both Simpsons and The Bay and it was understandable at that time that one or the other of the stores 
would close. I don’t think that has any relevance at all to what the hon. minister in charge of government 
insurance has stated. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Mr. Minister, would you not consider the drop in 
retail sales in the province of Saskatchewan and in the city of Regina has a direct effect on the economy of that 
particular store? 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, no I will not because from the information we are getting from the people 
who own Simpsons, the store has been going downhill for a number of years. They had been losing money prior 
to the boom (so-called) which we have in Saskatchewan and they have contemplated a move of this nature for 
quite some 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

486 
 

time. 
 
Coupled with the cost of renovating their buildings and coupled with all of the other necessary expenses, which 
they would have in order to keep the store operating, and along with that the idea they would have two stores in 
one city, they feel it is necessary to consolidate their efforts in two different areas putting Simpsons in eastern 
Canada (where they belong) and Hudson’s Bay in western Canada. 
 
For the information of the hon. member, I might tell him that Simpsons in Regina is the only store which Simpson 
has west of the Lakehead. 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to direct a question to the minister responsible for the Cornwall Centre. The minister 
has just indicated that the closure of Simpsons has been in the plan for some time. When you initiated Cornwall 
Centre, did you have advance notice of the closure or did you take into account the likelihood of the closure of 
Simpsons? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, we are helping to develop Cornwall Centre. We are not closing any 
stores. 
 
MR. LANE: — It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, by way of supplementary, that the existence of Cornwall Centre has 
had a dramatic impact and has led to the closure of the Simpsons store. Would the Premier be prepared to 
announce today the government’s plans to assist those who were laid off because of this closure to find immediate 
employment in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think my colleague, the Minister of Industry and Commerce has already addressed 
the problem, and I will ask him to reply. 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Simpsons people have graciously taken on themselves to look 
after all of their 270 employees. I have the schedule in front of me and I can give you a copy of the document, if 
you wish, outlining the procedure Simpsons is taking to take care of all of their people, both in the employment 
factor and in the early retirement, if they deem it necessary. 
 
Coupled with that our department has already been in contact with some of the stores, particularly Eaton’s, who 
are going into the Cornwall Centre, to see if they can alleviate that situation in taking on some of these employees. 
They are saying they will certainly look at it and lend a helping hand. 
 
MR. LANE: — A supplementary to the minister. That is a rather surprising statement because Simpsons 
announced today that many of those worker’s are being moved out of the province of Saskatchewan to other 
Simpsons stores across Canada. Would the minister not admit that it’s a rather surprising statement by the 
government opposite that they would welcome and accept the fact that probably over 100 employees are going to 
be moved out of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — No, Mr. Speaker, I will not. As a matter of fact there will only be about 20 of those 
move out, because of their managerial positions, to be located in other Simpsons stores. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — In light of the answer you gave about the 270 being looked after, did you not, Mr. 
Minister, read the release by Simpsons where it indicates first of all that 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

487 
 

there are 470 and not 270 affected, and secondly, as an example, 185 who Simpsons will seek diligently to assist. 
They are not offering positions, they are offering to assist these employees. They are not placing them anywhere 
else. How can you stand up and say that they are placing all of these people in other jobs? 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what press release the hon. member is reading from but I 
have it in front of me and it says 270 people. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, just as a supplementary, I will advise the minister that I will send him a copy 
of this release, where there are an extra 200 part-time employees also affected. 
 

Job Losses in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A question to the minister. In view of your statement with regard to the business boom, and 
with regard to the fact that employees are not being required to move out of the province of Saskatchewan, could 
you tell me if it is a sign of economic boom, and could you tell me if, in fact, the people are staying in the 
province of Saskatchewan when we see 75 people laid off in the city of Estevan because of the energy problems, 
when 104 people are laid off in Swift Current, or the district of Swift Current? Mr. Minister, could you tell those 
people, and tell the people of Meadow Lake who lost 150 jobs, and the people of Kindersley who have lost 
another 200 jobs where that . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I’ll take the next question. 

 
Public Hearings for Uranium Refinery in Saskatchewan 

 
MR. PREBBLE: — A question to the Minister of the Environment. As the minister will know, there has been an 
announcement that a site to the north of Prince Albert may receive consideration as a possible site for a uranium 
refinery in Saskatchewan. I wonder if the minister could give his assurance to the House that public hearings will 
be held on any proposal for a uranium refinery anywhere in Saskatchewan before a decision is made on the 
refinery being located in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, if there is a proponent that comes under the direction of The 
Department of the Environment Act which governs the environmental impact assessments, then under the 
provincial jurisdiction, that proponent will be required to follow the necessary legislation. However, in speaking 
about Eldorado, I would suspect that the same provisions will follow as in the case of Warman. The public 
hearing process was undertaken by the federal government and any proposal such as the refinery in any other area 
of the province of Saskatchewan, regardless of the specific site, would be required to meet those undertakings as 
they did in Warman. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker,. Eldorado, as a Crown corporation can be exempted from the 
public hearing process. My question is whether the minister could give the House assurance that in the event the 
federal government doesn’t require public hearings to be undertaken into the Eldorado proposal, the provincial 
government will require those public hearings? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I’d have no hesitation in suggesting that if the federal public hearing 
process did not apply, or the corporation, Eldorado, was excluded from that public hearing process, there would 
be no hesitation, at least on my 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

488 
 

part, to recommend that the legislation which we have for environmental impact assessments govern that situation 
if permissible. The public of Saskatchewan can be assured that a venture of that kind anywhere other than in the 
situation as has been reported to the public at Warman, would be similarly governed in any other part of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary to the minister of economic development. Can the minister enlighten this 
Assembly as to whether or not there are current plans by Eldorado Nuclear to build a refinery in Saskatoon, Prince 
Albert or any other place in Saskatchewan? As I understand it, the talk in Ottawa is that the building of that 
refinery is finished and we will not see it for probably 10 years in this province. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t respond on behalf of Eldorado. Discussions are being 
carried on with Eldorado. We have indicated our desire to see a refinery in the province. Eldorado is reconsidering 
its position with respect to site location and I expect it will make an announcement in due course. 

 
Economic Boom Versus Poverty Level in Saskatchewan 

 
MR. TAYLOR: — A question to the Minister of Social services regarding the supposed economic boom. Mr. 
Minister, this morning on the Harasen line the federal Minister of Health and Welfare, Monique “begin, stated that 
in Saskatchewan there are approximately 150,000 people, or 15 per cent of the population, living below the 
poverty line, whereas the national average is 12 per cent. Will you explain that to this Assembly and square that 
statement with the economic boom that the minister of SGI has been talking about? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a quick answer to that. I met with 
Monique Begin this morning for a couple of hours. She assured me that in terms of social assistance, the FIP 
(family income plan) and the SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan) were among the best in Canada. We are working 
in very close relationship with Monique Begin to bring about a better social system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — In his capacity as Minister of Social Services, he has very close to his heart the plight of 
the lower income people. I wonder then how he squares the fact that now in this month of tax paying, those with 
taxable income of $1,800 in Saskatchewan will pay $105.10 as opposed to those in B.C., zero; Manitoba, $1.80; 
Alberta, zero; Ontario, zero and taxable income of $3,000 in Saskatchewan, $212; B.C., $176; Alberta, zero; 
Ontario, $176. I know the Minister of Finance is going to tell me that there is $160 right off the bottom. The fact 
is that this is the tax schedule and even with the $160 off the bottom in Saskatchewan, we’re losing. Can you 
square that for the lower income people in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a quick comment on that. I think we have 
to make the comparison of the health premiums that exist in Ontario where there is more revenue created from the 
health premiums with the Conservative government than there is from their natural resources. So we have to look 
at the total comparison when we are doing a comparison of that sort. As well, we have to look at FIP and the 
many other social programs here in Saskatchewan that don’t exist in the Conservative counterparts including 
Alberta and Ontario. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

489 
 

Farm Cost Reduction Program 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, my question today is to the Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services. Mr. 
Minister, your news release dated January 30, 1981 states that there will be no program for the 1981 crop year, 
meaning a farm cost reduction program. I remember in January you personally stated that we are in boom times, a 
boom economy. How can you justify to the people of Saskatchewan a cut in a program of this nature in light of 
the fact that fuel prices are rising? How can you justify this to the farmers and ranchers of Saskatchewan when on 
one hand you are saying we’ve got a boom economy and on the other hand that the money isn’t there? How do 
you justify this, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — When the farm cost reduction program went into effect, Mr. Speaker, there were very 
low quotas and prices of grain were very low. That’s not true today. The prices of grains have risen very 
substantially and the fact remains that when we first put in the farm cost reduction program we were accused it 
was because we were coming up to an election. Now we are removing it and coming up to an election. What’s 
your reply to that one? 
 
MR. GARNER: — I’ll answer the questions after the next provincial election. Mr. Minister, you stated also in the 
same news release that the farmers must have fuel. Agricultural production costs have gone up 600 per cent in the 
last 10 years. A net farm income was the lowest in Canada last year. How can you say that the farmers must have 
fuel on one hand and then they must keep absorbing all of their high costs alone? How can you say to them with 
this boom economy that we are going to alternative sources of energy? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, the estimated costs for 1980 of the farm cost reduction is $16 million. 
We admit that input costs are going up, but don’t get the idea that the farm economy doesn’t get some beneficence 
(if you want to use the term) from this government. Farmers in this province will save $24 million this year on 
purple fuels that they use in their tractors and their equipment and trucks. They will pay no tax on farm 
machinery, fertilizers, etc., and will save themselves another $45 million. You’d better keep those things in mind 
as well. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Yes, the replies by the minister have prompted a supplementary question. The minister in 
his news release, to which the member for Wilkie refers, states that subsidies do not address the fundamental 
problems of energy supply and the province has no choice but to turn its attention to long term availability of fuel 
for farmers. Mr. Minister, there are two forms of subsidy that the farmers benefit from or at least did benefit from: 
one, the farm cost reduction program which was a benefit of $25 million; two, the tax exemption which resulted 
in a $22 million benefit to the Saskatchewan farmer. Mr. Speaker, the minister has chosen to eliminate the greater 
of the two subsidies, even though he says in a statement that he believes subsidies are not the answer. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. The member asked for a supplementary. I want to hear the supplementary. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I was right in the middle of asking the question, Mr. Speaker. I ask the minister, very 
simply, how does the elimination of one of those two subsidies contribute to the long-term availability of farm 
fuel for farmers, which you seem to be so 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

490 
 

bent on? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s program will be announced in due course. But, the 
fact remains that the member gives out incorrect information . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member for Moosomin was a graduate from the school of common sense, he would get a 
degree in asininity, with great distinction. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — If he would read the release, he would realize that the cost in one years is $16 million, 
whereas the savings in terms of utilization of purple fuel is $22 million. The difference is $6 million, and the farm 
economy is ahead that much. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, your implemented this program in 1978, just prior to the last provincial 
election. You reimplemented this program just as election bait and that is all it was. My question is: is it now not 
becoming a policy of this government that higher costs of fuel are going to have to be absorbed by everyone and 
that this government will do nothing to help them out today? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how the member for Wilkie can say that nothing is done 
for the farm economy when their estimated saving is $24 million this year in terms of purple fuel alone with no 
tax being paid on it. 
 

Purple Gas for Three-Axle Farm Trucks 
 
MR. SWAN: — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. I have a letter from one of my constituents that was 
addressed to the Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services. It deals with three-axle farm trucks. I have been in 
contact with the minister and he has replied to the constituent, so I am not bringing in a new subject, but I want a 
different approach to it. My question is: are you aware of the concern in the agricultural industry of the high input 
costs that we are now facing, and the need for farmers to haul over longer distances? Therefore, I see a need for 
this change to come about to provide purple gas for three-axle farm trucks. They are not luxury trucks; they are 
not work trucks, trucks that are needed. I want the support of the Minister of Agriculture to move in this direction. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose, we are aware 
of the issue of F-licences for three-axle trucks. It has been brought to our attention by a number of farm 
organizations. We have responded to those farm organizations saying our position is that we will not, at this time, 
extend F-licences to three-axle trucks. I think the hon. member makes an argument that it is necessary because of 
the longer distances the farmers are going to be faced with in hauling grain to the country elevator system. I had 
thought, Mr. Speaker, that we had won the branch line issue in this province and that we are, in fact, going to 
retain most of the branch lines that the people of Saskatchewan felt it necessary to retain at least until the year 
2,000, and that the pressure that was forthcoming for extending this service to three-axle trucks is not as large a 
pressure as it was prior to establishing the grain-handling network. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary to the minister. I don’t know whether you are aware, Mr. Minister, but out in my 
constituency a number of elevators have closed. There has been a consolidation of the grain-handling industry. 
Are you aware, Mr. Minister that many 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

491 
 

farmers indeed are hauling a considerable distance? The reason they are requesting this move to purple gas for 
three-axle trucks is to offset some of that additional costs and also to save energy. This government has 
supposedly said that we have to save energy. Well, you can haul more grain to market by using larger trucks. 
That’s one of the reasons why the people have moved in that direction. 
 
So I would ask you again, Mr. Minister are you willing to move as a government to provide the right for them to 
use farm fuels in three-axle trucks? I don’t think you have to go to farm plates, you can just authorize farm people 
to use that fuel, even on an R-plate, which is a restricted licence. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that in the option that the hon. member put forward in 
his last comments, it is sufficient to say that it should be granted to the R-licences, because the R-licences are used 
extensively by farmers who work off the farm. They are used for their work operation rather than their farming 
operation. I think that what the hon. member is asking the government to consider is providing the F-licence and 
therefore the use of tax-free fuel to the tandem truck or the three-axle truck, a large number of which are starting 
to appear in the farm community. 
 
I have indicated to the hon. member that we are aware of the requests that are coming forward, both from farmers 
and from farm organizations. I suppose I can say to the hon. member that the policy of the government with 
respect to three-axle trucks will be announced in due course, but I don’t expect to see it as part of the budget 
which will come down on Thursday. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, I think you have sort of missed the thrust of my question. I am looking for the 
support of the Minister of Agriculture. If you will take that to cabinet and argue in favor of it, we might a chance 
to get it. Can I get that support? That’s my question. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, it may be that the position of the Conservative opposition, as they 
view government and as they operate in government in other provinces, is that ministers should take a position 
different from the government position. We simply don’t agree with that and we don’t do that and therefore I 
indicate to the hon. member opposite what the government position is, and I support that position. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Amendments to the Meewasin Valley Authority Act re Corman Park 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Question to the Attorney General. Can the Attorney General advise this Assembly, and 
perhaps through this Assembly the residents of Corman Park whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan, in 
the very near future, will be bringing in amendments to The Meewasin Valley Authority Act excluding the R.M. 
of Corman Park from that authority, in line with the overwhelming vote of the residents of the R.M. of Corman 
Park on November 5, 1980? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I know the Conservative Party’s position of doing away with the 
Meewasin Valley Authority and the preservation of the river bank. It’s a well-know position in the province of 
Saskatchewan and certainly well-known in the city of Saskatoon. The question of the legislation, however, will be 
announced in due course when it is tabled in the House. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

492 
 

MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, in view of the position of the Attorney General, also well-known, endorsing 
that before any action is taken it must have a broad base of public support, and in view of the fact that 85 per cent 
of the people of the R.M. of Corman Park voted a certain way, can you advise those people whether or not you are 
going to be cognizant of that vote and act on that overwhelming vote? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is incorrect when he says 85 per cent of the 
people of the R.M. of Corman Park voted a certain way. In reality, not to be diminished, 85 per cent of about 30 
per cent voted a certain way. And you can interpret that however you want, but . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That’s right; you can interpret that how you want. And I know how the Conservatives oppose the protection of the 
river bank because, Mr. Speaker, it only stands to logic. They would like to see the river bank open to rampant 
development by their friends both ways from the Bessborough. They can laugh all the want but their outright 
opposition to that scheme from day one justifies my remarks. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Canadian Men’s Curling Championship 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I’m sure that all the members of this Assembly will want to join me in wishing good luck and 
good curling to the members of the Bob Ellert rink from Assiniboia and district who are representing 
Saskatchewan at the Canadian Men’s Curling Championship in Halifax this week. 
 
The rink which received the Saskatchewan Good Sportsmanship Award includes Bob Ellert, Don Bushell, Ken 
Berner and Bill Wilson. After a tough loss in its opening game, the rink has come on strong and is now 
challenging the leaders. We wish them well and know that the Ellert rink and the delegation of approximately 75 
supporters from Assiniboia will be good ambassadors for all of Saskatchewan in Halifax. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join with the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, on 
behalf of all the members on this side of the House, in wishing the Bob Ellert rink good luck in the Canadian 
Men’s Curling Championship being held in Halifax. I know all of the boys personally and I have sent them a 
telegram since they have left home. I certainly hope they bring the tankard back to Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Before the orders of the day, I understand that the Minister of Agriculture, who 
was acting House Leader in may absence yesterday, and the House Leader of the Conservatives have agreed to 
stand private members day to continue with the debate which was instituted yesterday on the government motion 
on the constitution. If that’s the case, I would request the leave of the House to proceed on that basis. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

493 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — I gather the Attorney General is asking that we move down the agenda to item 10 under 
government orders which is the resolution standing in the name of Mr. Berntson, the Leader of the Opposition, 
and return later this day, if necessary, to private members business. Does the House Leader have agreement of the 
House? Agreed. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney: 
 

That this Assembly opposes the current attempt by the federal government to patriate and amend the 
constitution of Canada, believing that the unilateral nature of the process is incompatible with the fundamental 
principles of Canadian federalism, that constitutional changes must have a broad basis of support among 
Canadians; and that the proposals, if implemented, would upset the balance of Canada’s federal system. 

 
MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say at the outset that in any discussion of constitutional 
reform, I start from the premise of an indivisible Canada. The word is clear; it means exactly the same in English 
as it does in French. I personally do not believe in a theory of two nations, five nations or ten nations. This is an 
occasion when this nation calls for one Canada. That was Sir John A. MacDonald’s objective, that was John 
Diefenbaker’s objective and today it is the objective of thousands of Canadians. The message is clear. The 
principles that have served us well must be used as a basis to build an even greater Canada for future generations. 
 
This is a serious time in the history of our nation. All of us in public life have a oral obligation to keep Canada 
together. The cause of freedom demands it. Canada faces a crisis, the gravity of which calls for leadership, not 
salesmanship. I say to this Assembly in all frankness that the government of the province has made a mockery of 
the whole constitutional debate. In the midst of a national crisis, they have placed political expediency before 
national purpose. I implore every member of this Legislative Assembly, in our deliberations on the constitution, to 
lay aside partisan considerations and remember the words of Sir Georges Cartier: “Before all else, let us be 
Canadians.” 
 
It is my purpose, Mr. Speaker, to be quite frank in discussing this constitution. In particular, it is my intention to 
be quite specific as to the record of the Premier and his government with regard to Canada’s constitution. Indeed, 
Mr. Speaker, I am especially pleased to be in this Legislative Assembly today to witness a historic about-face as 
the Premier abandons his philosophical soul mate, Pierre Elliott Trudeau, in a cause that he deems every more 
noble, the very survival of his party here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, I have no disagreement with the sudden change in policy by the opportunists opposite. Let the record show 
that it was the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan that was the leader in the battle against the 
constitutional chicanery of Pierre Elliott Trudeau and, until recently, his brethren, the Saskatchewan NDP. 
 
History will show, Mr. Speaker, that the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan was the leader in this 
province in the cause of a strong Saskatchewan 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

494 
 

and a strong West. Many months ago, we recognized the sense of frustration and attention that exists here in 
western Canada, but recognition is never enough. We fought and we stood up for the spirit of unity in western 
Canada. During that time where was the Premier? Where was the government of the province? They were too 
busy wheeling and dealing with their buddy, Pierre. Their silence on those concerns which matter most to 
Saskatchewan and western Canada was almost deafening. 
 
Over a year ago, Mr. Speaker, we in the Conservative Party pointed out to the Premier and the people of 
Saskatchewan that we expected more from confederation, but that we would not receive it if, as Westerners, we 
were not united. That was glaringly pointed out, Mr. Speaker, in the now famous leaked document in which it 
says (and this is Pierre Trudeau’s document): 
 

A solid front of provincial government and parliamentary opposition from the West could pose real 
difficulties for the Government of Canada. . . . Breaking up a solid western block of opposition is a 
prerequisite to our being in a position to take action. Saskatchewan may prove to be the key. 

 
The Premier was aware of that . It didn’t take him from his earlier position. It took the polls to take him from his 
earlier position. 
 
During those months, we in the Conservative Party covered the length and breadth of this province of 
Saskatchewan warning the people of the serious consequences of the Premier’s dealings with Trudeau. We said to 
the people of Saskatchewan that all of us want Canada to work but not at the expense of compromising the 
resources of Saskatchewan and western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that the people of Saskatchewan heard our message. They share the same beliefs. I am 
sure that that’s what the Premier’s pollsters told him. I’m sure the Premier’s pollsters told him of the huge number 
of NDP supporters showing up at Elmer Knutson’s meetings. That is why we are now faced with a motion from 
the Premier that, in effect, endorses where the Conservative MLAs and the rank and file have been advancing for 
months. 
 
In all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to hear the Premier endorse the Conservative position when he 
says in his motion that this Assembly opposes the current attempt by the federal government to unilaterally 
patriate and amend the constitution of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend the Premier for joining with the Conservatives in taking such a position even if the 
Premier’s decision was based on polls and political expediency, as I am sure, were Premier Davis’ and Premier 
Hatfield’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe we must take a hard look at the constitutional position of Saskatchewan because until the 
actual introduction of this resolution, their activities included such things as clandestine meeting in such places as 
Hawaii, Toronto and others. Let the government prove how serious it is about opposing the Trudeau constitutional 
package. Prove it to the people of Saskatchewan by deeds, not by words. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the record, I should like, for a minute, to touch upon the government’s whole attitude and 
approach in introducing the motion before this Legislative Assembly. The government literally made a joke out of 
its so-called negotiations and 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

495 
 

consultations with the Progressive Conservative opposition in the wording of the resolution before it came to this 
legislature. 
 
We must keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that we are discussing a matter that concerns the very future of this nation. 
The Attorney General in his own words, stated that he wanted meaningful input from the opposition, but the 
government remained inflexible, arrogant and intransigent in its approach. It was not until supper time 
Wednesday, February 25 that the official opposition received the resolution — a resolution that was supposed to 
reflect the sentiments of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. The government was obviously stalling 
because it knew full well that most of our MLAs would be in Ottawa at a national party convention. 
 
In my capacity as Leader of the Opposition, I met with the Attorney General to suggest meaningful changes to the 
resolution. They were flatly rejected. 
 
While I am on that, I would just like to comment on a similar discussion that went on in B.C. sometime ago. This 
is Mr. Barrett speaking: 
 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, if there is a genuine desire on the part of the government to have unanimity in this 
House on the single question of patriation, why not pick up the phone and call the Leader of the Opposition 
and say, “Mr. Leader, this is above politics just as it was when you asked me to sign a motion handed to you 
in the corridor about keeping Quebec in confederation, just as when we showed that unanimity in the House 
when you signed that motion and we agreed to it and we had high level debate in the House about our unified 
desire to keep Quebec in confederation. Let us work out the wording of this resolution to show that we are 
above politics and that we can have unanimity in this House. Let us both sign the resolution and bring it to 
this House. Dave, let’s work out a resolution so that I can go back to the federal government and tell them that 
we agree on this resolution.” 

 
But, it didn’t happen in B.C. and, as I understand it, the resolution didn’t receive unanimous support as it will 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Attorney General were sincere in his desire to have unanimous support for a resolution in this 
House of this importance, he would have taken a far better attitude toward the whole thing, Mr. Speaker, the 
resolution as it now stands is toothless and gutless. It exemplifies another half-hearted wishy-washy stand, the 
same type of stand this government has been taking right from the beginning on the constitutional debate. 
 
Let’s take a look at the record to date of the NDP government with regard to their dealings in Ottawa. On 
February 5, 1980 the Leader of the Progressive Conservative Party challenged the Premier to take a stand on 
energy policies. The Premier’s answer — silence. On March 26, 1980 the Leader of the Progressive Conservative 
Party speaking for all Conservatives, called for a unity of spirit in western Canada. What was the Premier’s 
response? Silence. All along he was working hand in hand with the Prime Minister. We stood solidly for an 
option for opportunity for Saskatchewan and we were the only ones standing up for our province one year ago. 
While western frustration and alienation grew, we heard absolutely nothing from those on the other side of this 
legislature, absolutely nothing to indicate they were even the least bit concerned about western aspirations. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

496 
 

Continuing with the record, Mr. Speaker, it should be noted that last spring on the eve of the Quebec referendum 
the government of this province, the NDP voted down a Progressive Conservative motion supporting 
confederation. Yes, Mr. Speaker, they voted no to allowing a motion urging Quebec to remain part of 
confederation, introduced by my colleague, the member for Kindersley. The NDP voted no. It makes you wonder 
how serious the NDP is about keeping Canada together. 
 
Then Mr. Speaker, there never was a word one way or the other when the cabinet minister from British Columbia 
suggested that a deal existed between Saskatchewan’s government and Ottawa to put this province on the 
federalist side with regard to resource ownership. Certainly they attempted to downplay the suggestion, but to this 
day they still have to prove that such a deal did not exist. While Trudeau was fractionalizing the West and 
seriously undermining national unity not a word was head from the Premier and his supporters. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier’s reputation has been tarnished. His motives and credibility are highly in question 
throughout all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me quote from Maclean’s magazine as to why there suddenly has been a shift in the policy of the 
NDP. I refer to Maclean’s February 23, 1981: 
 

One worried NDP from Saskatchewan said, “The Tories are our only opposition out there and they keep 
shouting that we are in bed with the Liberals. What else can people conclude?” 

 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, that is why Lorne Nystrom, Simon de Jong, Stan Hovdebo and others joined with the 
Premier in changing their position on the constitution —because the people of Saskatchewan concluded right. Let 
me quote Simon de Jong. What really worries him is the potential damage to his party’s future and reputation in 
the West. de Jong said, “I’m really leery of the spectacle of us cozying up to the Liberals.” 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, an admission that the NDP had indeed been cozying up to the Liberals, indeed an admission 
that their change in position has nothing to do with the constitution. On October 17, 1980 the Leader of the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan issued the following statement. In reference to the Premier he 
said: 
 

He not only looks like the weak link in the western front, but in fact is now willing to jeopardize 
Saskatchewan’s future to save his own political interests and personal national image. 

 
Now four months later we see that the Premier has come to his senses and has seen the wrongness of his ways. 
We took the position last fall that the Premier had to put Saskatchewan’s interest ahead of his own, that he had to 
back the rest of western Canada for the following reasons: 
 
1. It is impossible to guarantee provinces the right of control over resources under the Trudeau proposal because 
while it can be written in, it can also subsequently be written out by unilateral action. More specifically, a mere 
referendum could reverse the entire structure of resource control. It is consequently naive to even suggest that a 
measure of resource rights, enshrined in the Trudeau package, would even be functional in time. 
 
2. Under the Trudeau proposal, Ontario will forever have veto power over all provinces. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

497 
 

As it now stands, any province, having or ever having had 25 per cent of the population could veto amendments. 
Thus at no time in the future of western Canada would there be power to control our own destiny. 
 
3. Under the Diefenbaker bill of rights, there is the individual right of property. I shall discuss that matter during 
the course of my remarks. That right does not exist in the Trudeau package. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, last fall we correctly pointed out that Premier Blakeney did not have the full support of his 
cabinet, his caucus, party, or the people of Saskatchewan in his dealing with Trudeau. Now four months later we 
have been proven correct. 
 
The Rt. Hon. John Diefenbaker once said and I quote: 
 

Canada will never achieve its destiny if the determination of its constitutional policies is made as a result of 
political vacillation masquerading as statesmanship. 

 
I am sure that if the Chief were alive today he would have used those words to describe the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, history will record that in the midst of this great national debate the Premier of Saskatchewan 
vacillated and indeed he waffled! 
 
Mr. Speaker, make no mistake. The Progressive Conservative Party favors patriation of the BNA Act. Time and 
time again we have advocated patriation, but with an agreed amending formula. But that is not what Trudeau is 
doing. The Trudeau resolution is asking the British parliament to make the changes he wants, while the act is still 
in Britain. Once the act is back in Canada, changes wanted by other partners in our federation would require a 
new amending formula, a formula which denies the very essence of our federation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our tradition as Canadians has taught us to believe in the supremacy of democratically elected 
parliaments and legislatures, and not in the supremacy of written constitutions. We believe that in future years 
Prime Minister Trudeau’s proposed constitution, with its rigid and inflexible amending formula, could become a 
dictatorship of words, overruling the parliamentary system that has for centuries guaranteed our freedoms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the essential weakness of written constitutions is that they are inflexible. The courts that interpret a 
constitution must look at what the constitution says and not at the political and social reality of the times in which 
the judgment is being made. Parliament responds to human needs in a way that no court can ever do, because a 
court is not being directed by human needs, but by the dead hand of a written constitution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I really wonder why there are those trying to lock up Canada’s future in a written constitution? Why 
do some in this generation, this day, this brief span in Canada’s history, believe they have the answer for all time? 
The genius of the British political institutions is that they have maintained tradition with the necessary flexibility. 
The Magna Charta and other charters of freedom and the parliament itself, though nurtured in English soil, have 
matured when their seeds have been planted in the far 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

498 
 

corners of the earth. 
 
The parliamentary system that Canada inherited and that Canadians have caused to flourish in a new environment 
is not something to tinker with lightly or to lay aside thoughtlessly. What is being done by the Mr. Trudeau 
government could be summed up in the words of Sukarno as “guided democracy,” in which the freedom of the 
individual is diminished and the power of the governing authority is multiplied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work of amending the Canadian constitution is for Canadians to do, not for the British 
parliament to do. The Prime Minister of Canada is asking that certain amendments, those that he prefers, should 
be sneaked through by the British people and by the British parliament. I say that the constitution of Canada 
should not be amended by the people of Britain, that the constitution of Canada should be amended in substance 
by the people of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian constitution should be patriated without amendment other than the inclusion of an 
amending procedure which treats all Canadians equally and which enables Canadians to express the national will. 
Western Canadians, Mr. Speaker, see this constitutional package of Pierre Trudeau as just another one of his 
attempts to make the citizens of the West second class. I deplore such actions and I deplore the fact that our 
Premier was so willing to work with the Prime Minister in this constitutional effort. 
 
I should like to address a number of particular constitutional matters that should be put on the record of this 
Legislative Assembly so that the people of Saskatchewan may be the judge. The Trudeau constitutional package 
contains a charter of rights binding on the provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear that we on this side of the House have a legacy and tradition of being the 
defenders of freedom. It is with a deep sense of pride that I say I am proud to belong to a party that had such a 
defender of freedom as the late member for Prince Albert. Let me quote what he had to say about freedom. 
Speaking in the House of Commons in 1960, he said: 
 

The principles of freedom are never final. Freedom is not static; it cannot be fixed for all time. It either grow 
or dies. It grows when the people of a country have it in their hearts and demand that it shall be preserved. I 
would be the last to contend that any document made by man, however impressive, can assure freedom, but I 
think what we have done will provide an anchor for Canadian rights. The ultimate assurance to them must 
always be a vigilant people, vigilant to invasions of and intrusions on their freedom, for when the spirit of 
freedom dies in the hearts of men, no statue can preserve it. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the author of the bill of rights recognized that freedom comes from the people and not from a piece 
of paper. 
 
Throughout the years many have made Canada their homeland because of the freedoms we have here. To prove 
that freedom originates with the people allow me to refer to the constitution of the Soviet Union. It is amazing 
how similar it is to our constitution. Section 2(a) of the proposed Canadians constitution reads: 
 

Freedom of conscience and religion. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

499 
 

Article 52 of the Soviet constitution reads: 
 

Citizens of the U.S.S.R. are guaranteed freedoms of conscience; that is, the right to profess in any religion and 
to conduct religious worship or atheistic propaganda. 

 
Section 2(b) of Canada’s constitution reads: 
 

Freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the press and other media of 
communication. 

 
Article 50 of the Soviet constitution reads: 
 

In accordance with the interests of the people and in order to strengthen and develop the socialist system, 
citizens of the U.S.S.R. are guaranteed freedom of speech, of the press, of assembly, meetings, street 
processions and demonstrations. 

 
It goes on and on. Elections shall be equal. Each citizen shall have one vote. (I notice the reigning government 
won the election there yesterday.) Each citizen shall have one vote. All voters shall exercise the franchise on an 
equal footing. All the rights which are supposed to be entrenched in our constitution are in the constitution of the 
Soviet Union. They are very similar, even to the point where the right to own property is not included in either 
constitution. It is interesting to note that neither constitution includes property rights. 
 
Therefore, is it any wonder that the Kremlin of the Soviet Union, through its official newspaper Pravda has 
endorsed the Trudeau constitution? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to raise the matter of property rights in Saskatchewan’s Bill of Rights, section 10, it 
reads, and I quote: 
 

Every person and every class of persons shall enjoy the right to acquire, by purchase, to own in fee, simple or 
otherwise, to lease rent . . . without discrimination because of race, creed, color, religion or ethnic or national 
origin of such person or class of persons. 

 
This was a piece of legislation put into law by the government of former premier Tommy Douglas. 
 
On March 21, 1947, while speaking to this Legislative Assembly on the Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, the late 
Hon. J.H. Brockelbank said, and I quote: 
 

Now sections 7 to 9 deal with economic rights, the rights to occupy property. I contend without these 
economic rights the other rights and freedoms cannot endure very long. 

 
Now, 34 years later, the NDP is turning its back on men such as Tommy Douglas and J.H. Brockelbank and 
opposing property rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands of pioneers came to Canada because of the right to own land and be free. What are the 
implications of this? It does not mean that our homes, businesses and farms will necessarily be taken away. On the 
other hand, they will go 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

500 
 

without protection under the new constitution. 
 
I say to this legislature with all the sincerity at my command that property ownership is the fundamental basis for 
freedom in any democracy. Let the record show that the NDP solidly opposed property rights. Let the record also 
show, Mr. Speaker, that it was the NDP that rejected the supremacy of God. the argument was that many people 
do not believe in God, and therefore the reference should not be included, and that any such inclusion would 
diminish their rights as a consequence . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You should check with the gang of four: 
they’ll tell you what went on down there. 
 
We should remind ourselves that the Judaeo-Christian roots have had a reference to God as part of the building 
process of this nation and its values. Immigrants coming to Canada came for the freedom to express their concepts 
of God as they saw fit, so the Mennonites, the Hutterites and the Soviet Jews came. God and the motivation of 
that belief have played an important part in the building of our nation. These roots come from the premise that 
God give life, and gives rights, and governments perform under God. 
 
For those who say society is changing, let us look at our multicultural mosaic today. Let us be reminded that those 
who came from Islamic, Buddhist, Confucian and other religious backgrounds brought with them a concept of 
God which is not strange to their culture. Surely as we look at our roots and try to embed our determination to 
protect rights, we need to go back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record will speak for itself. The NDP rejected the supremacy of God and property rights. They 
alone must answer for their actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the time for Canadians to document the vision of an enduring nation enjoying imperishable 
freedom that moved the Fathers of Confederation more than a century ago. Like many loyal Canadians, I worry 
about where Canada is going. Those who believe in the principles that made this nation great will not be deluded 
by the propaganda which appears to assert that the history of this country began on June 25, 1968. Mr. Speaker, 
the time has come to bind the nation in unity. In 1948, Canada’s first Canadian born governor general spoke about 
his dream for Canada. He said: 
 

I believe in Canada, with pride in her past, belief in her present and faith in her future. I believe in the quality 
of Canadian life, and in the character of Canadian institutions. I believe that Canada is one, and that if our 
minds dwell on those things which its parts have in common, we can find the unity of the whole. I believe that 
with sound work, the spirit of a team, and an awareness of ourselves, we can look forward to achievements 
beyond our imagining. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the ultimate goal of this constitutional debate is to build a greater Canada. 
 
Some people talk about Switzerland and Germany and every other kind of federalism known to man, pointing out 
their relative merits vis-a-vis the Canadian system. The Fathers of Confederation were not thinking about 
Switzerland when they began their discussions. They were thinking of Canada, a huge country with a tiny 
population, and they designed a political structure to preserve this unique and fragile identity on the northern half 
of a continent, dominated even then by our southern neighbors. They were trying to devise a framework within 
which we could live and grow, a framework 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

501 
 

that was solid but flexible. 
 
They tried to create a society that would be decent and fair, where freedom would flourish, prosperity grow, and 
most of all a country whose virtues, attractions, and accomplishments would of themselves encourage national 
development and enhance the desire of people to remain Canadians because citizenship in the country was a 
privileged station in life and because, quite simply, it was good for them and good for their families. 
 
The Fathers of Confederation built better than they knew because in this entire world — and there are no 
exceptions — there is no nation with greater opportunity, greater tolerance, greater individual liberty, greater 
inbred traditions of justice and democracy than Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — With all our failings — and we have many — our country stands out in bold relief as a 
place where freedom truly rings. For a nation founded by immigrants, we haven’t done badly. 
 
Having said all that, Mr. Speaker, let me once again strongly emphasize that it was the Progressive Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan that stood up first in Saskatchewan against the Trudeau constitutional package. Let me 
repeat that the Canadian constitution should be patriated without amendment — I repeat, without amendment, 
other than the inclusion of an amending procedure which treats all Canadians equally and which will enable 
Canadians to express the national will. 
 
I conclude my remarks with the words of Sir John A. MacDonald in 1890: 
 

If I had influence over the minds of the people of Canada, any power over their intellect, I would leave them 
this legacy: Whatever you do, adhere to the union. We are a great country and shall become one of the 
greatest in the universe if we preserve it; we shall sink into insignificance and adversity if we suffer it to be 
broken! 

 
God and nature made two Canadas one — let no factious men be allowed to put them asunder. 

 
Mr. Speaker, later in the debate our members and colleagues in the Conservative caucus — one of them at least — 
will be offering an amendment to the resolution which I’m sure the Attorney General will support in that spirit of 
co-operation we were talking about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll give you a copy of it just as soon as I find 
out how the discussion went between Bennett and Barrett. I don’ t want to do anything original or earth-shattering 
here. Mr. Speaker, we will be supporting the motion. 
 
MR. PEPPER: — Mr. Speaker, the renewal of any nation’s constitution is not an act which can be undertaken 
lightly. Today, we in Saskatchewan, like Canadians everywhere, are at a crossroads in our nation’s history. 
Decisions are now being made, and are about to be made, which will affect every one of us and our descendants 
for generations to come. It is in the days and months ahead that the future shape of our parliamentary democracy 
in Canada will be determined. 
 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

502 
 

I do not enter into the discussion of the constitution resolution before this Assembly lightly. Indeed, I am 
saddened by the failure of the federal and provincial governments to reach a broad consensus for constitutional 
renewal. Without a broad consensus for reform, any reshaping of our constitution is fraught with danger. I wish 
today to examine some of the major concerns that face us, and in so doing, express the fervent hope that on this 
matter the legislature of Saskatchewan can speak with one voice for the people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan have many objections to the nature of the changes now proposed by the federal 
government. We also most strongly object to the manner in which these changes are being brought about. 
 
Unilateral action by the central government to amend the constitution, it seems to me, is contrary to the spirit of 
Canadian federalism. Canada is not a unitary state. We are a vast geographic land mass with very strong regional 
loyalties and a host of cultural and linguistic differences. It has been said that only a federal state could work in a 
country as diverse as Canada. 
 
We need a strong central government to define and pursue national goals, to handle the national economy, and to 
provide mechanisms for equalization between regions. Equally true is the fact that we need strong provincial 
governments to respond to the unique needs and challenges of our different regions. 
 
Provinces must be free to tackle problems, realize opportunities, and develop in the manner they choose. 
Saskatchewan, for example, has been referred to as a social laboratory in which great advances, like medicare, 
have been pioneered. So, to have this we pioneered a mixed economy in which the people have a direct say in 
how their provincial economy will develop. It is contrary to our proud tradition of co-operative federalism that 
one level of government should, on its own, try to alter the powers of another level. 
 
The purpose of constitutional renewal is not to weaken or strengthen one level of government at the expense of 
another. Rather, it ought to be to strike a new balance that is both more useful for, and more acceptable to, 
Canadians than the existing arrangements. There is no question that Ottawa, should it follow its announced plans, 
will, on its own, alter the federal-provincial relationship in a very fundamental way. 
 
Was the federal government simply acting on its own to repatriate the constitution, perhaps with a fair amending 
formula, the situation might be tolerable if not acceptable. 
 
Everyone agrees that we ought to bring the constitution home, but by unilaterally altering the fundamental balance 
of powers in our federal state, and by attempting to use the parliament of another nation to effect that change, the 
federal government risks deep divisions in Canada that could take generations to heal. 
 
Thus it is that we object to the present process of patriation, because unilateral repatriation sets us as a nation on a 
previously uncharted course. The co-operative federalism of which Canadians have been so proud is incompatible 
with unilateral constitutional change. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

503 
 

Nevertheless, it would seem the federal government intends to proceed with its constitutional plans whether or not 
we accept the process and whether or not the people approve it. I deeply regret, Mr. Speaker, that the Prime 
Minister has chosen to follow such a course. I fervently hope he does not remain deaf to the voices across the land 
that warn of the possible consequences because even now voices are heard calling for this dismemberment of our 
nation. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I also want to briefly examine some of the major areas of concern for us regarding the 
proposed content of the new constitution. I speak of resources, the proposed charter of rights, an amending 
formula for our new constitution, equalization of the Senate. These are topics that everyone in Saskatchewan and 
in Canada ought to be concerned with. As a nation we are on the verge of decisions which will have a profound 
effect on our future. Most of our laws and rules are being rewritten. 
 
For us in Saskatchewan resources are the key to our continued growth and prosperity. Most of our resources (such 
as potash) and much of our oil is exported. The people of Saskatchewan have, for example, worked hard to 
develop a stable, prosperous potash industry. Yes, indeed, since the Natural Resources Transfer Act of 1930 (I 
believe it was), we in the West have assume that the provinces own their resources and, therefore, could regulate 
the manner and pace with which they are developed. Yet, in two separate court cases, one affecting the oil 
industry and one affecting potash, the Supreme Court of Canada has struck down provincial taxes and regulations 
because of their supposed interference with federal trade and commerce power. 
 
The legal arguments involved were complex and we discovered that provinces did not control their resources as 
completely as everyone had thought. Our government, throughout this constitutional process, has sought to clarify 
and confirm provincial powers to manage and tax resources that we though we had, but which were called into 
question by the court cases which I have just mentioned. 
 
Saskatchewan then, Mr. Speaker, and since then has sought the power to make laws in certain areas for resources 
which are exported from Canada. Without constitutional provision for such power, any attempt we make to 
regulate resource production, pricing, marketing and the like could be struck down by the Supreme Court of 
Canada for intruding upon the federal government’s international trade power. We do not seek to regulate 
international affairs; we seek to regulate our own resource development. 
 
To be fair, I must point out Ottawa proposed to allow indirect provincial taxation of resources and that is a step in 
the right direction. But, for Saskatchewan, whether we talk about heavy oil, potash or uranium, our markets are 
international export markets. If we cannot control the production of resources, whether or not they be destined for 
such markets, if we cannot do anything that might affect pricing, if we cannot regulate marketing — if we cannot 
become directly involved in these areas we cannot take control of our economic destiny. 
 
It is on the resources issue that we in Saskatchewan feel a particular frustration. Early in 1979 the federal 
government was prepared to confirm provincial powers over resources by an international trade clause. I believe it 
was last year that it retracted the offer. Yet we will struggle for control of our natural resources. I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is of utmost importance, that on this matter the people of Saskatchewan speak with one voice. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

504 
 

We are also extremely concerned about the federal plans to give the Senate a veto over any and all future 
constitutional changes, including any change relating to the reform of the Senate itself. Frankly, federal actions 
regarding the entrenchment of a Senate veto in the constitution is completely unacceptable. In a democracy elected 
bodies must be supreme over appointed ones. Originally the only proposal about the Senate in the federal 
resolution was to limit its veto power to first 90 and then 180 days. I believe it was early this year signs began to 
emerge that the senators were pressuring the federal government. Faced with the prospect of having their own 
resolution stalled in the Senate by his own appointees, it would seem the Prime Minister caved into the Senate’s 
demand for a permanent right of veto over all future constitutional amendments. 
 
If the federal resolution is adopted, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, there would be no way, no way for as long as our 
nation might endure, that we could make any change in our constitution without Senate approval. I do not wish to 
be alarmist about this issue, but I would like to point out that of the 104 Senate seats in Canada in 1975 that 75 
were occupied, I believe, by the Liberal Party. The Senate is not even an elected body; it is an appointed group 
and all too often appointment to the Senate is simply a reward for political services rendered. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, that no constitution is complete without a formula for changing it. We ought to 
closely examine how the federal government says amendments ought to be brought to the Senate for approval. All 
provinces except Ontario are angered that the federal government is giving itself the power to act unilaterally 
again and again. The source of this concern is the federal referendum proposals. In the future, when the central 
government wants an amendment but the provinces do not, the central government can call a referendum, 
effectively by-passing the provinces in pursuit of its goals. Yet, if the provinces want an amendment but the 
federal government does not, there is no provision for the provinces to call a national vote. Thus, Mr. Speaker, the 
very nature of how a referendum might be called is contrary to the spirit of co-operative federalism. It also 
endangers the very fabric of federalism, presenting as it does the potential for the federal government to try to 
alter the balance of powers on its own at any time it chooses. Even the referendum itself is weighted such that 
Ontario and Quebec have a veto. It seems to me that in a federal state, at a minimum, both levels of government 
ought to have some measure of equality in the calling of a referendum. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we worry that the legitimate aspirations of the provinces for change, as our nation grows and 
develops, can be forever frustrated, either by the central government’s refusal to move on the matter, or by the 
Senate’s refusal to approve any amendment, or by either Ontario or Quebec, both of whom have a veto. This 
frustrates us. 
 
In this Assembly, we ought also to be urging our constituents to carefully consider the so-called charter of rights. 
No one in Canada seriously suggest limiting or reducing the rights and freedoms which we now enjoy, nor ought 
we to be under any illusion that a charter of rights will somehow prevent this. Many nations in the world have 
wonderful charters, including South Africa, the Soviet Union, and a host of repressive states which are guilty of 
massive violations of human rights. 
 
By entrenching rights in the constitution, we radically alter our parliamentary system. Important social decisions 
will now be made, not in our legislatures but in the courts. I 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

505 
 

say to you, Mr. Speaker, that our judges may well be learned men, but with all due respect, they are not 
representative of society, nor are they responsible to it. Judges, like senators, are appointed and I submit in our 
parliamentary democracy they ought to resolve disputes over law, not assume the role of law makers themselves. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I do not wish to be an alarmist, but I do not want to see situations develop here that our 
American neighbors have had to cope with. I do not wish to see society’s right to combat pornography or hate 
literature, for example, struck down because it interferes with a publisher’s right of free speech. I do not want to 
see legislation making Christmas a holiday declared unconstitutional because such laws give special status to one 
religion. Entrenching non-discrimination might mean that no government could subsidize for senior citizens. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, entrenchment of rights might sound good but it will only complicate matters and will, inevitably, 
frustrate many people. It is our tradition of freedom and tolerance, rooted in the people’s right to choose their law 
makers, that preserves our freedom 
 
A charter does not assist that process and should the will to protect freedoms be lost, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, no 
charter will revive it. 
 
There are many areas of the federal resolution that we find unacceptable. When one takes a broad overview of the 
detailed and fundamental changes being proposed, it is clear that our federal state is rapidly becoming a 
decentralized one. It will, I fear, set region against region and Canadian against Canadian. Those areas of the 
country now frustrated with the existing federal balance will find the proposed new centralized constitution even 
more intolerable. It is difficult to escape the conclusion that the thrust of constitutional reform is really only an 
entrenching of power in central Canada. Already the central government unilaterally decides the price at which 
our oil resources can be sold. We have also found that federal courts feel only the central government has the right 
to direct the development of resources bound for export markets. Now we are faced with a constitutional reform 
that opens the door to massive intervention by the central government in all areas of provincial jurisdiction. 
 
Yes, there will be trying days ahead. The British parliament is already expressing reluctance to become involved 
in what many see as a Canadian matter. It has been suggested that the British parliament might not, unreasonably 
in my view, wish that proposed changes to our constitution ought to at least meet the test of a Canadian amending 
formula. There is already speculation that, should Britain balk at making changes to our constitution that are so 
clearly opposed by a significant majority of Canadians, the federal government might seize on the matter as a 
pretext for a referendum, or for a general election. Such an action would be politically irresponsible, driving, as it 
would, ever deeper rifts into the fabric of our nation. 
 
Six provinces are now challenging unilateral actions in the court. In Manitoba their challenge was rejected, a 
judgment, is pending in Newfoundland, and a challenge will be launched before the Quebec Court of Appeal in a 
few days, as I understand it. It would be a sad day indeed, should such vigorous action opposing unilateral action 
inadvertently serve to strengthen the federal hand, as it will should the cases be lost and the Newfoundland and 
Quebec courts reject the challenge. Courts also tend to give yes or no answers and such decisions do little to assist 
the development of a federal state where matters ought to be worked out by negotiation. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

506 
 

We in this Assembly have a clear duty to speak out for the people of Saskatchewan by supporting the resolution 
now before us. Through long negotiations, Saskatchewan has taken a rational and positive approach. The Premier 
or our province has sought to find ways to make the package more broadly acceptable to Canadians. He has also 
striven to preserve the spirit of Canadian federalism, a federalism in which a province like Saskatchewan can 
protect the legitimate aspirations of its people. 
 
Sadly, we have found that the federal government has maintained its single-minded determination to drive its 
constitutional resolution to parliament. In the days and months ahead, Saskatchewan will need the continued 
strong leadership provided by our Premier. We must continue to put our case before the people, reasonably and 
forcefully. We must continue to strive to preserve our traditional federalism. We are indeed fortunate to have as 
capable a leader as Premier Allan Blakeney in these troubled times. Today, Mr. Speaker, we in this Assembly 
have an opportunity to speak with one voice on behalf of the people of the province. The resolution before us is 
one every member ought to be able to support . It is an opportunity we cannot afford to miss and I call on all 
members, in the interest of Saskatchewan and all of Canada, to support this resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WHITE: — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak in support of this resolution, I do so for a particular reason and I 
will concentrate the greater part of what I have to say on that point — the great upset in the balance in Canada’s 
federal system which will result from Trudeau’s proposed changes. 
 
As an individual with a fair knowledge of American constitutional development, I want to point out that there is a 
better approach to changing the constitution than the unilateral approach of the Trudeau government. 
 
Canada, Mr. Speaker, today is engaged in constitution making. A constitution we received over 100 years ago is 
being altered, and being altered quite radically. That is a very important undertaking. It could well be the most 
important task the nation deals with in the last quarter of this century. The constitution in its renewed form will 
likely be with us for a good many years. 
 
So far the constitutional renewal process has produced a good deal of criticism and acrimonious debate. It is 
dividing Canadians. The basis reason is well-known; the decision by the federal government to patriate and alter 
the constitution unilaterally. 
 
There are other ways to change a constitution, Mr. Speaker, and there are other ways for Canadians to obtain a 
charter of rights, if they so desire. It can be done by conciliation and compromise, and sharing of the 
decision-making process — as the government of this province has so stoutly maintained. If there is one thing 
Canadians are adept at, it is compromise. 
 
Yesterday the Premier and Minister of Northern Saskatchewan ably outlined our concerns about shifts in the 
balance in the direction of the federal government and 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

507 
 

away from the provincial governments. The increased power of the Senate was also discussed. To some extent, so 
was the increased power of the supreme court resulting from Mr. Trudeau’s charter of rights. Of these changes, 
what concerns me perhaps most of all in the long term is the later shift. Adoption of the charter of rights will have 
the effect of making the Canadian Supreme Court the overpowering element in the Canadian federal system, 
Hence, it is on the proposed charter of rights and the implications it has for the supreme court that I will primarily 
centre my comments. 
 
In the course of the constitution making now occurring, it has been said that Mr. Trudeau is seeking to 
Americanize our constitution by, among other things, the inclusion of a charter of rights. That will result in the 
Canadian Supreme Court, like the American Supreme Court, having an enlarged and much more decisive role in 
governing the country. Government by legislation, to a substantial degree, will give way to a more expensive and 
time-consuming form — government by litigation. Nor is that all. As few as five out of nine individuals, to date 
always of the male sex, appointed for long terms, elected from a single field (the legal profession), rather than 
people from a variety of walks of life who must seek a fresh mandate at the polls every four or five years, will 
make many important decisions affecting all segments of society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me put this question to you. Are Canadians really prepared to accept this type of an arrangement? 
Some of them say they want a charter of rights. But do such people really know what follows? There will be 
without doubt supreme court decisions which will be unpopular with a large number of people. How will they 
react? They may not react as Americans have. Americans have endowed their supreme court with a semi-sacred 
character. They have venerated both their constitution and their supreme court. Canadians have not. Where 
attitudes toward their supreme courts are concerned, Canadians and Americans have shown themselves to be two 
very different people. 
 
A charter of rights and a much more powerful supreme court may serve in the future to drive Canadians apart just 
as Trudeau’s handling of constitutional change presently is doing. Because I perceive this difference between 
Canadians and Americans and because of the way the Trudeau government is going about changing the 
constitution and drafting a charter of rights and because of the misconceptions I have heard expressed about the 
origin and operation of the American Bill of Rights, I propose to speak on the latter subject to some length today 
when this resolution is before the House. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, I propose to say something concerning how the American Bill of Rights came into being. A 
few days ago I heard it stated that Americans always had a bill of rights. That statement is true or false depending 
upon how you look at it. If it is taken to mean that Americans had state bills of rights in revolutionary days and 
thereafter, the statement is correct. If it is meant to suggest that Americans had a bill of rights associated with their 
national constitution ever since the coming into force of that constitution, the statement is false. Allow me to 
enlarge upon this, Mr. Speaker. It may, among other things, help us to understand the Trudeau government’s 
strategy in seeking to change our constitution. 
 
After their revolution, Americans at the national level operated under the articles of confederation. But that system 
of government proved unsatisfactory and a move developed for what they called a “more perfect union.” This led 
to the drafting of their present constitution in 1787 by a constitutional convention. I would point out that their 
constitutional convention even included a committee on style to make sure that the 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

508 
 

constitution was well-written and as clear as possible. Well, once the constitution was completed it was submitted 
by Congress to the several states for ratification. By late 1788 sufficient states had ratified it and it went into 
operation March 4, 1789, with George Washington as the first elected president. 
 
During the course of ratification by the states, one criticism repeatedly advanced was the constitution’s lack of a 
bill of rights. For that and for other reasons there was widespread opposition to its adoption. Those who had 
drafted the constitution had examined the idea of including a bill of rights but had refrained from doing so for two 
reasons which I won’t go into. They and their supporters now discovered that one of the strongest bargaining 
points to secure ratification by the various states was a readiness to promote adoption of the bill of rights by 
constitutional amendment once the constitution had been ratified and put into operation. 
 
To put matters bluntly, Mr. Speaker, the American Bill of Rights served as a bargaining tool in American 
constitution making. If one thing can be said of Pierre Elliott Trudeau, it is that he is a well-read individual. He is 
probably well aware of what occurred in the United States — that a promise to include a bill of rights in the 
constitution brought support for constitutional change which would otherwise not have existed. Knowing that, he 
put one in his package so that people who would otherwise question things he is doing, and how he is doing them, 
would support him simply to get a charter of rights. Mr. Speaker: Is Pierre Elliott Trudeau above attempting to 
entice people into selling their birthrights for what could turn out to be the proverbial mess of pottage? 
 
Now Mr. Speaker, permit me to say a few words about the actual drafting of the American Bill of Rights. It is a 
process which we might follow. During the process of ratifying the American Constitution of 19787, the various 
states, having been promised a federal bill of rights, made numerous suggestions as to what should be included. In 
total they proposed 124 alterations, the great majority of which dealt with guarantees for individual rights. The 
124 items sound somewhat like the 30-odd-item hodge podge the Trudeau government is putting forward as its 
charter of rights. 
 
The 124 proposals went to the newly operative Congress where they underwent a careful examination and 
digestion. The House of Representatives eventually produced 17 proposals. These in turn were studied by the U.S. 
Senate, which endorsed 12 of them. The 12 were submitted to the various states for ratification. By late 1791 the 
required 11 of the then existing 14 states had ratified them and the 10 became the first 10 amendments of the U.S. 
Constitution or, if you like, the American Bill of Rights. Three things stand out about the American procedure, 
Mr. Speaker. First, the existing American Constitution and Bill of Rights resulted from two different processes. 
Secondly the drafting of the bill of rights received careful consideration over a fairly lengthy period of time. 
Thirdly, it was not a unilateral production of authorities in Washington. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly not a great proponent of following doggedly in American footsteps; however, I am 
firmly of the belief that we could look at the procedures they followed to discover any of their merits. And I feel 
the procedures they followed in this instance do have merit. Adoption by Canada of somewhat similar procedures 
might well be a way of reducing present divisions and avoiding future divisions among Canadians. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to an examination of the operation of the 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

509 
 

American Constitution, and protection given to the American people by their all-powerful supreme court in 
particular cases which came before that court under their bill of rights. I will follow that up with a discussion of 
the American Supreme Court itself. I do this because I believe there is some confusion in Canadian minds 
concerning what an entrenched charter of rights will do for them and a lack of public awareness as to the future 
position and powers of the Supreme Court of Canada in Mr. Trudeau’s scheme of things. They are vitally 
important subjects, about which there should be as little misunderstanding as possible. 
 
Before I begin, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that henceforth, in referring to the American Bill of Rights, I will 
not refer exclusively to the first 10 amendments. Amendments 13, 14, 15 and 19 are closely associated with the 
first 10 dealing as they do with involuntary servitude, privileges and immunities of American citizens, equal 
protection of the law, the franchise, and the like. 
 
The Trudeau government, as already stated, proposes to upset the balance in our present federal system by among 
other things, establishing a much more powerful supreme court. Just how powerful it will be, I will speak of later. 
 
But first, Mr. Speaker, let me take you beyond the day of changes Mr. Trudeau suggests. When you go to the 
supreme court rather than parliament or the legislatures for protection of expansion of your rights, you may find 
yourself dealing with a body so supreme that when it calls a heart a spade, a heart truly becomes a spade in 
constitutional law. I will demonstrate that by direct reference to American Supreme Court cases. 
 
What I say, Mr. Speaker, will of necessity be quite detailed and I sincerely hope you will bear with me. What I say 
is highly relevant, if we are to see where Mr. Trudeau leads us. It is not my style as an historian to say something 
and expect you to take it as gospel. Rather I feel compelled to provide the evidence to you, that you may draw 
your own conclusions. 
 
My desire to help you compare what we now have with what we will have, if Mr. Trudeau has his way, also 
necessitates detailed treatment, and I will cover about 180 years of the operation of the American Bill of Rights in 
selected cases. 
 
The first point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is this. Just because a bill of rights, backed by an all-powerful 
supreme court, guarantees you certain rights, it does not mean that you enjoy them. This become abundantly clear 
when one examines protection extended to blacks over a good many years by the American Bill of Rights. 
 
Following the American Civil War, certain amendments, including the 14th, were made to the United States 
Constitution. They were designed, among other things, to give full rights of citizenship to blacks. The 14th 
amendment read in part: 
 

No state shall make or enforce any laws which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the 
United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty or property, without due process of law, 
nor deny any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 

 
To carry into force the intent of the amendment, Congress passed what was called the second civil rights act and it 
read in part: 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

510 
 

Be it enacted . . . that all persons within the jurisdiction of the United States shall be entitled to the full and 
equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, privileges of inns, public conveyances on land 
or water, theatres, and other places of public amusement, subject only to the conditions and limitations 
established by law, and applicable alike to citizens of every race and color, regardless of any previous 
condition of servitude. 

 
It was not long before blacks sought enforcement by the U.S. Supreme Court of what they saw as their rights 
guaranteed them under the constitution — no discrimination in accommodation, etc. But the relief they sought 
was not forthcoming. What follows is a portion of a supreme court decision: 
 

The essence of the law is not to declare broadly that all persons shall be entitled to full and equal enjoyment 
of accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges in inns, public conveyances and theatres but that 
such enjoyment shall not be subject to any condition applicable only to citizens of a particular race or color 
or who had been in a previous condition of servitude. It is proper to state that civil rights, such as are 
guaranteed by the constitution against state aggression, cannot be impaired by the wrongful act of individuals 
unsupported by state authority in the shape of laws, customs or judicial or executive proceedings. The 
wrongful act of an individual unsupported by such authority is simply a private wrong or a crime of that 
individual. The court went on to argue. “It would be driving the slavery argument into the ground to make it 
apply to every act of discrimination which a person might see fit to make as to the guests he would entertain 
or as to people he would take into his coach or cab or car.” 

 
The court’s decision to distinguish individual from state discrimination totally nullified congressional attempts 
reduced from what the constitution and the laws of the United States said they were to what the judges of the 
supreme court said they were. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, how does one really determine exactly what rights an individual possesses under these 
sections of Mr. Trudeau’s proposed charter of rights? I quote section 27: 
 

This charter shall be interpreted in manner consistent with the preservation and enhancement of the 
multicultural heritage of Canadians. 

 
(Section 28 says) nothing in this charter abrogates or derogates from any right or privilege guaranteed by or 
under the constitution of Canada in respect to denominational, separate or dissentient schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, might not the rights supposedly laid down in these sections be determined by the courts to be 
substantially less than people affected by them today believe they are? I certainly feel they could be. To go back to 
the U.S. experience, having decided that the rights blacks sought to have enforced were social as opposed to civil, 
the supreme court a few years later went so far as to declare: 
 

The object of the 14th amendment was undoubtedly to enforce absolute equality of blacks before the law. But 
in the nature of things, it could not have been intended to abolish distinctions based upon color or to enforce 
social, as distinguished from political equality or a co-mingling of the races upon 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

511 
 

terms unsatisfactory to either. Laws permitting or even requiring their separation in places where they are 
liable to be brought into contact, do not necessarily imply the inferiority of either race to the other. And it has 
been generally, if not universally, recognized that within the competency of the state legislatures in the 
exercise of their police power, the most common instance of this is connected with the establishment of 
separate schools for whites and colored people. 

 
I need not point out, Mr. Speaker, that such rulings validated segregation by states, not only in education, but also 
in buses, trains, parks, benches and restaurants — the whole system of Jim Crow that resulted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan and elsewhere in Canada we are doing, by means of human rights, codes and 
commission, what the powerful U.S. Supreme Court maintained it could not do under an entrenched bill of rights 
backed by acts of Congress. And what about the political equality that justice has spoken of? And I’ll come to that 
amendment. 
 
The second point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, and I think I’ve already made it in part, is this: rights entrenched in 
a constitution, no matter how clearly stated, are not self-enforcing. Let me give you an example. Section 1 of the 
15th amendment reads: 
 

The right of the citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or 
any state on account of race, color or previous condition of servitude. 

 
Not long after it became part of the supreme law of the land, two election officials of the state of Kentucky 
refused to allow a black to vote at a time when the Ku Klux Klan was actively seeking to keep newly enfranchised 
blacks from doing so. The actions of two officials were examined by the U.S. Supreme Court in the case U.S. v. 
Reese. The justices in part had this to say, and I would take you back to the 15th amendment. It says: 
 

The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any 
state. 

 
And the U.S. Supreme Court says: 
 

The 15th amendment does not confer the right of suffrage upon anyone. 
 
I told you about converting a heart to a spade. 
 

The 15th amendment does not confer the right of suffrage upon anyone. It prevents the states of the United 
States, however, from giving preference, in this particular, to one citizen of the United States over another on 
account of race. 

 
. . . It cannot be contended that the amendment confers authority to impose penalties for every wrongful 
refusal to receive the vote of a qualified elector at state elections. It is only when the wrongful refusal at such 
an election is on account of race, etc., that Congress can interfere and provide for its punishment . . . 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

512 
 

Not only did the interpretation weaken the force of the amendment, it could be easily read to mean that while 
preference in voting could not be built on race, it might be established by other means. Such means proved to be 
the grandfather clause, voters tests and the like. 
 
The nation’s supreme court chose not to enforce the right of blacks to vote and a great many of them were denied 
the opportunity through state or individual action. 
 
The third point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that the enshrinement of certain basic principles in a constitution 
does not necessarily lead to an end to discrimination or an expansion of rights. American women were apprized of 
this by their supreme court in the case of Minor v. Happersett. 
 
Section 1 of the 14th amendment reads in part: 
 

All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the 
United States and of the state wherein they reside. No state shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge 
the privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States. . .  

 
Women asked for the vote as a consequence of the passage of this amendment fully conversant with the fact that 
the 15th amendment had extended the right to vote to former male slaves. However, the supreme court had this to 
say: 
 

. . . The argument is that as a woman, born or naturalized . . . in the United States . . . she has the right to 
suffrage as one of the privileges and immunities of her citizenship. 

 
. . . There is no doubt that women might be citizens has never been one of the elements of citizenship in the 
United States. 

 
. . . If the right of suffrage is one of the necessary privileges of a citizen of the United States, then the 
constitution and laws of Missouri confining it to men are in violation of the Constitution of the United States, 
as amended, and consequently void. The direct question is therefore . . . whether all citizens are necessarily 
voters. 

 
The supreme court answers its own question thus: 
 

The constitution does not define the privileges and immunities of citizens, for that definition we must look 
elsewhere. In this case we need not determine what they are, but only whether suffrage is necessarily one of 
them. 

 
It is certainly nowhere made so in express terms. 

 
One brief question, Mr. Speaker: does Mr. Trudeau’s proposal 25 in his charter of rights define aboriginal rights? 
If not, who will and what are they? When the aboriginal people claim that this or that is one of their rights, the 
all-powerful Canadian Supreme Court may respond that it is not so stated in express terms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, American women had a substantial wait before voting in national elections became one of the 
“privileges and immunities” they enjoyed under the 14th 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

513 
 

amendment. 
 
While I’m on the subject of women’s suffrage, allow me to digress for a moment and point out a difference 
between the American and the Canadian system of extending rights. Women in the United States received the 
federal franchise through constitutional amendment. Canadian women through an act of parliament. It took the 
Canadians parliament two months and six day to extend the federal franchise to Canadian women. The bill was 
promised in the throne speech on March 18, 1918, and received royal assent on May 24, 1918. The same 
extension of rights took two years in the United States. President Wilson asked Congress to frame the 19th 
amendment in September 1918. Congress completed its task on June 14, 1919, and the 36th state, making the 
necessary three-quarters of the states, ratified it and it became law on August 26, 1920. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is not nearly as long as it took to pass certain other amendments. Amendment 16, authorizing a 
federal income tax, was recommended to Congress by the president in 1907. It was not ratified by three-quarters 
of the states until February 25, 1913, — I think I’m safe in saying a full six years later. Which system of 
expanding rights or providing new ones, I ask you, is the better — the Canadian or the American? 
 
The fourth point I want to make is that rights entrenched in a constitution can be used to prevent social progress 
and, indeed, to turn back the clock. The member for Moosomin was talking about property rights and I have 
something to say here about that. 
 
Just to go back, the fourth point to be made is that the entrenchment of rights in a constitution can hold back 
social progress and indeed turn back the clock. This was particularly evident in the United States in the ’20s, when 
the majority of justices on the supreme court were very conservative. Among them were Justices Van Devanter, 
Butler, McReynolds and Sutherland, later known as “The Four Horsemen” for the way they run roughshod over 
Roosevelt’s New Deal. Statements by individuals prominent in government characterized very accurately the 
attitude of the majority of the nine supreme court justices of the day. President Warren G. Harding remarked: 
“What America needs is less government in business and more business in government.” The U.S. Supreme Court 
during the ’20s generally acquiesced in business domination over government regulatory commissions and 
administrative agencies, thus translating contemporary conservation and constitutional law. 
 
Justice Sutherland set the tone for the decade by overruling a minimum wage law for women (and this says 
something about property rights). Despite the fact that similar state laws had previously received supreme court 
approval, he condemned wage legislation as economically and socially unsound and a denial of due process of 
law. In stating the court’s ruling, Sutherland wrote: 
 

The statute now under consideration is attacked upon the ground that it authorizes an unconstitutional 
interference with the freedom of contract included within the guarantee of the due process clause of the fifth 
amendment. (That amendment read in part: No person shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without 
due process of law.) 

 
Sutherland continued: 
 

That the right to contract about one’s affairs is a part of the liberty of the individual protected by this clause is 
settled by the decisions of this court and is no longer open to question . . . Within this liberty are contracts of 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

514 
 

employment of labor. In making such contracts, generally speaking the parties have an equal right to obtain 
from each other the best terms they can as the result of private bargaining. 

 
The present law is simply and exclusively a price-fixing law, confined to adult women . . . who are legally as 
capable of contracting for themselves as men . . . What is sufficient to supply the necessary cost of living for a 
woman worker and to maintain her in good health and protect her morals is obviously not a precise or 
unvarying sum — not even approximately so. The amount will depend upon a variety of circumstances: the 
individual temperament, habits of thrift, care, ability to buy necessaries intelligently, and whether the woman 
lives alone or with her family. 

 
. . . The relation between earnings and morals is not capable of standardization. It cannot be shown that 
well-paid women safeguard their morals more carefully than those who are poorly paid. 

 
That is the supreme court talking. Sutherland then spoke of the need to consider other mattes and finally 
concluded: 
 

It has been said that legislation of the kind now under review is required in the interest of social justice, for 
whose ends freedom of contract may lawfully be subjected to restraint . . . But, nevertheless, there are limits 
to the power and when these have been passed, it becomes the plain duty of the courts in the proper exercise 
of their authority to so declare. 

 
According to the court, social justice had to give way to a grossly inflated view of freedom to contract. I need not 
point out how a similar interpretation of entrenched rights by an all-powerful supreme court could affect 
affirmative action programs for women or the handicapped or the Amok agreement which ensures employment to 
Northerners. I would also urge you to recall that Liberals and Tories were and, I can doubtless say, are prepared to 
add property rights or the free movement of capital to Trudeau’s charter of rights. What a field day Trudeau’s 
supreme court would have when it was properly stocked with Liberals. 
 
Of the decisions I have outlined, one of America’s greatest justices of all times, Oliver Wendell Holmes, stated in 
a minority report: 
 

This case is decided upon an economic theory which a large part of the country does not entertain . . . A 
constitution is not intended to embody a particular economic theory. It is made for people of fundamentally 
differing views, and the accident of our finding certain opinions natural and familiar or novel and even 
shocking, ought not to conclude our judgment upon the question whether statutes embodying them conflict 
with the constitution of the United States. 

 
Holmes’s dissent, Mr. Speaker, is regarded to this day as a classic among criticisms of the U.S. Supreme Court by 
its members. 
 
The fifth point, Mr. Speaker, is that in times of national stress and hysteria — hysteria which may infect the 
supreme court itself — a bill of rights can be rendered quite meaningless for a whole class of people. I am 
thinking of course, of the Japanese Canadians during World War II. They were faced with conflicting orders from 
the 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

515 
 

military (they couldn’t obey all of them): curfew, confinement, deportation and lengthy detention. They obtained 
little comfort from the court, though dissenting judges made such statements as these: 
 

(The curfew order bore) a melancholy resemblance to the treatment accorded to members of the Jewish race 
in Germany and other parts . . . (or deportation from the Pacific coast) goes over the “very brink of 
constitutional power” and falls into the ugly abyss of racism. 

 
Of the constitutional results of the whole affair, a constitutional expert has written: 
 

As a result of the court’s opinions, it is now written into constitutional law that a citizen of the United States, 
set apart from his fellows only by race, may be expelled from his home, separated from his native community, 
forcibly transported to a concentration camp and there detained against his will, at least until his loyalty has 
been established. 

 
Rights guaranteed by the constitution (and supposedly protected by the U.S. Supreme Court) to the people of 
Hawaii, were also seriously affected during the war. There, civilian government was replaced by military 
government, military tribunals were set up to try civilians, and habeas corpus was suspended. In examining these 
occurrences, the supreme court would rule that creation of military courts to try civilians was illegal, that martial 
law could only be declared under conditions of actual invasion or rebellion, and that military authority when used 
for police purposes must always be subordinate to the civil power. However, these rulings did little to protect 
enshrined rights during the war. The decisions were handed down in 1946, after hostilities had ceased. 
 
The Canadian constitution, as it now exists without an enshrined charter of rights provided Canadians with 
essentially the same degree of protection when Trudeau invoked the War Measures Act as the American Bill of 
Rights and the American Supreme Court gave Japanese Americans and Hawaiians during World War II. the 
protection extended in both cases was pretty well nil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the final analysis, an entrenched charter of rights gives no more protection to individuals than 
national sentiments of the day support. When it comes right down to it, is it not possible that the civil, legal and 
political rights of citizens are as securely or more securely held when the need to protect them is firmly stamped 
on the hearts and minds of the population by long tradition rather than being merely printed ink-deep on a piece of 
paper? 
 
Point number six, Mr. Speaker. Judges of even such an August body as the U.S. Supreme Court are human and 
capable of what some of their number would probably call an error. Such an instance occurred with first 
amendment freedoms — the entrenched right to practise one’s religion. Because I have spoken for some time 
though, I’ll skip the details of the two cases involved. Suffice it to say that in reversing their first decision, the 
supreme court said in part: 
 

We are required to say that a bill of rights, which guards the individual’s right to speak his own mind, left it 
open to the public authorities to compel him to utter what is not in his mind. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

516 
 

In deciding the first case, its decision had allowed public authorities to compel a person, contrary to his religion, 
to utter what is not in his mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so far I’ve demonstrated, through reference to decisions on the U.S. Supreme Court, that entrenching 
certain rights and freedoms in a constitution does not mean that people will necessarily enjoy them, does not 
necessarily mean that they will come fully into force, does not necessarily end discrimination or lead to an 
expansion of rights, can frustrate attempts to provide greater social justice and indeed nullify progress already 
made along those lines, may not protect large groups of people during periods of national hysteria, and that even 
freedoms which appear at the very top of the U.S. Bill of Rights, religious freedom, dealt with in the first 
amendment, may not be fully guaranteed. 
 
Before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, there are a couple of other matters I’d like to bring to the attention of 
members of this House, and citizens generally, respecting entrenchment of a charter of rights in the constitution 
and Trudeau’s consequent great expansion of the role of the Canadian Supreme Court in our federal system. 
 
When rights are entrenched in a constitution it follows that some body must be empowered to see that those rights 
are not infringed upon. That task is given to a supreme court, in the case of the United States, to a body presently 
made up of nine men. In Canada’s case the task would also fall to nine men, our supreme court now being made 
up of nine judges. 
 
It is therefore useful to examine what has been said about the powers and responsibilities of the United States 
Supreme Court and of certain individuals who have made it up, as those are likely to be the future powers of our 
supreme court. The position of the United States Supreme Court in the American system of government is dealt 
with in many books. But for present purposes I’ll relate what only one author has to say: Fred Rodell in Nine Men: 
A Political History of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1790 to 1955. Rodell, by the way, was a 
member of the Yale University Law School when he produced his book. 
 
The three words which make up the title of chapter 1 in Rodell’s work are catchy. to say the least. They are 
“Powerful, Irresponsible and Human.” And in the course of the first chapter he has this to say: 
 

At the top levels of the three branches of the civilian government of the United States sit the Congress, the 
president plus his cabinet, and the supreme court. Of these three — in this unmilitary, unclerical nation — 
only one wears a uniform. Only one carries on most of its important business in utter secret behind locked 
doors — and indeed never reports, even after death, what really went on there. Only one, its members 
holding office for life if they choose, is completely irresponsible to anyone or anything but themselves and 
their consciences. Only one depends for much of its immense influence on its prestige as a semi-sacred 
institution and preserves that prestige with the trappings and show of superficial dignity rather than earning 
it, year after working year, by the dignity and wisdom of what it says and does. Under our otherwise 
democratic form of government, only one top ruling group uses ceremony and secrecy, robes and ritual, as 
instruments of its official policy, as wellsprings of its power. 

 
The nine men who are the Supreme Court of the United States are at once the most powerful and the most 
irresponsible of all men in the world who govern 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

517 
 

other men. Not even the bosses of the Kremlin, each held back by fear of losing his head should he ever 
offend his fellows, wield such loose and long-ranging and accountable to-no-one power as do the nine or 
five out of nine justices who can give orders to any other governing official in the United States. Ours may 
be, for puffing purposes, a “government of checks and balances” but there is no check at all on what the 
Supreme Court does — save only three that are as pretty in theory as they are pointless in practice. The nine 
justices sit secure and stand supreme over Congress, president, governors, state legislators, commissions, 
administrators, lesser judges, mayors, city councils and dog catchers — with none to say them nay. 

 
Lest you conclude that Rodell is overstating his case, let me refer to you what three of the most thoughtful men 
ever to hold high public office had to say about the supreme court’s powers and responsibilities. 
 
President Thomas Jefferson: 
 

Our constitution, intending to establish three departments, co-ordinate and independent, that they might check 
and balance one another . . . has given . . . to one of them alone the right to prescribe rules for the government 
of the others, and to that one, too, which is unelected by and independent of the nation. 

 
Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes: 
 

As the decisions now stand I can see hardly any limit but the sky to the invalidating of the constitutional rights 
of the states, if they happen to strike a majority of this court as for any reason undesirable. 

 
And you may substitute province for states. 
 
A recent United States Supreme Court Justice, Harlan F. Stone, said: 
 

The only check upon our own exercise of power is our own sense of self-restraint. 
 
I need not comment on what I have just read. Suffice it to say that entrenching a charter of rights has extremely 
far-reaching implications for our existing balance in our federal system, not to mention responsible government as 
it has been practised in Canada. Entrenchment indeed involves the transfer of ultimate power from the people as a 
whole to a group as small as five of nine appointed judges. I would urge women to note they are and never have 
been males. 
 
In the course of his book, Rodell maintains that court decisions often reflected political beliefs and personal 
backgrounds of individual judges, that the Supreme Court of the United States is a much more political body than 
is realized, owing in part to presidents frequently making strictly partisan appointments, and that its decisions all 
too often reflect social thinking that is out of date at the time the decisions are made. 
 
As a commentary on judges into whose hands fall a great deal of power through an entrenched bill of rights, I 
propose to refer to the background, appointment and career of two men of markedly different ability, Justice 
Pierce Butler and Chief Justice John Marshall. Butler I have already referred to. He was a member of the 
ultra-conservative 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

518 
 

court of the 1920s and one of the Four Horsemen of the New Deal era. Her is how one writer describes Butler and 
his performance as a supreme court judge. 
 

Fourth of the Horsemen, and least intellectually gifted of the nine old men, was Pierce Butler of Minnesota, 
the farm boy become millionaires by his monolithic legal services to the Great Northern, Northern Pacific, 
and Chicago, Burlington and Quincy railroads, whom Harding appointed as a second-rate successor, of sorts, 
to far abler Justice Edward White, when he was pressed to put another Catholic on the court after he had 
named Protestant and former U.S. President William Howard Taft in White’s place. Like so many risers from 
rags to riches, big, bull-headed Butler had an almost religious devotion to the status quo and especially to 
railroads. He was an expert at only one thing, the complicated accounting involved in figuring out railroad 
values and railroad rates. And his expertise was single-mindedly one-sided. Confirmed by the Senate only 
after he had solemnly pledged that he would not sit on railroad rate cases, he got around his pledge by actually 
writing the court’s decision on two major rate cases dealing with water companies which he knew would set 
clear precedents for railroad cases to come, nor did he disqualify himself when railroad taxes, not rates, came 
before the court — even though in one big tax case the railroad was his old client, the Great Northern. Butler, 
of course, voted to cut the tax. His attitude towards scholarship and civil liberties had been presaged when, as 
ruling regent of the University of Minnesota, he had engineered the firing of three professors because of their 
liberal views. The whole New Deal could not but prove anathema to his Philistine philosophy of politics and 
law. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, how would you like to entrust your life, liberty, property and pursuit of happiness to him, or 
one like him? 
 
Justice Marshall was a supreme court judge for a long period of time in the 19th century and is the first of the 
American chief justices to be regarded as great. He has been commonly described in these terms: 
 

Marshall is conceived to have dominated his associates on the supreme court so completely that he was able 
to make the constitutional decisions of that tribunal express his own views and nothing else. His ideas, it has 
been commonly assumed, were those of his political party, the Federalists. 

 
Consequently, the common view is that John Marshall was able to use, and did use his domination of the 
court to read the old Federalist constitutional views into the court’s decisions and thus to lay the foundations 
upon which our constitutional law ever since has rested, or, as some might wish to insist, the foundations 
upon which it rested until the notorious Roosevelt court fight. 

 
Also permit me to quote a passage from Rodell describing Marshall. 
 

Marshall not only though that the nation should be fun by a strong central government, he also though the 
nation and its government should be run by and for his own kind, his political and economic class — 
meaning, of course, the creditor-capitalist, the federalist, the financial conservatives. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it might interest you and other members to know that John Marshall was 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

519 
 

appointed chief justice early in 1801, following the election of 1800, by President John Adams, a Federalist. On 
March 4 of that years, the Federalists transferred power, and it proved to be a permanent transfer, to the 
Republicans under President Jefferson. Was Marshall’s appointment an attempt by the Federalists to perpetuate 
their power in the supreme court? His appointment has been characterized as one of President Adams’s “Midnight 
Appointment.” Be that as it may, Marshall continued federalist efforts to nationalize the constitution, or if you 
prefer, to centralize power in Washington, a task at which he was quite successful. 
 
Mr. Trudeau proposes entrenching a charter of rights in the constitution and thereby significantly expanding the 
powers of the supreme court. I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is the political life expectancy of Pierre Elliott 
Trudeau and the Liberal Party of Canada? 
 
I’m sorry I have taken so long, but I did think certain things had to be said about entrenching a charter of rights in 
the constitution and the changes that will involve in our federal system. particularly those changes as reflected in 
our supreme court. Indeed, I believe a good deal more has yet to be said. For the moment, however, I’ll be 
satisfied if you permit me just a few more words. 
 
From what I have said, the conclusion might easily be drawn that I’m dead set against entrenchment of a charter 
of rights in Canadian constitution. As a student of both our system and the American system, I have serious 
reservations about it. An entrenched charter of right does hold our certain benefits, some of which people are 
aware of, through, among other things, watching American TV. However, there are definite adverse results which 
I firmly believe they are less well informed about, as they are on the implication of an entrenched charter of rights. 
 
My purpose in making my remarks are multiple, Mr. Speaker. I believe that it is absolutely essential that 
Canadians, if they choose to entrench a charter of rights, be fully aware of the implications of their actions. They 
must consider carefully which rights should and should not be entrenched. They should also carefully examine the 
terms used as each rights is entrenched. Those terms will be subject to interpretation by a very powerful court. 
They must above all realize that by entrenchment they are taking power out of hands of people they can control 
and placing it in the hands of a very small group, usually elderly and of one sex, that they cannot control. They 
must also face the fact that their potential for reversing decisions of a supreme court is much less than for 
reversing decisions of a legislature. The complexion of a legislature can be changed within about four years; that 
of a supreme court takes much longer. People should know these things at a very minimum. 
 
The Canadian people should also realize that if they really so desire, they can obtain an entrenched charter of 
rights by means other than the divisive ones presently being employed the Trudeau government. They should not 
forget that there is an alternative to entrenchment. They have it now and it has served them well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that what I have said will help everyone understand more fully the reasons for this 
government’s position on one aspect of Trudeau’s proposed constitutional changes. I also hope it has helped 
inform the members of the opposition in this respect. I would urge all listeners to call upon the Trudeau 
government to go back to the bargaining table where the constitution is concerned. 
 
Lastly, in closing, I would appeal to all members of the House to give their unqualified 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

520 
 

support to this resolution. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would wish to make a few comments with regard to the constitutional 
resolution. At the conclusion of those remarks I intend to move one of the amendments to that resolution and, 
perhaps, will refer to a second subamendment that will be moved later on in the debate. 
 
I can say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in the two and one-half years that I have been involved as an elected 
politician. it seems to me that politics is centred around three main issues, both at the federal level and at the 
provincial level. Those issues are quite simple, and I think I have a fair degree of support identifying these three: 
(1) the economy, (2) the energy pricing or energy agreement, and (3) the constitution. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone is going to put different preferences on one or the other of those issues. 
There is nothing precisely wrong with that. The question I have and the one thing we must look at is that we 
cannot look at all three of those issues of any one of those three issues in isolation from the others. From that 
point of view it is important that we address all three issues when we are talking about the constitution. 
 
I reject those who say that the constitutional debate which is going on today in Canada is a lot of hot air, that we 
should set it aside, that we should put it back and get on with the issues of the day — whether they be the 
economy, or helping the poor, or solving the problems in the auto industry. The constitutional question is, in fact, 
wrapped up in the fibre of Canadian politics both at the federal level and at the provincial level. 
 
Equally, I reject those who say the constitution can be looked at in isolation, that there is no connection between 
the constitution and the energy program. I think I might refer to an answer to a question in this House last fall by 
the Premier who suggested that the two are not connected other than by the fact that the antagonists are the same. 
 
Therein lies part of the problem, part of the concern which I have with regard to the procedure and process 
developed by the Government of Saskatchewan. The issue of the constitution in conjunction with those two other 
issues has clearly pitted region against region in this country and province against province. They have strained 
the fibres of all three political parties in this country and (I think all of us have seen it in our riding) they have 
brought the country to a point where many citizens are in fact questioning the very foundations of this nation. 
 
Those people who are questioning that, those people who are raising that point, are not wild-eyed, right-wing red 
necks. The include the elderly gentleman who calls you and asks about the constitution and suggests that perhaps 
separation is the way to go. That same elderly gentleman has lived and farmed in that area for 50 years. Another 
could be a student at the at the university or even one of the people in the media, silently suggesting or looking at 
that type of option. 
 
My suggestion is that if we cannot address those three questions, the nation cannot grow or cannot realize the 
potential which it is so important to realize if we are to put the thing back in order. But never has democracy been 
a quiet enterprise. Freedom and equity in this country have never rung with silence. Those who criticise in a 
moderate way or in a strong robust way cannot be looked upon as somehow being un-Canadian or wrong or 
whatever it might be. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

521 
 

When I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the three are intertwined, I am saying that when the economy of this 
country is wrong, very little else is right, whether it is the constitution or anything else. When the Ontario 
home-owner faces an 8 per cent mortgage payment, he tends to hunger after the resources of western oil. When 
inflation hits double digits, the consumer has no option but to go some place and try to find more revenues. 
Hence, Canadians tend to eye the resources rents of western Canada, at this point in time, as a solution to their 
immediate problems. As a result, we see region pitted against region and province against province. Therein lies 
the dilemma we face in the constitution. 
 
As well as that, I think we have to add the situation of what we see as the federal state and what the history has 
been in this province. We must recognize, whether it is by convention or other means, the reality of regionalism in 
this country. Regionalism does exist. The reason for that regionalism, I believe, is that the people of the Prairies 
feel more community with other people in that prairie region. They feel more community with the people here 
than they do with the broader Canadian scenario. 
 
Against this background, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we have to look at the constitutional debate presently 
before us and before the House of Commons. In that regard, I suppose what we have to do is ask what, in fact, a 
constitution is. To me, a constitution is the rules by which we as a society will govern ourselves. In this country 
that means a federal state and it means a parliamentary system of government. 
 
It, therefore, I would suggest, requires two prerequisites to amend the constitution. First, it must have the support 
of a large segment of the population. The reason for that is it must be able to protect the minority. How are the 
minorities defined? I suppose this will vary from one person to the next person. It could well be the native 
population of this country or it could well be the province of Newfoundland or the province of Alberta. All those 
would fit into that definition of minority. Second, and equally as important as that broad support for any 
constitutional change, is that the change must be consistent with our basic principles of justice and what a 
parliamentary system is. It also must be consistent with reason. 
 
The former, the wide basis of public support, protects against the oppressor, which, in this case I think is the 
federal government. It is against the less powerful people. The latter projects against what I see as the great danger 
we face today — trying to react to an immediate problem with a solution that is not time-tested and not based on 
reason and the principles on which our country has stood for some 113 years. 
 
So, with those introductory statements, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have to look at two parts of the package. Part 
one, obviously, is the process. Part two is the content or substance of the resolution. 
 
Dealing with the question of the process, we deal with the question of unilateral patriation. I think that before we 
simply react to that, we must look at the basis from which this unilateral action stems. Obviously, the federal 
Liberal government prior to the last first minister’s conference in September, I believe, 1980, determined in its 
mind what its strategy would — not only with regard to the constitution but with regard to the economics and, in 
particular, with regard to the energy question and the resources issue. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

522 
 

I think that when you look at number one, the constitutional resolution, to be followed quickly on its heels by the 
national energy program. I believe a good case can be made, and many have made the case, that the national 
energy program is really and truly power politics in action, and that the constitution is intertwined with that and 
part and parcel of the same. 
 
What I am saying of power politics in the national energy program is quite simply that the direction in which the 
federal Liberal government is moving on the question of resources, as it relates to oil, is as follows: they are going 
to develop programs and have developed that will discourage development of western resources as we know that 
word, primarily in the provinces of Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia. 
 
The emphasis of the national energy program will be to develop the frontier that is the high North, and to develop 
the east coast — the Hibernia that we refer to. The reason for that is the federal land part of the national energy 
program. Through that system, the federal government will be able to control the resources if it is successful in 
establishing is control over the resources offshore, and it appears to have solved it’s problem with regard to the 
ownership of the resources in the high North. 
 
From that point of view, that gives them economic power and it also takes away the political power of the people 
of western Canada. That, my friends, it seems to me, is part of that strategy. Given that, the second thing, and the 
second most important part of the national policy with regard to constitutional change is the charter of rights. It 
has kicked around for a long time, and they see the charter of rights as a way of being able to lull people into 
thinking that if we, as Canadians, have a charter of rights, somehow we are going to have more freedoms, 
somehow things will be freer, somehow many of our problems will disappear so we will not have to worry about 
the struggles people have made in this country for the past 100 years to develop those freedoms, to develop those 
rights, somehow that is going to be all closed up. I think that is really one of the great tragedies of the Trudeau 
package as it relates to the entrenchment of the bill of rights. 
 
I ask everyone in this Chamber: do you really disagree with me as to what the strategy of the federal Liberal 
government is with regard to the national energy program? Does anyone disagree with me as to the strategy of 
economic development in this country by the federal Liberal Party? That strategy, my friends, in this: we put the 
emphasis on protecting the Chryslers and the Massey-Fergusons of this world to preserve those jobs. To their 
credit, there is a concern with preserving jobs, but in doing that, they are preserving something that is 
unproductive, something that is moving toward being obsolete. Their emphasis is to encourage that type of 
economic development in the East to the detriment of the people of the West. I say whether the members opposite 
agree with me on that proposition or not, they must agree that if that is, in fact, their strategy, it is wrong strategy 
for economic development in this country. 
 
It is against that background, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I think it is clear what the strategy of the federal Liberal 
government was with regard to the constitution. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

523 
 

It is in that regard that I think it becomes very significant as to the federal strategy that was leaked during the last 
first ministers’ conference. With your indulgence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to read that. 
 

In our negotiation strategy, we have linked very closely to resources. 
 
They’re talking about their strategy with regard to the constitution — that they have lined it very clearly with the 
resource question. 
 

If there is to be a solid western block of opposition to the federal government, it will be an inadvisable course 
of action to proceed the way we are in fact proceeding today. Given the government’s lack of western 
representation, it would probably be more difficult to defend unilateral, federal action on such a regionally 
sensitive issue as resources. 

 
So, it’s tied in again, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the question of the constitution and the question of resources, I 
suggest to you that we cannot separate those two. We must never separate those two. Here’s their strategy. 
 

Breaking up a solid western provincial block of opposition is the prerequisite to be in a position to take action 
of this package. 

 
That is the strategy of the federal Liberals as stated in September, 1980. The members opposite obviously had 
copies of that. It goes on: 
 

A solid front of provincial government and parliamentary opposition from the West could pose real 
difficulties for the Government of Canada. 

 
It could pose real difficulties for the Government of Canada! It is in that setting, and I suggest, around the 
question of resources. In view of the leaked federal strategy, I think we can all admit that that strategy is pretty 
well right on course today. Unfortunately, maybe that strategy is going to lead it right through to the point of 
fruition. 
 
The government opposite, knowing that, sought to say, “No, we had better negotiate.” They’re prepared to say, 
“Well, let’s go for Trudeau’s carrot. We really don’t think this is his strategy. We think that we can outmanoeuvre 
Pierre Trudeau.” There lies, I think the dilemma. But the dilemma, it strikes me, is even . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
I think the members opposite are prepared to admit that they tried that. It didn’t work. I’m not going to go into that 
whole process of whether they should or should not any more than I have now. 
 
What strike me as being wrong is this: how can we as parliamentarians, as leaders of this country, go through the 
process that we have been through in the last three or four months — drafting or attempting to draft a new 
constitution for our country based on the political whims of one pressure group or another, based on whether 
we’ll make this trade so I can get your political support, or make that trade so I can get your political support? 
That is exactly what is happening. 



 
March 3, 1981 

 
 

 

524 
 

The most recent one, and I think the one the Attorney General made reference to, was the question of the Senate. I 
agree that there should be reform in the Senate. The Senate is archaic. I think there is very little support for that 
institution throughout this country. It’s probably a weak argument to use — that that was the straw which broke 
the camel’s back. But they also traded that. How can you reason that it is proper to draft a constitution when you 
will deal with the question of the Senate by saying, “We will throw that in because that will give the senators their 
support so we can get the package through?” If they’re dealing with the question of a charter of rights (I disagree 
with the charter of rights but it’s into the process of dealing) and they say we want to have property rights in it, 
that’s great; we agree with property rights. The members of the New Democratic Party in the federal House, stand 
up and say, “If you have property rights, we’re off the train, we’re no longer with you.” So they pull the property 
rights. 
 
Is that any way, I say, to draft a constitution? Is that the way the Americans drafted their constitution: by a trade 
here and a trade there, the political whims, misrepresentation? That is the process and that is the tragedy of the 
process that the people of this country do not say, do not agree with, do not stand behind and fight. And regardless 
of what happens in the process from here on in, you are not going to have the much needed support of the people 
of this country because of the lack of diplomacy or statesmanship of the whole issue. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, and prior to moving the amendment, I suppose what we are left with now is that 
that’s water under the bridge. We’re not at that stage any more. Regardless of whether we failed or not, the 
question now is: what do we do as people of this region? Obviously, one thing is this motion today which I hope 
will get unanimous support. Another thing would be to bring court action. And what we’re suggesting is a 
reference to the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal so that the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal can deal with the 
question as it relates to convention. 
 
I think that the Premier and the Attorney General have been perhaps less than . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Honest. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — No, I wouldn’t use that one. Let’s say, less than frank with the population of this province by 
referring to the line that they can not and must not join those awful group of six that are going to the courts 
because they have but one position and that is unanimity. 
 
There is no question that what is also being argued in those court challenges is the question: what is the 
convention? Has a convention developed to the point of being law? And what is that convention if it is in fact 
developed? Surely it is a function of the courts of this land to interpret our constitution. If we are to say that from 
now on with a charter of rights we’re going to throw this open to the courts to deal with all the issues (whether 
they are the social issues or the legal issues or the resource issues), if we’re going to throw that to them as the 
package, surely it seems to me that we should put the fundamental question to them as to what is the convention 
before we get to that stage. That’s number one. 
 
As for number two, I think the question is going to build, Mr. Speaker. I think the issue in this province is going 
to build against a constitutional package, against what they’re doing in the constitution. I suggested time. If the 
provinces have time on their side, if the people have time on their side (those opposed to the Trudeau motion), if 
they have that time, the momentum of the opposition is going to continue to build, not only in 



 
March 3, 1981 

 

 

525 
 

western Canada, but throughout this country. 
 
I think we’re all finding now that the public is becoming genuinely interested after six months of debate. Some of 
the people are starting to call and I’m sure they’re calling you, “Can you tell me what this package is about?” And 
that’s not to belittle the people, but that is to suggest that there is more and more public awareness in what the 
constitution is about. 
 
In order to delay that process, I call on the Premier or the Attorney General or the other people of this Assembly 
to lobby in the halls of Westminster. I believe the only process we are going to get from the government in Great 
Britain is the slow shuffle. The House of Commons is not going to turf out the package. It is going to practise that 
old British tradition of doing it in its own way. That slow shuffle, I think, is going to be in the process if it is 
properly lobbied. I call on this government to lobby in that way because we must buy time. 
 
If we believe that this system which Mr. Trudeau is pushing on us is wrong, if we genuinely believe it is wrong, 
then we have the obligation to stand up and fight against it with everything we have in our power. One of those is 
going to court and one of those is going to Westminster. I call on the government and all members of this 
Assembly to join with us and make that same representation, because that is the only way it is going to stop. If it 
does not stop, my friends, the requirement is going to be more difficult. 
 
The basis of the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and the first amendment to be advanced by the opposition will read as 
follows: 
 

That the motion be amended by adding thereto the words, “and that this Assembly urge the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council to refer the proposals for unilateral patriation of the constitution of Canada to 
the court of appeal of the province of Saskatchewan pursuant to the provisions of The Constitutional 
Questions Act, Revised Statues of Saskatchewan, 1978, chapter 29.” 

 
I move that amendment, seconded by my colleague, the member for Meadow Lake. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I find the amendment in order and the debate continues concurrently on the motion and the 
amendment. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have a number of words I wish to address. I know members are waiting with bated 
breath and I know they wouldn’t want my remarks divided in two by the bell. I wonder if we might call it 5 
o’clock and pick this up again at 7 o’clock? 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


