






















































Hansard: May 07, 1981


(3010) 3011 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 7, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. HAM: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me, on behalf of the member for Nipawin to introduce 21 grade 7 
students from the Red Earth-Shoal Lake Joint High School. They are accompanied by Mrs. Samuel Tranter and 
Selena Whitehead, and their bus driver, Raymond Head. I will be meeting with them on behalf of the member for 
Nipawin, at 2:20 and speaking with them over refreshments in the members’ cafeteria. Will you please welcome 
them here and wish them a safe trip home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce through you to the Assembly, the 
Saskatchewan high school boys curling championship from Greenall High School in Balgonie. They are sitting in 
the Speaker’s gallery and I would ask them to stand and be acknowledged. They are accompanied by their coach, 
Dave Kernetsky. There are five; there were six at various times. I just want to give the assurance that any four in 
any combination were more than enough to win the championship. The members of the team, and I’ll name all 
six, are Al Leippi, Rob Schneider, Murray Brandt, Don Gottselig, Ed Leippi, and Tim Sterzer. So, if they would 
stand and be acknowledged, I think all members will join with me in congratulating the boys high school 
champions of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to the members of the 
Assembly and to you, Mr. Speaker, 22 students from Dr. Perry School who are in the Speaker’s gallery. They are 
accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Carol Hart, and four parents, Mrs. Schuster, Mrs. Sitoussee, Mrs. Ibbot, and 
Mrs. Kambeitz. I would ask the members of the Assembly to join with me in welcoming this group to the 
Assembly this afternoon and I want to tell them that I will be meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures and 
refreshments. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Action to Combat Inflation 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I have a question to put to the Minister of Finance in light of today’s announcement by the 
Bank of Canada of record high interest rates, rising to now 18.71  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3012 

per cent, and also in light of a statement made by Mr. Bouey of the Bank of Canada. If I may read the statement, 
he said: 
 

The inflationary psychology gripping the country has reached alarming proportions. 
 
He cited the residential mortgage market boom despite rates of 17 per cent per year. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, in light of the procrastination on behalf of the government in that it has taken no action to 
combat inflation, I would ask the minister today if he is now prepared, at least for one year, to freeze the rates of 
public utilities — telephone, natural gas and power rates — and either freeze or roll back to an acceptable level 
the 20 per cent sales tax on gasoline? Will he now look at the situation as being very serious and you, yourself, at 
this point, get serious with the problem that we are now faced with. 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to the member that, indeed, we are always 
considering our options with respect to things we must do as a government, as they affect people who are feeling 
the impact of these high interest rates, which in themselves, I believe, are firmly contributing to our rate of 
inflation. I listened very carefully to what Mr. Bouey had to say. I also listened very carefully to what Mr. 
MacEachen had to say, when they recently spoke to a group of investors, I believe it was, in Toronto. They didn’t 
indicate that they are going to be changing their policies very rapidly. I think that’s rather unfortunate. As a matter 
of fact, I think it’s deplorable. 
 
We have, therefore, as a government (as was indicated in the budget which we introduced on March 5) provided a 
number of measures which we believe will help alleviate the impact that the inflationary period is having on 
citizens of Saskatchewan. That is why we have, along with the indexing of the income tax system, a saving in the 
full year to taxpayers of Saskatchewan of $50 million, which will contribute in a big way toward that. 
 
To respond directly to the member’s question, we are not now contemplating the freezing of utility rates. We must 
keep in mind that the increases in our utility rates over the years in Saskatchewan have been lower than most other 
province’s simply because we do have Crown corporations and do, as a government, have some input in 
establishing those rates, rather than turning decisions over to a public utilities review board as they do in other 
provinces, where the governments can wash their hands and take no responsibility. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, at the risk of getting into a debate, and I will not do that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask 
the minister how he can justify the statement he has just made with respect to utility rates when we see increases 
in, for example, natural gas of some 50 per cent, and in SGI rates of 48 per cent in 14 months. The cost of the 
gasoline sales tax will be a 100 per cent increase this year. To clear the matter so that the minister knows: we were 
paying 3 cents a gallon last year, and this year we’ll be almost to the 6 cent level, depending on the price of 
gasoline. So, that is almost 100 per cent. Again, I would ask you, in light of those increases, will you discuss this 
with your cabinet and take action to reduce rates by rolling back or by putting a freeze on them, or will you do 
something to alleviate the situation that is facing the people of Saskatchewan today? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, may I first correct the member who indicated that the gasoline 
tax last year was 3 cents a gallon. That’s not right. It was 19 cents a gallon. It is now 23.1 cents a gallon. That is a 
very considerable difference from  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3013 

what has been indicated. 
 
As I have already said, Mr. Speaker, our gasoline tax in Saskatchewan is not out of line with the gasoline tax that 
exists in almost all the rest of Canada. In fact, it’s the second lowest in Canada except, of course, for Alberta 
because, as we all know, there is no gasoline tax in Alberta. But then, it has other taxes that we don’t have, such 
as health premiums, and the like. 
 
As I have already indicated, we have measures now which were not necessarily provided in order to combat 
inflation or the high interest rates, but do have a significant input. The tax cut is one measure. We have programs 
in agriculture through FarmStart, which is another measure. We have assistance to home-owners in property 
improvement grants, and to renters in rent rebates, as well as the mortgage interest rebate program. 
 
All of these are helping to some degree the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to at least absorb some of this inflation that 
we have, which we as a province cannot control. All we can do is provide some assistance. It is going to take a 
larger measure on the part of our national government to deal with it in any substantial way, when it comes to 
dealing with inflation, and when it comes to establishing a reasonable policy as it applies to interest rates. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Just to correct my statement, I meant the gas tax, the 
insurance tax on the gas tax being doubled from 3 cents to almost 6 cents. The gas tax itself will be from 19 cents 
to 20 per cent, which will be more than the 21 cents the minister indicated. One only has to look at the estimates 
of this year’s budget to indicate that it is a 20 per cent increase from that. My question is: will you look at the 
utility rates? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, we are always looking at utility rates, because we review them 
before the increases. Of course, the Crown corporations, SPC and Sask Tel, will review the rates, as will the 
boards of those corporations, as will the government when they are brought forward. 
 

Mortgage Interest Rate Policy 
 
MR. LANE: — In light of statements by the head of the Bank of Canada that interest rates could continue to 
climb, would the Minister of Finance be prepared to reconsider government policy and initiate a “made in 
Saskatchewan” mortgage rate policy to subsidize the interest rate for home mortgages in the province of 
Saskatchewan to allow people to obtain homes at reasonable cost and to stimulate the house building industry in 
this province? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, we already subsidize the mortgage rates through our mortgage 
interest tax credit, a program which we established a year or two years ago. We are not in a position to consider 
subsidizing a policy of high interest rates or counteracting it in the way the member opposite indicates. The 
amount of money that would be required to make up for the kinds of national problems we face because of high 
interest, is something which is beyond the capacity of any one province. It will take a bigger effort; it will require 
a change in policy. I come back to my initial answer that we already have a program which to some degree 
subsidizes the mortgage interest rates through the mortgage interest tax credit. 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3014 

MR. LANE: — It is obvious that the existing policies have not in any significant way stimulated housing starts or 
made housing more accessible. I think the minister will agree with that. Is it not time to reconsider your position 
and a made in Saskatchewan interest policy? It could be done extremely easily. We give interest free moneys to 
Crown corporations. Why isn’t the same benefit (and I’m not talking interest free, but certainly a subsidy) given to 
Crown corporations extended to the average taxpayer in Saskatchewan, particularly in these inflationary times? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure whether we are talking about the same thing. But 
if you want to take it in that context, we do now, because of the well-being of our economy, provide direct 
assistance to Saskatchewan people. We have a property improvement grant program, which is a major rebate on 
property taxes. We have the mortgage interest tax credit which will be an estimated $12 million return to people 
who do not pay taxes directly, but do pay taxes indirectly when they rent a suite. So, essentially, we are already 
doing what the member is asking us to do. Maybe he would do it in a different way, but we are still talking about 
the same dollars. 
 

Meals on Wheels Program 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. What are the guidelines or the 
criteria under the home care program for the eligibility for Meals on Wheels? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to state to the member that to be eligible, 
individuals should not be able to prepare meals on their own. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Could you tell me why an 88 year-old widower, who lost his wife about three months ago and 
who has not been accustomed to any type of housework throughout his life, would be told by the home care 
board, “You can certainly put a potato in the pot,” and was cut off from home care Meals on Wheels? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the member is well aware of whose responsibility it is 
to decide whether people will receive a meal on a day-to-day basis. It’s a local decision made by the board. I don’t 
know whether the member wants the Government of Saskatchewan to become involved in the day-to-day 
operation of locally elected boards. I’m sure that is the case; he would like it to be centralized in Regina. But I 
would like to tell him that it is not our intention to become involved at that level. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — A final supplementary. As the minister responsible for the home care program in 
Saskatchewan, would you investigate the case if I give you the name? Surely to goodness, if we are providing 
home care, a person 88 years of age should qualify for this type of Meals on Wheels. Would you not agree? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that I have many old friends in my constituency 88 
years of age and over who can prepare their meals and, in fact, do. To say that because someone is 88 years of age 
he can’t prepare his own meals is being a little bit ridiculous. 
 
If you have a case which you feel we should be looking into, I would expect that you  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3015 

would have sent a letter to my office, and we would have checked it out. To say that a man of the earth can’t 
prepare a meal, I think, is underestimating the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

Meeting with Federal Energy Minister 
 
MR. ANDREW: — My question is to the Minister of Mineral Resources. Mr. Minister, the first quarter records 
of several oil companies have come down. Union Oil, for example, has indicated in its annual report that it is 
losing 85 cents a barrel on production in Saskatchewan; BP is losing 40 cents a barrel on production in 
Saskatchewan; Mobil Oil is losing 60 cents a barrel on oil produced in Saskatchewan. It seems to me that the 
energy problem is becoming very serious in this province as the cutbacks come. 
 
You have rejected the suggestion of rolling back royalties. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: in view of the 
serious situation in the oil industry today, are you prepared, rather than sitting back and waiting to see what 
Alberta and Ottawa are going to do, to take the initiative to meet with Mr. Lalonde and to bring those matters to 
his attention? Would you act in some way to try to address that serious question as to oil production in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve seen the same reports as the member opposite has. I think the 
impact on our oil industry is significant, as it is in Alberta. The response by the provincial government in Alberta 
is similar in many ways to the one taken by us in Saskatchewan. They’ve gone even further by cutting back on 
their production, as well. 
 
With respect to meeting with Mr. Lalonde, I am quite prepared to meet with Mr. Lalonde when it seems useful to 
have such a meeting. My officials are in contact regularly with officials in Ottawa. At this point, given the 
likelihood of a meeting in two or three weeks between Mr. Lalonde and Mr. Leitch, it seems to me there is no 
particular end to be gained by asking for a meeting with Mr. Lalonde. I have no objection to having a meeting but 
it seems to me that I’m not prepared to call one unless I have something to offer. In terms of the information, Mr. 
Lalonde and his department receive information with respect to the oil industry in Saskatchewan on a regular 
basis from my department and from other sources. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A supplementary question. The problem in Saskatchewan, as you are aware, Mr. Minister, is 
that it differs from Alberta in the unprofitability of even producing the wells here. Alberta is shutting down the 
wells as a strategy by the government. 
 
Is it not time? I gather that you have communicated this to Mr. Lalonde. Has he given you any indication that he 
looks at the Saskatchewan situation differently than the province of Alberta, and whether there could be any 
remedy for the Saskatchewan problem without necessarily addressing the entire question? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — The answer to the first part of your question is yes. The answer to the second part of 
your question is that he has given no indication of any particular strategy for addressing Saskatchewan’s particular 
problems. That’s where it’s at. 
 

Eligibility Under the Home Care Program 
 
MR. SWAN: — I have a question for the Minister of Social Services. My question relates,  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3016 

to some extent, to the question asked by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley. Is it not true that a person who is 
88 years of age, who happens to own land with a value in excess of $125,000, would be ineligible to receive 
assistance under home care because of that assessment being in excess of that $125,000? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, it is not true that he wouldn’t be able to get assistance through 
home care. Anyone in the province who is unable, for example, to prepare his or her own meal is eligible to 
receive home care. To say that he is not eligible for home care is a misstatement of fact. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, at a meeting in Rosetown, when you were asked the question about your $125,000 
eligibility, you said that if they had that much land they would not be eligible — if they had that kind of 
assessment. Can you tell the Assembly how the $125,000 eligibility applies in home care? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the Assembly, and the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose, that the question in Rosetown was one of whether or not there would be a subsidy, if I 
remember the question correctly. They would not be eligible for subsidy, but they would be eligible for the 
program to be delivered to them. 
 
MR. SWAN: — My question to you was about the eligibility for assistance under home care. You said no. Now, 
you say he is eligible for home care but not assistance. There is the problem. 
 

Government Steps to Combat Crime Increases 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Attorney General. Mr. Minister, you 
have in recent months indicated that you would take steps to suppress crime and show leadership in that regard. 
Recent events would indicate that you possibly wouldn’t know crime if it were sitting across the desk from you. 
 
In light of recent events — only within the last week there were two stabbings within a two-block radius — would 
you indicate to this House what positive measures you have taken in recent months in order to allay the concerns 
of the Saskatchewan people as they relate to the moderate upswing in crime in the province? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, in fact, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s statistics, I believe, are in error. I 
would like to get more complete information to answer at a subsequent time. The rate of crime in the province of 
Saskatchewan is certainly no greater and is perhaps less than the rate in provinces to our immediate west — 
Alberta and British Columbia. I think we’re probably a little ahead of Manitoba, but I would even question that. In 
any event, the Government of Saskatchewan continues to do the kinds of things we have been doing. We have one 
of the highest per capita police force commitments in the province of Saskatchewan of any province in Canada. 
We propose to do all we can to streamline the courts in efficiency and dispatch of people who come before the 
law. 
 
My colleague, the Minister of Social Services, is still heading one of the most progressive penal reform systems to 
try to make sure there is no return to crime once we apprehend the individuals involved. Over and above that, in 
the end result, it also requires attitudinal changes on the part of many people stemming essentially, in my 
judgment, in the home first. 



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3017 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Attorney General, there’s no question that organized 
crime is getting its foot in the door in the province of Saskatchewan. There seem to be indications of that. It was 
not so long ago — in spite of the fact which you’ve given me that we have a higher per capita rate of police 
forcing in Saskatchewan than in any other province — that the city of Regina had the highest per capita crime 
rate. I’m sure you’re well aware of that particular fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General raises a most important point, the point which I want to make: people, 
generally speaking, feel (and I believe it is a fact) that, if you have a higher per capita rate of policing, you will 
have a lower per capita rate of crime. That having been established (and I think you would agree with me on that), 
what is the current situation between the provincial government and the federal government in terms of their 
negotiations with refers to policing costs? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would dispute the hon. member’s judgment that the more per capita 
police force there is, the lower is the reported incidence of crime. In fact, it’s the exact opposite. The higher per 
capita police force per provincial area (or per unit of measurement), the higher the recording of the rate of 
incidence of crime is. That’s because if you have more police officers, you have more apprehensions, whereas if 
you have fewer police officers, you have fewer apprehensions and detections and less recording of the incidence 
of crime. As a consequence, you will have a lower per capita rate in some areas. So I think the hon. member’s 
assumption is incorrect. 
 
On the second aspect of the statement, which deals with the question of our state of negotiations, I can tell the 
hon. member that essentially there is no change from the negotiations I reported to the House two or three weeks 
ago, when the hon. member for Qu’Appelle asked me this question. (I believe it was the member for Qu’Appelle). 
There has been no change in circumstances. We are still waiting for an appropriate meeting of federal and 
provincial ministers. I don’t know if there are any officials meeting at the present time, which have taken place or 
are about to be held. I guess we’re more or less at a standstill in trying to negotiate an appropriate cost-sharing 
formula with the federal government. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Attorney General, the information you have given 
me would indicate that, if we reduced the number of police forces which we have (or police personnel per capita), 
then we would have a reduced level of crime. I wonder if that’s the reason you’re not pushing harder to negotiate 
a settlement between you and the federal government in terms of policing? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Of course, that is, with all due respect to the hon. member, a specious question. No 
attorney general would want to logically say that if we had no police we would have no crime. That is the obvious 
conclusion of what the member is saying. That is not our position. I’m very proud to be a member of a 
government which has given much support to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and to the other city police 
forces in the province of Saskatchewan, giving us, as I say, perhaps the highest per capita percentage of police in 
the general population. 
 
The question is: are we pushing for a settlement with the federal government on the RCMP contract? The answer 
is yes, I would very much like to come to a satisfactory conclusion, but I draw to the attention of the hon. member 
that there is a bit disparity between what the federal government would want us, as provincial governments, to pay 
for policing and what we, according to our budgets, are able to pay. It wants the  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3018 

provincial portion to increase to 75 per cent. We are currently at 56 per cent. It has not budged off 75 per cent. 
We’ve indicated a willingness to go higher than 56 per cent. There seems to be no movement on the part of Mr. 
Kaplan or the federal authorities whatsoever. We are united with the other seven provinces which have contract 
forces. So we’re pushing, but there’s a certain limitation as to what can be done. 
 

Investigation of Proposed Sale of SGI Building 
 
MR. LANE: — I wonder if the Attorney General is prepared to report to the Assembly on any investigation he 
has done on a question which I asked last week about an attempt by SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
to sell its building (in its words) to a company controlled by people with extensive criminal backgrounds? What 
are the results of your investigation into the matter? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I may not have precisely in my mind the form of the question 
that the member for Qu’Appelle asked last week. I think the short answer from my department’s information to 
me is that some time ago the Royal Canadian Mounted Police were, in fact, (perhaps “investigating” is not quite 
the right word) aware of certain activities dealing with the principles of the company involved, which is subject to 
some questioning and litigation by the opposition in the government. Essentially that’s where the matter has rested 
or has stayed. 
 
MR. LANE: — I asked you as well if you would advise the Assembly when the RCM Police advised SGI, if they 
did, as to their concerns. Would you advise, as well, on your report on the number of proved wiretaps in the 
province of Saskatchewan, whether or not that particular company was one of those. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, my department report makes no indication that the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police informed people at SGI. I have simply no knowledge of that, and quite frankly, I don’t expect that 
I can get that from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. As the hon. member says, there are even limits to the 
scope of information that an Attorney General should properly request of an RCM Police force, or any force for 
that matter, during the course of investigation or concern. 
 
On the question of the wiretap information, I would like to get further information, although my recollection is 
that the federal statute requirements say that that information is not available — who is being wiretapped. I could 
be in error there. It has been quite some number of years since I was obliged to answer a question of this nature, 
and I’ll have to get more information on that aspect. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 101 — An Act to amend The Personal Property Security Act. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that a bill to amend The Personal Property 
Security Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 102 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (No. 4) 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that a bill to amend The Saskatchewan 



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3019 

Human Rights Code (No. 4) be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

MLA All-Stars Defeat Press Club 
 
MR. BANDA: — Mr. Speaker, a very major sporting event took place last night in Regina. Before I comment on 
that I just want to quote from a note that was sent to the members about a week ago. It said this: 
 

Last year the press gallery club demolished separate government and opposition teams. The scores are just too 
embarrassing to print. The press gallery also dumped an MLA all-star hockey team a few weeks ago. This 
time the press gallery is hoping they’ll meet some opposition on the playing field. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there comes a time of reckoning, and today is a very sad day for members of the press in 
Saskatchewan. If members will note, they are all wearing black armbands. Last night at Rambler Park the press 
club was literally smashed to the ground, Mr. Speaker, by an MLA all-star team. After giving the press a three run 
lead in the game, they were battered to a seven to four defeat. The press club had much difficulty getting that ball 
out of the infield due to the errorless playing of the members and the lightning pitching that took place. The press 
couldn’t hit what they couldn’t see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BANDA: — Lucky Mike, up there, happened to hit a home run which, with some difficulty, he turned into a 
three bagger. That was the most dangerous hit of the game. Unfortunately his colleagues didn’t even bring him 
home and he was left on third base. Even if the members of the press club were humiliated and shocked at the 
performance, with a little bit of discipline they showed good sportsmanship and admitted that they had been 
beaten by a better team. 
 
However, I hear talk around that they are going to protest the game. They have yet to find a reason. They are 
looking at possibly blaming the press umpire or the press score keeper. The only other reason would be that they 
had three practices and they had already played a league game. Unfortunately, they’re still looking at that. I 
understand they have put in a request for a grudge match. I believe the members of the Assembly would accept 
that under the condition that we give them one more year to practise. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Just to join with the member for Redberry, Mr. Speaker. I want to set out some of the 
planning which went into this particular game. The MLA all-star team sat down and worked out some 
considerable strategy. We put all the left wingers in the infield and I understand that the member for Thunder 
Creek was dickering for a good deal on a membership later last night. But in keeping with their philosophical 
leanings, they wanted total control and they had it. They did a terrific job of the infield. 
 
Our offensive strategy was to bring in the big hitters from the right wing, the Tory side of the legislature and, of 
course, it worked. There was some talk a little later in the evening  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3020 

about the umpire perhaps having taken her training from Mr. Speaker. I don’t think that is true because I’ve never 
seen her in the gallery, so if she has taken training, she didn’t get it here. 
 
About halfway through the ball game there was also some talk that perhaps we should ease off a little bit because 
after all we need these guys to get the message out and perhaps they would be feeling a little vindictive or a little 
inferior. So, some of our guys were thinking that wasn’t the way to go. The more we thought about it, the more 
we thought perhaps there was nobody who had more right to feel inferior, so we just went on and waxed them 
anyway. With those few remarks, I would join with the member for Redberry and accept the challenge under any 
terms and conditions which you might lay out because I think we can handle them in any event. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would suspect if there are any other responses we’ll see them in another form. 
 

Congratulations — Nancy Jewitt 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to inform the members of the Assembly of another sporting 
event which brought honor to Saskatchewan. I would like to tell the members that 19-year-old Nancy Jewitt, a 
former student in my constituency, who lives at Webb, Saskatchewan, won the Canadian senior women’s judo 
championship in Lethbridge on the weekend. Nancy now goes on to New York City for the world women’s 
competition and I am sure all members would join with me in congratulating Nancy and wishing her luck in the 
next step in her career. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Review of the Legislative Library 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would like to lay on the Table the report of 
the special committee on the review of the Legislative Library. I want to make a few brief remarks and, at the 
conclusion of them, I would like to move that the report of the special committee on the review of the Legislative 
Library be now concurred in by this House. 
 
By way of background, Mr. Speaker, on May 3, 1979, this Assembly passed a resolution constituting a special 
committee of the legislature to conduct an inquiry into the role of the Legislative Library. I know I speak for the 
members of the committee when I say that the committee wishes to express its sincere thanks to all individuals 
and organizations who made written and oral representations to the committee. The information presented and the 
opinions expressed were of valuable assistance in assessing the present situation and in the preparation of this 
report. 
 
I should inform all hon. members that all research material is on file for future reference in the Legislative 
Assembly office. The committee wishes to express its appreciation to Gordon Barnhart, Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly; Gwenn Ronyk, Deputy Clerk, who acted as secretary to the committee; David Mitchell, Clerk 
Assistant Procedural, who helped out a great deal; Carol Adams, the research assistant to the committee; and the  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3021 

legislative librarian, Christine MacDonald. 
 
I want to particularly thank Carol Adams for her invaluable assistance. Without her the report would not have 
been possible and I think all members of the committee agree with me in that judgment. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — The committee received written briefs from interested individuals and 
organizations. The briefs were presented by the original authors or group spokesmen in Regina during August and 
October of 1980. Each presentation was followed by a discussion and a question period. The committee also 
interviewed a number of selected individuals with a special interest and with special concerns regarding the 
Legislative Library. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Legislative Library is widely acclaimed for its rich and historic collection, for its 
predominant stature among the government and law libraries on the Prairies, and for its traditions, which originate 
with the territorial government. When one possesses a valuable resource, it is sensible to appraise from time to 
time how that resource is being used, maintained and enriched in the service of its trustees, the members of the 
Legislative Assembly. The opportunity to be taken is clear — to establish goals and expectations for the library 
which will support members throughout the 1980s, to renew the interest and commitment of the Assembly in the 
valuable resource available to it, and to set the library itself on a path which can meet those goals and cultivate 
that interest. 
 
The report contains much data, and also the results of our deliberations regarding the current state and condition 
of the Legislative Library. I refer hon. members to the body of the report for further insight into our findings. I 
just might mention that the report contains 28 recommendations dealing with: (1) the role of the Legislative 
Library, (2) functions and services that should be provided, (3) the collection itself, (4) the relationship that should 
exist between the Legislative Library and the Assembly, (5) space requirements and space needs, (6) staffing and 
finance. 
 
I can’t cover all the recommendations here, given their length and breadth. However, I would just like to mention 
a few in general that I consider to be important for the members to consider. 
 
1. We are recommending that the hours of service should be altered so that during session the library will meet the 
hours from Monday to Thursday of 8:30 to 10 p.m. and on Friday of 8:30 to 5. Also, the library will meet the 
regular hours of 8:30 to 5 when the legislature is not in session. 
 
2. Improved information services should be available through the library to members, including the maintenance 
of a depository for all Saskatchewan government publications ratified by this legislature, including systems for 
making known the availability of such publications on a timely and readily accessible basis (and this is a 
modification of current practice), and also the implementation of a computerized on-line information system. 
 
3. The enhancement and rationalization of the collection including increased funds for this purpose. 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3022 

4. The establishment of a branch outside of the Legislative Building located within the new archives building to 
hold information not needed immediately by members. This needs to be done, Mr. Speaker, because of the 
limitations this building places upon the availability of space. 
 
5. The addition of staff positions to meet the requirements for enhanced services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the view of the members of this committee, we have a good library and I am sure all the members 
of this Assembly will agree. However, we have concluded that the measures we recommend can further enhance 
and support this important service. The library and the information it provides is essential if members are to fulfill 
their responsibilities in an increasingly complex world. 
 
May I say in closing that our committee confirmed what we already knew from experience — that we have a 
dedicated and competent staff in our Legislative Library who have, through unstinting effort, made it possible for 
us to enjoy the best service possible within existing resources, space and facilities. In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to thank all members for the contribution they made to the committee and for the work that was put into the 
results of this committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member for Rosthern: 
 

That the report of the special committee on the review of the Legislative Library be now concurred in. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — With pleasure, I second the motion moved by the Minister of Education. The library study, 
which has taken us almost two years, we hope will benefit the members of this House in the future. Let me first 
say that we must give special thanks to the members of the library staff who worked so diligently with the 
constraints they have had over the year. Hopefully, our report will assist them in providing better services to all 
members. 
 
To Carol Adams, who is in the Speaker’s gallery today, our undying thanks for a job well done. Without her 
assistance, I don’t know whether our report would have been done at this time. To the members of the committee, 
who spent many hours of their leisure time away from the House studying the library and the consequences that 
are happening in other areas of the province, our thanks, as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the main concerns of the library are its role and the services it should provide for the 
members; the importance of the special collection, as was mentioned by the minister; and the attempt to extend the 
hours during the session to give better services to all members of the Legislative Assembly, so that when the 
House is not sitting over the supper hour, they will have time to do their research. One of the biggest 
recommendations we will make is for on-line services of information for all the members, and we hope to get 
sufficient funds to make those services available to all members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two years work is contained in this document. We think it will be of lasting benefit to all members, 
and hopefully will make the library much more usable for all the members of the House. Mr. Speaker, it gives me 
great pleasure to see this tabled today  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3023 

and I hope all members will concur in the report. 
 
MR. WHITE: — Mr. Speaker, I, too, would like to say a few words upon the presentation of this report. First, I 
want to thank the members of the House for putting me on the committee. I have always been interested in the 
Legislative Library and the opportunity to serve on this committee was very worth-while. It was an excellent 
experience. 
 
While I have the opportunity, I would like to congratulate everyone associated with the committee. Our technical 
adviser on library services, Mrs. Carol Adams, first of all, provided us with a great deal of information and 
invaluable insights about the library. Without her assistance, I think it is perfectly safe to say that we wouldn’t 
have a report anywhere near the quality of the one just placed before the House. I think it wouldn’t be untrue to 
say, too, that we wouldn’t have any report at all today without her activities. The House would still be waiting. 
 
Our secretaries, Ms. Ronyk and Mr. Mitchell, worked very hard to expedite the business of the committee, 
arranging trips out of the province and doing all the other necessary work. Suggestions offered by your librarian, 
Miss MacDonald, and the various people who appeared before the committee were also very valuable to members 
of the committee. 
 
I would also like to say a few words about fellow MLAs on the committee, Mr. Speaker. I can’t speak too highly 
of their performance throughout. On the basis of my observations, I would say that everyone gave their best and 
were always open-minded. There were arguments on various matters, but people could be persuaded to change 
initial opinions. There was never the slightest hint of party considerations or divisions along party lines, and I 
think that’s excellent. 
 
It was a pleasure to work on the subcommittee in the last few weeks with the hon. member for Rosthern, with our 
adviser, and with the secretary. All efforts, I think, you could say were directed toward getting to the precise 
desires of the committee. On a somewhat lighter side, I think, you could say, it was also very enjoyable to sit for 
some time on a plane with the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley and to talk about a variety of subjects, as 
well as go on what you might call the McArthur tour of the Toronto subway and eating establishments while 
down there. 
 
In closing, I would urge all members of the House to concur in the report. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 
 

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like briefly to move into an area that has been brought up in 
question period a variety of times, that is the intention of the government to interfere with the medium of cable 
television and the removal of beer and wine ads. 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3024 

Mr. Premier, we have gone at this in a variety of ways. Initially, I would like to go at the prime defence which has 
been used by both you and the Attorney General as a justification for removing the beer and wine ads from 
American cable television. As the Premier knows, the vast majority of the products advertised on American 
television is not available in Canada. The exceptions, of course, are some of the California wines — not very 
many of them and, I suppose, the Budweiser beer (even though it is not made in the United States.) But by and 
large the bulk of the products has not been available in Saskatchewan for sale — the exception during the period 
of time since cable television arrived in Saskatchewan has been the wine. 
 
Mr. Premier, if I have interpreted your position correctly, your government takes the attitude that liquor 
advertising encourages consumption. You are in effect saying that these ads must be taken off because just the 
sight of anything that may have alcohol in it may encourage people who do not now consume to start consuming 
or encourage those who do to increase consumption. 
 
Mr. Premier, I would like to draw to your attention the report of the 1979-80 Saskatchewan Alcoholism 
Commission. I would like to draw to your attention the number of rehabilitations. We have some numbers here 
which cover the period since cable television finally arrived in Saskatchewan. I don’t know how meaningful these 
figures are but to briefly summarize them, last year the number of rehabilitations was down 25 per cent. The 
number of people who went through the rehabilitation department was down 25 per cent. Now, that has to mean 
something. Even more important is the annual report of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board. Again, Mr. Premier, on 
page 10 of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board report, the figures are available and these ads were on cable television. 
You can argue all you wish that consumption may go up but unfortunately, the figures don’t bear you out. 
 
Mr. Premier, I suggest to you, that your attitude in this regard is sanctimoniously hypocritical and I think you are 
simply carrying through with some bad legislation. Frankly, if I read between the lines, I feel that you wish you’d 
never heard of that bill a couple of years ago. And probably, if you had a graceful way out, you wish you could 
tear it up. You think you are caught with it, and so you have to proceed. 
 
Mr. Premier, it amazes me that you zero in on these ads, because I find them very innocuous compared to other 
advertising on both American and Canadian television. Maybe it depends on what doesn’t bother you personally. I 
think the most offensive ads on television are the ones that advertise female hygienic products. You’ve seen the 
ads. Some of them literally make you sick. You know the products: the beltless, the double adhesive, etc. I find 
them obscene compared to these innocuous beer and wine ads. Frankly, some of these beer ads are pretty well 
done. They are some of the funniest. In fact, I often wonder how the beer companies think that it helps them in 
their product. If you watch a football game or a basketball game, very often an ad comes on where Rodney 
Dangerfield conducts a meeting of the board. I think it is a pretty funny commercial. I don’t see where it sells very 
much beer for them but as far as corrupting anyone, the corruption escapes me. 
 
And so, Mr. Premier, in light of the numbers that I’m putting forward to you (and these are your own numbers in 
the report of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board), which show very clearly consumption hasn’t gone up, I have to ask 
you how can you consistently hang your hat on this business that if these American ads are there the consumption 
is going to go up? It hasn’t happened in Ontario where much more extensive liquor 



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3025 

advertising is legal. In fact the products are available on the shelf. It hasn’t happened in Alberta or B.C. 
Apparently it hasn’t happened in the United States. 
 
Why is Saskatchewan an island, an oasis, where, if our people are corrupted at the sight of these beer and wine 
ads, they re suddenly going to go out and buy and consume volumes and volumes and volumes? It simply isn’t 
going to happen. Your own numbers (your own liquor board) say it hasn’t happened. Therefore, my question is: 
why do you persist on this ludicrous, nonsensical, grossly hypocritical position as far as cable television is 
concerned? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, the purpose of the current legislation is not primarily to enforce or 
to try to set any standard of aesthetics or good taste and, accordingly, there well may be ads which offend the hon. 
member’s sense of aesthetics or good taste more than the liquor ads. That, in our judgment, is not relevant. The 
purpose is not to enforce any standard of morality and, therefore, there may be other TV presentations which, in 
his judgment, lack a sense of morality much more than any liquor advertising does. The purpose is to attempt to 
promote standards of public health and public safety. Those are the reasons. 
 
People may or may not hold the view that the consumption of alcoholic beverages is moral or immoral. That is not 
a point of view which our government is attempting to promulgate. What we are trying to say is that the 
consumption of alcoholic beverages is generally a danger to health and to public safety. I’m not suggesting that 
any consumption is a danger. I am suggesting that there is a high correlation between the level of consumption of 
alcoholic beverages and the level of health-related problems due to that consumption, or the level of road traffic 
and other safety problems due to that consumption. That is a view that has been held by our government, and 
previous governments of Saskatchewan, going back a good number of decades. We have prohibited the 
advertising of alcoholic beverages on radio and television. 
 
I suppose I cannot say what motivated the people to make that change in the law many decades ago, but I do say 
that it is retained, and has been retained in the last several decades, primarily because people were concerned 
about the dangers to health and safety by the use of alcoholic beverages. We believe that it’s a good idea to limit, 
indeed prohibit, this advertising of beer and wine on regular radio and television, and we believe that if we are to 
be consistent, we ought to carry the same restrictions to cable television. 
 
It is argued that the consumption of alcohol has not gone up, and I think that is true in absolute terms, and I’m 
glad of that. It has been argued that the number of people who are presenting themselves for rehabilitation because 
of acute alcoholism is not increasing, and I’m glad to hear that. 
 
I don’t think anyone disputes the point that there is advertising of beverage alcohol in Ontario, Alberta, and 
British Columbia, as mentioned by the hon. member, and the consumption of alcoholic beverages per capita is 
higher in Ontario, Alberta, British Columbia, and Manitoba than it is in Saskatchewan. You mentioned the United 
States. I do not have the figures for all of the states, but as a general proposition the consumption of alcoholic 
beverages per capita is higher in virtually every state than it is in Saskatchewan. 
 
I am not attributing this primarily to the fact that we don’t have advertising on radio and  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3026 

television, but I think it makes its contribution. Generally speaking, rural societies consume less alcohol per capita 
than do urban societies, and we are a rural society. But I think the fact that we haven’t advertised alcohol on 
regular radio and television has been a positive contributing factor, a positive fact which we would like to 
continue on cable television. 
 
Some of the problems surrounding advertising of liquor on cable television are illustrated by the fact that the 
Budweiser brand, which is widely advertised in the United States and is on cable television, is now sold here. One 
might well expect that if the policy of handling advertising on cable television but not on regular radio and 
television continued, we would see people here bottling the Miller brand, or the Michelob brand, or the Pabst 
brand, or the Schlitz brand or some other brand — Olympia or any other widely selling brand in the United States. 
 
I think the view that the dangers to health and safety increase with the level of alcoholic consumption is widely 
accepted and was accepted by the legislative committee on liquor legislation and by this legislature, five or six 
years ago. I believe the view that advertising over a lengthy period of time adds to consumption is widely 
accepted. There can be no other purpose for the advertising unless it’s brand preference. I suggest that it is 
unlikely that liquor companies would advertise extensively over long periods of time if the purpose was not to 
increase sales. 
 
Accordingly, I am of the view that the case, while not airtight, has been reasonably well established. If we are to 
decrease the consumption of alcoholic beverage and thereby decrease the abuses flowing from overconsumption, 
we should attempt to limit advertising. We have done that on radio and television for 30 years or 40 years. We are 
continuing the same logic with respect to cable television. To us it makes sense. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Listening to the Premier outline his defence, I can’t help but think of the benevolent big 
brother government looking over our shoulders, knowing what is best for us, and knowing that it really knows 
what’s best. Whether the individual himself is aware of it, certainly big brother government is. Mr. Premier, any 
liquor company will tell you that advertising merely changes its share of the market. It doesn’t increase the 
consumption. It changes its percentage of the market, and nothing more. Labatt’s, Molsons, anybody will tell you 
that. 
 
Here is where the sanctimonious hypocrisy fits into this. The Premier talks about limiting consumption; he talks 
about the big brother attitude of, “We, the government know what is best for your health even though you, the 
individual, may not.” But the Premier has the key on the liquor store doors. You are the ones who streamline the 
liquor stores so there are no line-ups. You are the ones who extend the hours. You own the stores. If you want to 
limit consumption, you have the power to do so. Close the stores. Conversely, if you don’t want to completely 
shut it off, if you believe in what you just outlined, you need only have the stores open a couple of days a week. I 
think they are now open six days a week. I think even Moose Jaw has progressed to that. 
 
Consequently, after the member for Moose Jaw North failed repeatedly to get it to six days, I came in and again 
did your constituency work for you. That is exactly what happened. It has happened so many times. But, I will 
return to the subject. The key on the liquor stores is strictly in your hands. If you wish to limit consumption (if 
that is the goal of your government) and if you know what is best for the individual better than the individual 
knows himself, then why don’t you take action via the Saskatchewan Liquor Board? 



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3027 

What concerns me about the intrusion into cable television is the precedent it is setting. I think the CRTC in one 
of its very few wise moves decreed that signals shall come in uninterrupted. In doing that it very effectively 
eliminated some control by either the federal or provincial governments. 
 
Mr. Premier, I am concerned that the precedent of eliminating what is now simply a beer and a wine commercial 
may ultimately be something else. I am concerned about the precedent that is set and to what it is going to lead, 
because once you do this, what happens down the road? For the life of me, I cannot think of a more useless 
expenditure of money than a capitalization of $200,000 and $100,000 a year operating costs which, with inflation, 
will be $110,000 next year; then it’s $150,000 within a couple of years and you know the way bureaucracy goes. 
Pretty soon we’re going to have a Crown corporation in charge of deleting beer and wine commercials. That’s 
been the history. I cannot think of a more useless purpose for spending money than for the deletion of those 
commercials. 
 
Please spare me the Attorney General’s argument. “I’m sorry the hon. member isn’t in favor of liquor 
rehabilitation. I’m sorry that the hon. member is in favor of unlimited consumption of alcohol, etc. etc.” Please 
spare me that one. 
 
Mr. Premier, I repeat again, I believe your position is sanctimonious hypocrisy and a thorough waste of money — 
a complete waste of money — at the time we’re being bilked by SGI and level 4 rates are going up. My goodness, 
there must be a thousand places where you could spend the $300,000 this year, every one of them much more 
productive than what you’re proposing in this business. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A few comments. First, while it may be the view of some that the purpose of 
advertising alcoholic beverages or most other products is simply to get people to switch from one brand to 
another, that is certainly not my view of most of the liquor ads I see or most of the other ads I see. With some of 
the soft drink ads I suspect that there is a suggestion that one should switch. Almost all of them, particularly liquor 
ones, tend to be what I call lifestyle ads, which suggest that the consumption of alcoholic beverages adds 
generally to the joy and pleasantness of life. It wouldn’t matter, in the impact of that ad, whether one were 
drinking Carling’s or Molson’s or Labatt’s. I invite anyone to look at the ads which one sees about beer at the 
picnics and these sorts of things. See if they aren’t essentially lifestyle ads; they are not designed to get you to 
drink Labatt’s as opposed to Molson’s, but rather to get you to believe that it is pleasant to have beer at a picnic. It 
may or may not be. I am just saying that’s the purpose of the ad. It’s designed to convince one of that. 
 
Secondly, the member is obviously concerned about the precedent and he asks what is going to happen next. I 
obviously can’t tell him what’s going to happen next. I can say it’s developing slowly, because we have had the 
prohibitions of these ads on regular radio and television for 30 or 40 years and nothing else has happened. 
Presumably we have another 30 or 40 years if we prohibit it on cable television before something else happens. 
 
Whatever comes from the prohibition of liquor ads on the electronic media, whatever else it leads to, is coming 
very slowly. We have had 30 or 35 years of it and nothing else has come yet, nor do I think there is anything 
going to come, whether it’s on regular radio and television or on cable. 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3028 

I think we have a difference of view with the hon. member on some things like the consumption of alcohol and 
perhaps other particular lifestyles we may have. We believe, as a government, they are in general terms 
undesirable and it would be better if people didn’t do it. On the other hand, we do not think that it is the role of 
government to prohibit the consumption of alcoholic beverages. It did not prove, in the long run, publicly 
acceptable in the United States and would not prove acceptable in Canada today. I’m not saying it would be a 
good idea if it were publicly acceptable but I am saying that a government, which believes that a particular activity 
by the public has important and unfortunate health and safety consequences, but believes that it is not reasonable 
or proper to prohibit it, is left with the device of attempting to persuade people not to consume alcohol and to 
prohibit people from persuading them to consume alcohol. 
 
On the one hand, we have a prohibition against ads which attempt to persuade people to consume alcohol, as we 
believe, and on the other hand, we have something like an Aware program which tries to persuade people not to 
drink alcohol or to be moderate in their consumption of it. We think that is a sensible approach. I’m sure that 
overeating has important unfortunate health consequences but we’re not likely to attempt to prohibit people from 
overeating; we do, however, try to persuade them not to overeat, through the Feelin’ Good program. Similarly, we 
don’t say that people must exercise; we do attempt to persuade them to exercise with programs like Feelin’ Good 
at the provincial level, and participation at the federal level. 
 
It is a governmental method, used by governments other than our own, as well as our own to attempt to dissuade 
people from conduct which appears undesirable from a health and safety point of view, or to persuade them to 
adopt conduct which is desirable from a health and safety point of view. It seems to us reasonable and plausible. It 
seems to us not to be particularly hypocritical or sanctimonious, and it is directed at improving the health and 
safety of the public, without imposing the heavy hand of government by saying, “Thou must.” 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, as usual the Premier makes something sound plausible which isn’t even remotely 
sensible. I still hold the belief that you put through a bill a couple of years ago that you wish you had never seen 
nor conceived, and you’re caught with it. But if there were a graceful way out of it without losing face, I believe 
you would forget it. But again, we’re into something like arguing religion and, obviously, we’re not going to 
change each other’s mind. 
 
If I may move to another area associated with it, perhaps the Premier could briefly inform us, while we’re on the 
morality kick of keeping people from overindulging, how he can justify a medium known as Teletheatre. It makes 
a practice, particularly when it requires a boost in sales or hookups, of bringing in what can be termed in some 
quarters as blue movies, which in most other parts of North America are shown only after 11:30 p.m. or in the 
early morning hours. How can the Premier justify having a medium (and what is now, for practical purposes, a 
government medium) show blue movies at prime time? 
 
Would the government have us believe that the beer and the wine ads are going to corrupt us into excess 
consumption of alcohol, and yet have us believe that the blue movies of Teletheatre which is 50 per cent owned 
by this government and incidentally isn’t a very good medium . . . If there is any sort of display of lifestyle, or a 
putting forward of a way to live (using the Premier’s terminology) by the beer ads, what is being put forward in 
some of these uncut blue movies? And what is the difference? How can 



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3029 

you justify it in a medium which is 50 per cent owned and controlled by your government, and in which the 
people making the selections are totally controlled by your government, even beyond the official censor? You can 
suggest that this is not a lifestyle. You may argue that these programs are published well in advance. You don’t 
have to watch if you don’t want. True, you don’t have to watch the beer ads either. They are going to be on but if 
you don’t want to watch them, you don’t watch them. 
 
The programs are published in advance and you can argue that you should keep your children away from the 
television set. That is not a realistic proposition. You can say it’s expensive. Well, it’s about the same price as 
cable. In fact, with the latest price hike in cable, it’s about equivalent. I think it’s about $9.50 to $10 and just as 
readily available. Again, these movies are depicting a lifestyle, and it would appear that your government must 
approve of some of the things which are portrayed in these movies. How can you equate these as being right? If 
lifestyle is what you’re going to hang your hat on, what’s the difference between what these blue moves are 
depicting and the innocuousness of some of these beer and wine commercials? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m sorry, Mr. Chairman, that I did not make myself clear. I am not objecting 
particularly to the lifestyle portrayed in the liquor ads. I am objecting to any impact they may have on increasing 
the consumption of alcoholic beverages. I am refuting the argument put forward by the hon. member that all the 
liquor ads are brand preference ads. They are not the same liquor ads I am watching. The liquor ads I am watching 
would be equally valid as advertising if you change the label on the bottle. They’re not ones that say, “Drink Pepsi 
and don’t drink Coke”; they are not that at all. They are saying, “Beer is good,” and that is an equally good 
message whether it’s Molson’s or Labatt’s. I’m not a connoisseur of these ads because I only see them, by and 
large, when I am outside the province. I see them in my hotel room and I’m spending a lot of time outside the 
province these days. 
 
I want particularly to hone in on the point that the hon. member makes. He believes that our objection to the 
consumption of alcoholic beverages is something dealing with our belief that this will corrupt somebody. I tried to 
make clear that our feeling was that it was dangerous to health and safety. That is a curious use of the word 
“corruption.” There are a great number of things that are dangerous to health and safety which don’t have any 
moral stigma attached to them at all. 
 
I don’t want particularly to press the alcoholic consumption argument on the basis of morality. It may or may not 
be moral but the job of the provincial government is not primarily to instruct people in morality, but rather to 
attempt to establish circumstances which promote health and safety. That is certainly true. I want to point out what 
is obvious to us all. It is a primary function of a provincial government to promote the health of its citizens. It is a 
primary function of a provincial government to promote the safety of its citizens on the highway or wherever they 
may be at risk, but not a primary function — maybe a secondary function but certainly not a primary function — 
of a provincial government to offer views to its populace on what is moral or immoral entertainment. There are 
other institutions in society which do that. There are other laws (primarily those of the federal government dealing 
with obscenity) which regulate that. We do some of it with respect to theatres, and I concede that out of hand, so 
we are not totally out of the picture. But it is not thought, generally, to be a primary function of government to 
instruct its citizens in morality in that sense of the word. We hope our operations do not detract from that. There 
are many views on what is moral and they don’t call for judgment by a provincial government in a definitive 
sense. 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3030 

With respect to whether or not Teletheatre offers things which are aesthetically upsetting to hon. members, I can 
only say, and repeat what others have repeated in the House, that the programming is selected by the operator and 
not by the Government of Saskatchewan or any representative thereof, and that the audience is a very small one 
— people who select this service. It’s not in any sense a service offered in all homes, or most homes. It is clearly a 
discretionary service which is confined to a very small number of people in relative terms compared with all 
television watchers. By definition, I believe, you cannot get Teletheatre unless you are a cable subscriber. The 
member for Thunder Creek was pointing out that the cable subscribers (as a group) are a very small number of the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it is also possible for me to get a little lock-on device so that one can prevent any particular channel from 
being used. If one doesn’t like channel whatever the number is, the Teletheatre channel, to be available to one’s 
children, one gets a relatively simple and inexpensive lock-on device. I speak not from any particular personal 
knowledge, as I have already pointed out. 
 
For all of those reasons it’s not a service which is available to many people and is able to be readily restricted 
from making it available to the general public and particularly to the young people. To suggest that it represents a 
hypocritical view, to have these available is a view which I simply don’t share. I’m not defending the aesthetics of 
those particular presentations. I’m just suggesting that they don’t fall in any sense in the same category as general 
presentations on regular radio, regular television and cable television, which, in our judgment, are likely to lead to 
circumstances which have a potential danger to health and safety. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Premier, I am going to leave this area after this comment. I shall repeat again the term 
“sanctimonious hypocrisy,” because if you weren’t being totally hypocritical about it you would cut off Estevan 
and Weyburn. They are going to go untouched. Apparently, if we follow your line of thinking, the people in 
Estevan and Weyburn are certainly of much stronger character than their counterparts in the rest of the province. 
In your government’s infinite wisdom, you are not going to bother them. And the people who live along the 
Alberta border, who receive the Alberta signal obviously must be of stronger character because they are not going 
to be bothered. 
 
If you are serious in what you outlined in your belief about removing advertising and what it can potentially do, 
you would tell Maclean’s magazine, “Don’t send your magazine into this province with your beer and liquor 
advertising.” They advertise hard stuff. You would tell Time magazine, “Don’t send your magazine in here, send a 
blank page, but I don’t want it in with that liquor advertising.” The Toronto Globe and Mail is widely read in 
Saskatchewan. I don’t know what its circulation is, but it’s very high. It has liquor advertising in it. Most of the 
out-of-province papers do have liquor advertising as do all of the Canadian magazines. 
 
Do you know what you’re really doing, Mr. Premier? I say, categorically, that the numbers in your publications 
and annual reports clearly show that, since the advent of cable, consumption has not gone up. You say that there’s 
no comparison. There is. We’ve had cable for two years. We have a couple of reports in front of us which say that 
it has not affected consumption. 
 
You know, you can’t make Saskatchewan into a little island in the middle of a great big sea. Unless you’re going 
to literally close our borders to the east, the west and the  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3031 

south, we are going to continue to receive bits and pieces of corruption from other places. You cannot stop it. 
 
You know what you’re doing? You’re crippling the owner of that little newspaper — that little weekly paper out 
in the country — because he can’t get liquor advertising. You’re hurting him because there’s a good ready source 
of advertising. (I realize that I’m moving into a different issue so I’m not going to spend a great deal of time on 
this.) His competitors — the people who compete with him from afar — have the benefit of that advertising. 
You’re depriving him. You can argue, “Okay, we’re fixing that up. We’ve spent money on the Aware program.” I 
think it’s fair to say that Aware hasn’t really stopped too many people from drinking. The intention of Aware was 
primarily to replace lost revenue or revenue that the Saskatchewan media doesn’t get from alcohol advertising. 
Instead, you have a budget for Aware to replace it. But, as far as decreasing consumption, I don’t think the 
Minister of Health is going to jump up and defend it and say, “Oh heavens, no, it has decreased consumption.” 
 
Incidentally, while we’re talking about the Minister of Health, he’s a great second baseman. I recommend him for 
a senior cabinet portfolio there. He’s also the best hitter. I think when the free agent market comes up, he’s going 
to be in heavy demand. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Premier, I suggest to you that you cannot make an island. Our people are going to see this 
advertising even if it is dangerous to their health and safety. They’re going to see it somehow. I think, in many 
respects, you’re hurting our local media by depriving them of revenue which their counterparts in other parts of 
Canada take for granted. Your Aware program has hardly replaced that revenue. Perhaps all you’re doing is 
accelerating the decline of many of our own Saskatchewan-controlled media into oblivion; I refer particularly to 
the weeklies. Let’s face it, they don’t have an abundance of advertising revenue. Sure, they get a fair amount of 
government advertising. They’re pretty heavily dependent on that. You are removing a real source of revenue 
from them. 
 
I repeat that two years of cable experience and your own figures dispute your assertion that consumption goes up 
with advertising. I again refer you to your own report. With that, I intend to leave the area. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’ll make a very quick reply. The member makes a point with respect to the printed 
medium. He knows that we can’t tell Maclean’s not to send its magazines here. We have no power to do that. 
Even if it were wise to do so, we couldn’t do it. We don’t run the post office. Perhaps we should, but we don’t. 
We obviously can’t in any way, stop (nor should we be able to) the dissemination of printed material in the 
province. We wouldn’t wish that. 
 
The member is right in saying that it is a difficult problem for the weekly newspapers, and that’s certainly one of 
the aspects of it which is regrettable. We do offer Aware and Feeling Good advertising and the like, but we are not 
suggesting that it necessarily replaces other advertising. We just attempt to deal with it as fairly as we can. 
 
With respect to making Saskatchewan an island, I don’t know whether we can create an island, as the hon. 
member says. I note with respect to the age of consumption of alcoholic beverages though it’s not particularly 
relevant; we moved from 18 to 19, and we were then an island. I note that Manitoba is moving theirs up to 19 and 
the island gets bigger. Who knows, with respect to liquor advertising, the island may increase in size. I’m not in 
any way suggesting these are comparable, but we started  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3032 

with an island with respect to hospitalization and it got bigger. We started with an island with respect to medicare 
and it got bigger. We started with an island with The Automobile Accident Insurance Act, and it’s somewhat 
bigger. Who knows, our particular views on how society ought to be regulated or not regulated (as the case may 
be) may find favor elsewhere. Although I must say that that particular aspect of it is not gaining recruits rapidly. 
But we still think it’s a good policy based upon health and safety. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Premier, I don’t know if I want to continue the discussion of island building or maybe 
look at removing some of the mountains. There are a few concerns that I have and I’d like to discuss them with 
you. Some of these I’ve attempted to discuss with your ministers but have not found satisfactory answers; 
therefore, I feel it would only be fit to speak to you, as head of the Government of Saskatchewan, regarding these. 
 
One of the things that certainly comes to mind is the problem of elective surgery. Mr. Premier, I think you well 
know, and I’ve heard cases raised in this legislature, of people — and I could take you out and show you people, 
as I’m sure any member in this House could — who need hip operations. That’s one of the things that’s classified 
as elective surgery. These people are having to wait six months approximately for a hospital bed. Many of these 
people are older people. They are being restricted in part of the good life just because they are in dire pain trying 
to move around. I wonder if there is any way that we could improve the situation that there is in this great backlog 
(which I’m sure the Minister of Health would admit there is) of people in Saskatchewan who are waiting for 
elective surgery. Is there anything that you would plan to do, as the Premier of this province, to improve this very 
critical situation? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, this is by no means a new problem. This stems really from the 
desire of a great number of people to get particular kinds of surgery which can only be delivered in base hospitals. 
In some cases I am advised it’s not effectively a limitation on the number of hospital beds, but rather the number 
of surgical cases which an individual doctor can take. I think it would be reasonable for me to suggest to patients, 
if they are lined up for surgery (and orthopedics is the big area; this is the one where we hear it all the time), that 
they ask the surgeon or whoever is referring them to the surgeon, how many patients are in front of him. Because 
if that particular surgeon has 50 operations lined up in front of that patient then it doesn’t much matter how many 
beds there are, there is going to be a long wait. There have been cases of that, that at least have been suggested to 
me, where individual surgeons have had large case loads, probably because the number of orthopedic surgeons 
who specialize in hip replacements is relatively small. I don’t know whether in hospitals in Saskatoon and 
possibly in Regina the beds can be rearranged so that beds which might be available for other types of surgery are 
made available for orthopedic surgery. I must say that this is an area which is not within my particular sphere of 
expertise. 
 
It is partly a function of the number of beds, because I suppose if you had another 1,000 beds there might be more 
beds for orthopedic patients. Since it arises primarily with respect to one or two specialities, I cannot help but feel 
that it is not only the number of hospital beds but also the way the beds are distributed and the way the surgical 
procedures are arranged. I don’t know the answer to that, but I don’t think it is in any way wholly within the 
power of the government to solve it. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Premier, judging from your remarks and from my investigation into this, I think part of 
the problem is that some of the beds are closed down during parts of  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3033 

the year, mainly because of budgetary restraints on hospitals. If you check at the University Hospital you will find 
some of the operating rooms are not functioning. 
 
I would think that a government which pats itself on the back in providing top-notch hospital care must shoulder 
some of the responsibility and look at this situation. You say that it could be the specialist. If that is the case, 
maybe you need more specialists in this situation. People are having to wait six weeks or six or eight months to 
have a hip replaced, and that’s only one example. There are many other things classified as elective surgery. If 
there is a problem in the delivery of health services in this province it is in dealing with this whole topic of 
elective surgery. I think you, as Premier, should take a look at this or instruct your Minister of Health to take a 
look at this situation of beds and operating rooms that are closed down during the summer months. If you don’t 
have enough specialists, if 100 or 200 patients are lined up, that would tell me if we are really delivering to the 
people or that we should attract other specialists. I wonder why they are not coming here? 
 
I think, Mr. Premier, to dodge the question by saying that it could be that we need more specialists, or that we may 
need 1,000 more beds . . . I don’t think we need more beds. I think we need to utilize the facilities that we have 
here in Saskatchewan on a year-round basis. There is the crux of the problem. 
 
I would like to move to another area in the field of health. When I spoke on the budget, I congratulated you on the 
Alvin Buckwold Centre in Saskatoon as being a very valuable centre for diagnosing the capabilities of people 
considered to be mentally retarded. I believe there needs to be an expansion in this. Since my speech, I have found 
out that maybe things weren’t quite as rosy as I had thought. The Minister of Health will remember about two or 
three years ago, I questioned him for an increase of $50,000 in the budget for the Alvin Buckwold Centre, which 
he complied with. It was gratefully received. However, more recently, I know of a situation where a parent wanted 
a total assessment on a retarded child. They applied to the Alvin Buckwold Centre . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I hesitate to interrupt the hon. member, but I think we are getting into a situation 
similar to yesterday, that we had with the member for Arm River, and members will recall that at that time the 
Premier had raised a point of order, and I ruled that the Premier and all ministers should be expected to answer 
questions for which they have direct responsibility. I referred members to a ruling of the committee Chairman on 
March 20, 1978, which I will just read again. 
 
During consideration of the main estimate of the Department of Telephones, a point of order was raised, that 
questions regarding cable television should not be asked under the vote of the Department of Telephones. The 
chairman ruled that questions on this topic should more properly be asked under the subvote of the 
communications secretariat, (etc.). 
 
These questions, I think, could be more properly asked of the Minister of Health, so I would ask the member to try 
to come back into order, and to deal with the estimates of the Executive Council and those things for which the 
Premier more or less has direct responsibility. 
 
If they are general kinds of questions, I think the Premier has always tried to answer them in the past. But, for 
detailed questions, I think it is only reasonable to expect that officials would have to be here to answer them. 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3034 

MR. TAYLOR: — In all fairness, Mr. Chairman, I wasn’t leading up to a question. I was laying out a scenario — 
a situation which I was intending to relate to another situation. You assumed that I was going to ask a detailed 
question, which I don’t think is fair on your part. 
 
Secondly, the Premier is the head of the Government of Saskatchewan, and if you tell me in this House that I can’t 
ask him general questions, then I wonder what the purpose of this whole exercise is. Now, I’m not going to grill 
him on specifics of what is happening in hospital A or hospital B, but . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! Let’s not argue with the Chairman over the ruling. I have made my ruling. 
Let’s go back to the questions. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I will go back into this, but I would ask you not to guess at what I’m going to do. If I’m out of 
line in asking a specific question, fine, I’ll accept your ruling. But until that time, let’s just keep on. Is that fine? 
 
I think the Premier is willing to answer the question. Mr. Premier, I was on the Alvin Buckwold Centre and I was 
laying out a scenario here, saying that I knew of a case in which people had applied for a total assessment, waited 
two weeks for an answer, and were told that they couldn’t get an assessment until the middle of July. In checking 
I was told that there is such a backlog in that situation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You make fun of it, in the 
International Year of the Child — that’s just about your stage of action, my friend, the member for Yorkton. I 
phoned the Alvin Buckwold Centre (which I certainly admire) and was told the backlog is such that they need 
another doctor. 
 
These are some of the scenarios that I want to draw to your attention. But getting back to the situation of the 
elective surgery, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Premier, what concerns me is that these people (and I say many of them 
are senior citizens) have to wait for six or eight months in this province to have elective surgery done (if it be a 
hip operation) when on the other hand in this province one can go into a hospital on very short notice and have an 
abortion. How do you square that with serving the medical needs of the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — All I can say is that if the hon. member knows that orthopedic operations are 
readily available, or more rapidly available in other provinces, he should tell us this. It is not known to me. I don’t 
think it has anything to do with the availability of hospital space. There is nothing mysterious about it. Orthopedic 
surgeons are in short supply everywhere. The hip operation, which was very rare 10 to 15 years ago, has become a 
very common operation. The number of people who can perform that operation is relatively low, because there 
was simply not the same need for orthopedic surgeons when some of the operations which are common today 
were very uncommon, even as recently as 10 years ago. 
 
I am not unfamiliar with this. My mother has had not one, not two, but three hip replacements. I remember which 
one was done in Florida, which was done in Chicago, which was done in Toronto and the sequence and frequency 
or lack of frequency. I think that it’s not fair or just to lay those waiting lists at the door of the hospitals. It may 
well be that we should be able to get more orthopedic surgeons, but they are short everywhere. I think the waiting 
lists are no longer in Saskatchewan than they are elsewhere. This would indicate that if we are failing in attracting 
orthopedic surgeons, so are a lot of other people. 



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3035 

I wish I could offer a quick solution to that problem but I don’t have one. I think there are many other procedures 
— appendectomies, herniotomies and abortions — that many surgeons can perform and therefore there’s no 
particular waiting period. However, when you get something which involves a relatively scare speciality — 
orthopedics is one, certain types of cancer surgery are another — you tend to have waiting periods. I wish it were 
not true, but I can offer no quick solution to that. I do not feel that it has much to do with beds closing down in the 
summer, because I think the hon. member will find that with beds closing down in the summer or not closing 
down in the summer, there are no particular long waiting lists for the appendectomies or the herniotomies, but 
there are waiting lists for the orthopedic operations. That tells me that it has nothing much to do with hospital 
beds, not even anything to do with surgical beds and not much to do with the availability of operating rooms, but 
concerns the availability of skilled surgeons. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Premier, I would like to discuss with you the concern of the abortions that are performed 
in this province and funded by public funds — the MCIC (medical care insurance commission). I think the 
Minister of Health pointed out there were 1,608 of them in the last year under review. There were 8,008 D and Cs 
— of course, not all are abortions, but some may be performed in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would just like to read a portion of a comment regarding abortion and see what the position of the government 
opposite is. This comes from a man much more versed on the situation than I am, a Dr. Edward Palmer of New 
Jersey. He points out this: 
 

The crunch issue in the matter of abortion is this, is the unborn child the image of God or not? Is he a human 
with an eternal destiny or is he a mere glob, a bit of tissue? Is he an individual distinct from his mother or is 
he a part of the mother like an appendix, a kidney or a tumor? Is he a human being with a potential or is he a 
potential human being? 

 
What is the view of the government opposite in regard to a statement on the crunch of the abortion? Do you see 
the fetus as an extension of the mother or as an unborn human with a human potential? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, that is a theological question and is not one on which the Government 
of Saskatchewan is called upon to have a view. The Government of Saskatchewan does not have a view on a great 
number of theological questions, including that one. It may be also a physiological question, but whatever it is, we 
are here to administer laws and not to give opinions on theological, philosophical questions. I may have personal 
views, but speaking for our government, we do not have a view on that theological question. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — At some time I would like to discuss with you in private your own personal view. I know here 
in the estimates I can’t press you on what your personal view is, but I will tell you what mine is, very plainly. It 
goes on to say here: 
 

Each stage of development from fertilization to old age is merely maturing of what is entirely there at the start. 
Birth only changes a baby’s dining habits, 
 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3036 

its airways and its charms. 
 
I think that viewpoint is held by many people in this province. Look at what is going on in the courts of the United 
States today, where they are looking at repealing some of the laws that affect abortion. I wonder if the government 
opposite would take a stand and be willing to take a stand on this very serious moral problem. I tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, it is growing in the United States, as you well know, and it will grow in Saskatchewan. Perhaps you may 
be lucky not to be in government when that decision has to be made. If the government opposite continues in 
power, mark my words, you will not be able to stand up in the legislature of this province and say that it is a 
theological or a philosophical question upon which the government has no opinion. 
 
So I would ask you, Mr. Premier, is there any intention of the government to follow the lead of many of the states 
in the United States, which are showing some backbone, some morality, some concern about the sanctity of 
human life and are coming to grips with a most difficult problem? Does the government opposite have that kind of 
moral courage? Do you have that kind of concern for individuals? Or are you going to continue to waffle on the 
issue, as you have this afternoon, by passing it off as a theological and philosophical question upon which we 
have no position? Is this what the people of Saskatchewan can continue to expect from an NDP government if you 
should have the good graces to stay in power? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, the position of our government is the position of every provincial 
government in Canada. The proper position of every provincial government in Canada is that the Criminal Code 
defines what is an abortion and when an abortion is legal and when it is illegal. It very properly, I believe, 
provides that the judgment will be made by three physicians on a hospital committee. 
 
In so far as I am aware, no abortions have been performed in Saskatchewan hospitals which have not been in 
accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Code passed by our parliament, for good or ill, and approved in 
each case by three physicians giving their best professional judgment. Whether or not their judgments are right or 
whether or not the law is right are clearly highly debatable questions. 
 
Whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan should respect the Criminal Code of Canada is not a debatable 
question. Whether the Government of Saskatchewan should attempt to substitute its judgment for the judgment of 
three physicians on a particular patient is not debatable. In neither case should the Government of Saskatchewan 
attempt to substitute its view — in the one case for the Criminal Code, in the other case for the three physicians 
who make their professional judgment. 
 
The hon. member opposite really is launching an attack on expressing his objection to the provisions of the 
Criminal Code. He is, in every sense, free to express his objections to the provisions of the Criminal Code, but I 
do not think that he can call upon the Government of Saskatchewan to act as if the Criminal Code made 
something illegal which it very clearly makes legal. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Premier, you may interpret it that I am questioning the Criminal Code. I’m attempting to 
express the views of a lot of people in this province to the man who is the head of the government of this 
province. He is a man who perhaps is in a position to use his influence (and I might say an influence which I think 
is considerable  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3037 

in the Dominion of Canada) to bring about what I think would be an improvement in our lifestyle, and to do a 
moral act. It is being done in other countries and sometime in the future, someone is going to have to come to 
grips with this. 
 
I would just like to read one more quote and then I would leave this topic. This is to show you that many good 
people are attempting to define the whole question of life and are willing to take a stand. There was a conference 
on abortion held in Washington, D.C., and I quote from it in my concluding remarks. This was a conference made 
up of a cross section of leading scientists and concerned individuals, representing every race, religion, culture, and 
geographic background in America. I quote: 
 

The majority of our group could find no point in time between the union of sperm and egg or, at least, the 
blastocyst stage and the birth of the infant, at which point we could say that this was not a human life. The 
blastocyst stage occurs approximately one week after fertilization and would account for twinning. The 
changes occurring between implantation, the six-week embryo, the six-month fetus, a one-week-old child or a 
mature child are merely stages of development and maturation. 

 
I believe, Mr. Premier, that many people in Canada, in the world and in the province of Saskatchewan, 
whole-heartedly believe that and are waiting and wanting legislators to come to grips with this issue. At this point, 
I will move from the topic, but I hope you have taken my word seriously, because I think it is certainly a serious 
concern with many people in this province. 
 
I would like to turn to the comments of your right-hand man, the Attorney General, about the position of God in 
the constitution. The other day in question period (I don’t know whether you were present or not) my colleague 
for Qu’Appelle or my colleague for Kindersley questioned the Attorney General about a statement of his in a law 
magazine. I am sure you are familiar with the magazine. The Attorney General was quoted as saying that it was a 
difficult problem to deal with God in the constitution. 
 
When questioned in this House, I think his reasoning (I should use the words of the Minister of Labor, his 
convoluted reasoning) was that although morally he rather supported it, legalistically it was very difficult. Mr. 
Premier, my question to you is where in the name of God are we going in this society, if the lawyers are so 
bungling up things that it makes it difficult in a Christian land to adhere to the God of the Christian people within 
the constitution? 
 
You’re a lawyer yourself. I was shocked when I heard the Attorney General come out with that kind of reasoning. 
To say that because legalistically (some type of lawyer talk from the Attorney General) it would be easier for the 
lawyers to legally handle the constitution, “Let’s take God out of it.” Mr. Premier, can you explain that kind of 
reasoning to me? Because it escapes me entirely. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The difficulty, Mr. Chairman, is in the assumption the hon. member makes that this 
is a Christian land. This is an assumption I am prepared to make, if you are taking about the professed religion of 
the majority of people. If you are asking me to make that assumption after this bill of rights is in place, which 
provides for freedom of religion, freedom for Islamic people, for atheists, or anyone else . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I guess there’s no point in making the argument. But I am saying we have opposed the bill of 
rights. We have opposed it because it has these sweeping generalizations for which nobody knows the meaning. 
One of them is  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3038 

freedom of religion. 
 
Obviously, I am in favor of freedom of religion. I am a little disturbed at the proposition which can flow from that 
— that freedom means the state cannot give preference to any one religion. Lots of people say that is what is 
meant by freedom of religion, therefore it’s not up to the state to say that Sunday ought to be a special day. You 
can’t believe that if you believe in freedom of religion. This is how argument goes. I don’t know whether that is a 
good argument. We’ve seen the same argument operate in the United States that you can’t have prayers in schools 
if you believe in freedom of religion. You tell the Supreme Court of the United States that is nonsense then. They 
have decided that freedom of religion means the state cannot prefer one religion to another and they can’t prefer 
atheism to another. 
 
The problem is what are we doing if we put in the bill of rights something about God, something about freedom of 
religion (which presumably means freedom not to have a religion). What are the legal consequences of these 
conundrums? We believe that the charter of rights ought not to be spelled out in stone. I have no objection to a 
charter of rights — just not to have it in the constitution so when you run into one of these unusual interpretations 
(like no prayer in schools) that it cannot be changed. I think that the point the lawyers were making is that it is a 
little strange and we’re not quite sure what we’re ending up to if we put a reference to God in the preamble, then 
refer to freedom of religion down below in the operative portion. 
 
If the statute is meant to be enforced as a piece of law, then it causes trouble for the legal mind. If it’s meant to be 
a statement of our aims and aspirations as a nation, then I am sure neither I, nor the Attorney General, not anyone 
else, is objecting to the inclusion of a statement about God. We are perhaps not very good practising but at least 
we are professing Christians. I was brought up with the right Baptist Sunday school upbringing. I have no trouble 
in having that in a statement. I am just trying to say what I believe the Attorney General was trying to say, that 
there are certain legal problems which leave unanswered questions which always bother lawyers. I don’t think it 
goes any farther than that, from the point of view of raising a question about it. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I’m certainly wise enough not to get into waters I can’t swim in, Mr. Premier. I’m certainly 
not going to debate the constitutional arguments with you. I just want to point out to you what the university of 
common sense thinks is that part of a constitution of a country, the preamble of the constitution of any country, 
could certainly indicate the direction in which the majority of the people of that country is headed. I think it is just 
astounding and I will say dangerous, if we in Canada at this point in time feel that freedom of religion must 
indicate that we do not put an adherence to God as a direction to which our country is heading. To me that’s 
wrong. I don’t know the legalistic jargon of it or the problems it may cause, but philosophically, theologically, and 
morally to me and to many that’s wrong. I don’t think that is the type of constitution we want to see brought in. 
 
I’d like to now turn to another consideration, Mr. Premier. It has to do with a report commissioned to the Minister 
of Finance, who was minister of health in 1979. The report was written by one Dr. Terry Russell, entitled, 
Saskatchewan Health for Children and Youth. I just want to quote a bit about this report, Mr. Premier, to bring 
this to your attention, to get your viewpoint. Dr. Russell says: 
 

An excellent job has been done (he’s talking about Saskatchewan) in controlling physical disease. But 
accidents, suicides, drinking, and drugs  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3039 

are on a rampage and haven’t been addressed very well, and the age at which people are at risk has become 
increasingly lower. 

 
The report finding shows Saskatchewan has the worst accidental death rate for children and youth in Canada, 
and in relation to the provinces of Ontario, Manitoba, Alberta, and British Columbia, in the 15- to 19-year-old 
age group. The province holds the second worst record for the 1- to 4-year-old age group and for the 10- to 
14-year- old age groups. Findings show a threefold to fivefold increase in suicide in the province since 1972. 
For those aged 15 to 24 it is the second leading cause of death. The 1977 statistics for suicides in 
Saskatchewan are cause for alarm. The high rates in the 15-to 19-year-old age span equals the traditional 
higher 20- to 24-year-old age group, and the number of suicides in the 5- to 14-year-old age groups are recent 
phenomena which are very disturbing, the investigators state. 

 
Mr. Premier, those aren’t very glowing statistics to describe what is happening to the youth of our province. That 
report was brought in on February 25, and announced by the Minister of Health. There are some 
recommendations by Dr. Terry Russell as to what could be done to try to alleviate this very serious problem. Are 
you aware of the report, Mr. Premier, and can you tell me if anything has been done to improve this serious 
societal problem that is afflicting Saskatchewan? We have the worst record in Canada. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes, I’m aware, in general terms, of the report. Is anything being done? The answer 
is yes. To know more of the details of what is being done, I invite you to ask the Minister of Health. I simply am 
not aware of the details. I know that the child safety committee has been announced. I know that some thrust 
groups, I believe they are called, have been set up to address some of these problems. I wouldn’t trust my memory 
to deal further on details of what follow-up of Dr. Russell’s report there has been. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I certainly will be talking to the Minister of Health because I think this is an alarming 
situation. I was shocked to see that we were leading this nation in suicides of young people, and that has to be a 
cancerous growth in our society, and it is certainly something that should be addressed most severely and should 
be cured. Perhaps later on today I’ll be able to discuss the situation with the Minister of Education. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Premier, I’d like to spend a few minutes this afternoon discussing with you the irrigation 
issue. We’ve talked about it before. Some progress, I believe, is being made, but there are some things which I’m 
still concerned about. When I talked to you last year you indicated that I should go out and see if there were at 
least 50 people who were interested in irrigation on the west side of Lake Diefenbaker. I found 143. 
 
The project has been approved, up to a point. The government, at this point in time, has indicated that it will pay 
approximately half (or perhaps a few dollars over half) of the capital cost needed to put water in the existing 
irrigation ditch. My question to you is: do you feel that the government cannot become involved to the extent that 
it, at least, makes the water in the ditch available to the people in that particular area? Now, I want to go beyond 
just the Outlook area before we’re through, but I want to start with just that one. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I have to confess to the hon. member that I am  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3040 

not familiar, in detail, with this. I know that he has asked a good number of questions of the Minister of 
Agriculture dealing with this at some length. I doubt very much whether I would have anything to add to what the 
Minister of Agriculture has said on these issues. As I recall, when I spoke last week, I said that we would put the 
main ditches in order. The farmers would then pick up the water, pump it out and do what they wanted with it. 
That’s my recollection of what I said. My recollection of what the Minister of Agriculture has said is that this 
would be a satisfactory arrangement. I am not sufficiently familiar with the details of the South Saskatchewan 
River development project on the west side to be able to answer, in detail, what the appropriate arrangement and 
cost sharing would be. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Premier, I can tell you what the Minister of Agriculture has said, if that will be of assistance. 
But what I’m asking for is the policy position of the government as to a commitment to supply the capital costs 
necessary to put the water in the existing ditch. The farmers are going to have a significant amount of capital costs 
when they take the water from the ditch and put it on the fields. They have also expressed a willingness to pay the 
water users fee. I believe the government could then collect, over a period of time, the capital costs back from the 
farmers. The costs in regard to the awkwardness of setting up the initial pumps and the equipment necessary to 
pump straight from Lake Diefenbaker into the canal are the costs I’m talking about. The Minister of Agriculture 
has indicated that the total cost would be about $750,000. Of that amount, he’s asking the farmers to pick up 
approximately $365,000. My question to you is: is the Government of Saskatchewan prepared to get involved in 
irrigation to the extent that it will provide those capital costs to put water in the ditch and charge farmers for the 
water that they draw from it? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — My answer to that is that the policy of the Government of Saskatchewan on 
irrigation is that announced by the Minister of Agriculture. Changes in government policy will be announced in 
due course. I, frankly, don’t know whether what you suggest is reasonable or unreasonable. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Premier, we’ve had three extremely dry years in a row in our province, and we may be 
facing a fourth one. I believe that irrigation in the province of Saskatchewan could be a very valuable industry and 
a valuable safeguard, not only to the people who grow grains, but also to the people who raise livestock. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s called drought-proofing. 
 
MR. SWAN: — I believe indeed that it could be called drought -proofing, as the hon. member said. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Very intelligent, hon. member! 
 
MR. SWAN: — There’s a limit to how far I’ll go. The concern I have is that the government does not seem to 
have a commitment to proceed to any great extent with an irrigation program in the province. Now, at the time 
Diefenbaker Lake was built there was an indication in the original contract, signed by T.C. Douglas in 1958 when 
he was premier of this province, that there were 500,000 acres available for irrigation from that particular project. 
We’re a long way from having 500,000 acres under irrigation in this province. 
 
That was only one project. I think there are a number of other areas in the province which could benefit from 
irrigation, and the water is available. My question to you is  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3041 

this: are you prepared, as a government, to take a serious look and to begin to develop irrigation in the areas where 
the water is available? Are you willing as a government to do that? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — My recollection of the South Saskatchewan River project is that the 500,000 acres 
figure was a general proposition as to what might be available. There were no commitments on 500,000 acres. 
The commitment was for 50,000 acres. I’ll look at the contracts. I’m speaking now from recollection from a way 
back but I believe the commitment was for 50,000 acres. There were certainly thoughts that at some point in the 
future there might be much more extensive irrigation. I’m not sure whether we’re at 50,000 acres or not. We 
certainly have 50,000 acres of irrigated land but I’m not sure whether it’s all in that project. 
 
If I may put the view of the government in its broadest form, it is that we wish to proceed with irrigation as 
rapidly as farmers wish to proceed with a good deal of encouragement from the government. The first 10,000 
acres or 20,000 acres, particularly the east side project (and I’m speaking now from memory on the size), came 
very slowly. The farmers were dry-land farmers who were dubious about getting into irrigation. A good deal of 
encouragement had to be given. There were grants, there were remissions of water fees and the like. 
 
There has been little evidence up until the last year or two that many farmers were very interested. There were a 
few who were always interested in growing potatoes, alfalfa or some crops other than grain crops. The alfalfa 
cubing operation was encouraged and some potato operations were encouraged. There has been a good deal of 
discussion of other vegetables. I don’t know how much is produced there, but I can remember a number of 
discussions about it. 
 
Work on the west side was certainly done, and suspended when it began to look as if we could hardly get any 
farmers interested on that side. The ditch is there, but not very much else on the west side, although I am again 
speaking from memory, and I don’t know the area intimately. 
 
We would like to expand the number of irrigated acres and we would like to particularly expand the number of 
irrigated acres which were in either vegetable root crops or forage root crops — vegetable because it gives rise to 
another secondary processing industry and forage because it offers a back-up for the livestock industry and for the 
cattle industry should we have a period of drought. We would also like to get the security which comes from a 
good number of irrigated acres. 
 
Obviously we would look at sugar beet and other things which are the lifeblood of irrigated acres in southern 
Alberta. We have to be convinced, I think, that farmers would like to proceed with it. This is not to suggest that 
they wouldn’t get encouragement from the government. But we don’t want to strong-arm them because then we 
are simply left with dissatisfied farmers who have expectations of government assistance which are higher than 
we can give. 
 
I can’t give a more definitive policy statement than that except to say that we would welcome with open arms a 
substantial increase in the number of irrigated acres. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Premier, you are right on the figure of 50,000 acres being the commitment. That 
commitment was to be accomplished within three years after the lake was to the irrigation level and we are a long 
way behind that figure at the end of the  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3042 

three years. We are some 14 years down the road now. 
 
What I am really speaking about is the capability of the water supply there for 500,000 acres. In a province like 
Saskatchewan, where drought is no stranger (it frequently comes to this province), 500,000 acres of irrigation 
could be a real safeguard against drought for a significant area of the province. 
 
Now when you speak of irrigation in the province as a whole, it could go far, far beyond the 500,000 acres. That’s 
just one project that we are talking about there. The requests I get are not just from the people on the west side of 
Diefenbaker Lake but from a number of other areas in the province, and these requests are for assistance to get 
into the irrigation area. The capital costs are extensive and I think the Premier will know that the method of 
irrigation has changed significantly since 1968, when you had to go to a land levelling process and so on. Today 
they can do it with irrigation equipment which works much differently. 
 
This has changed the attitude of many people in the Outlook area and on the west side of Lake Diefenbaker and 
the area around Allan in the southern part of the province, where there are other water sources available. People 
are now asking and wanting to get into an irrigation program that would make their livelihood a little more stable. 
That’s the reason I am asking for a new look by this government at their position as it relates to irrigation. 
 
Your policies were changed slightly this year to bring the total amount of assistance to any one farmer to $2,850. I 
think that’s an increase of something like $1,100. It’s a help, but it’s a small help when you are talking of 
irrigation at a cost of somewhere between $79,000 to $80,000 per quarter section to buy equipment. Then $2,800 
is not a significant amount of money per person. 
 
So I am asking will you as a government sit down and take a new look at this to come up with new dollars to 
assist people to get into irrigation? If you won’t make it available in grants, can you make it available through 
FarmStart or some other program that could make interest at least bearable for the people who are having to 
purchase very expensive equipment? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The hon. member makes a good point. I think attitudes are changing with respect to 
irrigation. I think it is fair to say that a good number of dry-land farmers were not impressed with irrigation, 
particularly in the relatively good years of the early ’70s. In the Outlook-Broderick area, we still have difficulty 
getting farmers to irrigate even when there are ditches taking the water right past their farms. There are ditches 
right in their yard and they still don’t feel it’s worth their while to irrigate. However, the hon. member makes the 
point that irrigation methods are changing. The use of gravity as the essential method of distribution is less 
common and they’re using pumps and those big wheels and all these sorts of things. Irrigation farming is not my 
strong point. I’ll concede that out of hand. 
 
We are making loans available through FarmStart and the maximum must be in the order of $200,000. It may well 
be that the FarmStart interest rate is not sufficiently attractive although it is well below any commercial interest 
rate. If the person doesn’t have a lot of money, there is a grant program as well with FarmStart. There are some 
irrigation grants — not a lot of money — $2,500 to $3,000 a quarter, I guess it is. There are some FarmStart 
grants and some FarmStart loans as well below commercial rates. 



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3043 

I won’t say more except that the point the hon. member makes is a good one. Our government continues to look at 
ways to increase the amount of irrigated land for several reasons. One, because we would like to get the best use 
possible out of a lot of social capital in the Gardiner Dam and the whole project; two, because we would like to 
grow some crops — root crops and the like — which would be the basis for a processing industry; three, because 
we would like the security and the backup for the livestock industry and for others that comes from having 
irrigated land. 
 
MR. SWAN: — I might tell the Premier that on the Broderick-Outlook project, the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation superintendent tells me that he has never had a busier year since he has been involved with Sask 
Power and mainly it is because o f installing new services to irrigation equipment going into that area. So perhaps 
your wishes for that area are coming true this year. I believe there are something like 35 new irrigation programs 
taking place in that one small area this year. 
 
I would like to have you give us some commitment to take this back to cabinet and give it a pretty good hearing. I 
believe that for some time, the agriculture section of the province has not received the attention that it should from 
cabinet. I would like you to take the irrigation request back to cabinet to have it discussed with a look at the newer 
methods to see if something can be done. 
 
I want you also to have a realistic look at what happens under FarmStart. You say there’s money available and 
there is some, but it’s available to very young people just starting up; it’s not available to those who have been 
around for a little longer because their assets tend to be too high to qualify. There is still a grave need for them to 
have large amounts of capital available if they’re going into extensive irrigation projects. So my request is that 
cabinet find some method of funding. I don’t think it should all be in grants by any stretch of the imagination. I 
think farmers are used to paying their own way. But a method of providing funding at better interest rates would 
likely be all that’s necessary to have a significant amount of irrigation take place in the near future. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to whether or not agricultural subjects get very much time in cabinet, 
all I can say is you could have fooled me, if you are making the supposition that they don’t get much discussion. 
Without rebutting, may I point out that members such as the member for Buena Vista, a nice city riding like that, 
owns some farmland and the member for Nutana owns some farmland, and the member for Regina Lakeview 
seems to recall that he was once deputy minister of agriculture. The member for Weyburn city is a retired farmer, 
and the member for The Battlefords has land and worked for the Department of Agriculture. It seems to me that 
everybody who purports to speak for the cities is a frustrated farmer. 
 
I think that the hon. member makes points. He asks really two things. First, would we assess the irrigation 
program once again to see whether or not we can do things that might speed it up, and secondly, will we look 
specifically at FarmStart along that line or will we note the limitations of FarmStart as a method of loan capital for 
irrigation because of the relatively exclusionary provisions of FarmStart? I understand that. We are not going to 
change FarmStart, but this doesn’t mean that we shouldn’t perhaps have another program for people who want to 
move into irrigation, which is a high capital operation. I will give him the undertaking that I will ask the Minister 
of Agriculture to look at those specifically. I will not give a further undertaking that will produce any results, but 
the member for Indian Head-Wolseley knows better than to expect results from this government. I’m sure that’s 
what his line would be, but I will 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3044 

pursue it. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Premier, I would like to direct some questions to you regarding the frustration that is felt, 
I think it’s fair to say, by the whole community and the eastern half of the constituency I represent, which includes 
the town of Meadow Lake and the surrounding area. This is with regard to the fact that the Meadow Lake Sawmill 
is closed. Your government is now the 100 per cent owner of that mill, which was closed by the other company 
prior to your government purchasing it. The frustration felt there certainly has to do with the downturn in the 
economy, but I think it stems from the fact that they are unable to get any kind of a commitment as to a date when 
they would have some information about what the future of that mill will be, let alone when it will reopen. 
 
I think it’s more than just a frustration of having lost their jobs and having to look for other ones, but the fact that 
they don’t even know for sure whether their families will have to move elsewhere to find other employment, and 
so on. The situation at present is that many of these families are remaining in Meadow Lake while the 
breadwinner, the man who once worked in the mill, is away working. Mr. Premier, I haven’t received satisfactory 
answers for myself, and certainly I haven’t received answers satisfactory to the people in the constituency I 
represent. I have no idea how many, but I know a number of them have written to your office asking for a 
response from you on this. They are appealing to your social conscience, if nothing else. The frustration they feel 
is also because they receive answers from your deputy minister, who is here with you today. 
 
In one case a letter from a lady was referred to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan for some reason which 
nobody can determine. Another case is that of a representative of the union involved, who sent a letter to you 
asking for an announcement and for some information regarding the future of that mill. It was referred to the 
minister in charge of Sask Forest Products. There again, no one can really understand why it should be referred to 
him since his jurisdiction doesn’t involve that mill. I would ask the Premier for some answer that would hopefully 
give some satisfaction to the people in that area. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I wish I could give satisfaction to the hon. member. I simply cannot 
give him a commitment. The Meadow Lake Sawmill is owned by the Prince Albert Pulp Company (PAPCO). It is 
now true that all of the shares of the Prince Albert Pulp Company are owned by the Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. The Prince Albert Pulp Company is still being operated essentially by a board, 
some of whom are the old directors and some of whom will be new directors, and with the same management as 
was in place when the majority of the shares were owned by Parsons and Whittemore. We are still taking the same 
management decisions and management advice. We have not made any decisions to operate this as a Crown 
corporation, if I may put it that way. We are continuing to operate it as a commercial entity in exactly the same 
way or substantially the same as it was before, because we are negotiating with at least one and perhaps more 
potential purchasers of the shares of PAPCO. 
 
We are simply not in a position to give a commitment that we are going to open the mill. I wish I could. I wish I 
could say that we are going to open the mill because it is commercially sound or that we are going to open the mill 
even though it isn’t commercially sound. I wish I could say, “Well, we’ll sell it to Saskatchewan Forest Products.” 
They operate mills marginally and they do it with their eyes open. But I  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3045 

simply cannot give you that assurance. Our current thinking is that we would try to sell a portion of the shares of 
PAPCO to a partner and that we would keep PAPCO intact and not sell off any of the assets of PAPCO before the 
sale. 
 
That is all I can say to the hon. member since we have not made the decision, which he in essence asked us to 
make, of operating the mill because of the desirable social impacts that it would have on his community. He is not 
arguing that it is commercially sound to operate it; we’re not convinced that it is. We take his point that it would 
have a desirable impact on the community. We are not now in a position to say that we can act because of that 
reason. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — I understand what you are saying, Mr. Premier. When you say that it’s under the management 
of a board which is in place, it seems to be the management decisions you say were in place before your purchase 
of it, which is something that I wasn’t able to find out from any of your ministers. I thank you, the people will at 
least know that much about it. 
 
There is one other point I would like to make about this. I said before that I am not convinced it is economically 
unsound, but I won’t get into that debate. There are two reasons the mills should open, regardless of what your 
management people are saying, even if it’s on the short term: (1) these people should be put back to work while 
these supposed negotiations are going on with CanFor (we’re led to believe); and (2) the prime timber that is now 
in place from the mill site and in the bush should be used. I have brought this detail up before in the House with 
several of your ministers. 
 
For those two reasons I ask the Premier to exert some influence there, at least to open those mills. While it is 
under review the people could be working. For social reasons, it would certainly do something for the optimism 
that is gone from Meadow Lake. The lack of optimism is very evident there now. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I understand the point the hon. member is making. The advice we have received is 
that the wood that has been cut in the mill or in the bush is not in imminent danger of deteriorating badly. That 
advice may be wrong, but that is what we received. On that score we have more time. On the other score, I take 
the point he makes but I am unable to give him a commitment. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Premier, today in Crown corporations your minister responsible for SGI admitted that the 
government had been studying SGI’s getting into the life insurance business. He then immediately added that it’s 
not in the year under review and that he doesn’t have to answer any more questions. I believe this was very close 
to the exact phrase. He made what I believe to be a flip comment — that we would be looking at the next four or 
five years. 
 
A decision of this magnitude, obviously, has to have a great degree of consultation. If the matter is being studied, I 
am assuming when it’s not in the years under review, that the study is ongoing although I’m not aware of that — it 
could have been prior to the year under review. I wonder if the Premier might comment on the government studies 
or the government’s consideration of SGI’s going into life insurance? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I do not know that the matter is being studied. I do advise the hon. member that a 
great number of things are studied around the government long before they come for consideration by cabinet or 
the cabinet minister. There is really no  



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3046 

point in raising issues unless some preliminary work has been done on them. So I don’t know whether there have 
been any studies. I am aware of none with respect to SGI’s going into the life insurance business — none at all. 
 
MR. LANE: — I have taken your minister’s statements. I wonder if the Premier would comment on the idea of 
SGI’s going into life insurance, in terms of the fact that we have presently at least, two well-known 
Saskatchewan-based life insurance companies. SGI would obviously be in competition with these organizations. 
 
There is a very extensive industry in the province of Saskatchewan to date. Obviously, for SGI to be successful, it 
would have to be in a monopoly position, based on its track record to date. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you would give the assurance that the Government of Saskatchewan is not then going to 
get into the life insurance business. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, the government insurance office is not in the life insurance 
business. I am aware of no studies that it go into the life insurance business. If there is any change in government 
policy, it will be announced in due course. I do not anticipate a change. My recollection of the reasons why SGI is 
not in the life insurance business, and wasn’t in 1945 (and I don’t have the act here) is that it is not empowered to 
enter the life insurance business. My recollection is that a look at The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act 
(and I may be wrong on this) will indicate that it is not empowered to go into the life insurance business. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It was in a lot of things it wasn’t empowered to go into. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, no. There is an exclusion there. The exclusion is quite narrow — life and 
health. However, we can sort that one out. I am speaking from memory. It has been probably 10 or 15 years since 
I have ever looked at that act. The reasons were fairly clear — the co-ops were in the life insurance business, and 
w were not particularly interested in getting into the life insurance business. In any case, we sell a lot of bonds to 
life insurance companies and they may not be attracted to the idea of us being in the life insurance business. So, 
those reasons, which have existed for a great length of time, probably still exist. All I can say is that we’re not 
now in the life insurance business, and if there is any change in policy, it will be announced in due course. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I have a question, Mr. Premier, with regard to the present problem of the oil industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The Government of Saskatchewan has, by and large, taken a hands-off position as of 
now — tacit approval, I take it, of the Alberta position. 
 
I will take the Premier back to 1973, and subsequent years from 1973 (1975, I think, as late as 1979). The Premier 
at the premiers’ conference in Quebec brought forth the Saskatchewan position of how to proceed in Canada with 
regard to the energy question. That was about a year and one-half ago I think, Mr. Premier. It was, in effect, to say 
that any increase in the wellhead price, over and above what it was in 1979, should go to a federal energy security 
fund controlled, by and large, by the federal government. The members on this side of the House, of course were 
against that. Could the Premier advise as to whether that position is still being actively considered by your 
government, or whether you have finally scrapped it as being a poorly conceived plan which will do nothing, 
really, to solve the particular dilemma of the energy  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3047 

problem in Canada? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, we put forward that proposal in 1974-75 — the so-called, Canada 
energy security fund proposal. It had a good number of other aspects in it, including the removal of the 
non-deductibility provisions of the federal budget of 1974, not only with respect to oil, but also to potash, 
uranium, and others. It was not a simple proposal. We have put it forward on a number of occasions since. The 
member is right in believing that the last formulation of it really was put forward at the premiers’ conference in 
Quebec. 
 
It seemed clear, at this point, that, firstly, it had no particular support. Secondly, the circumstances on which it 
was based were changing to the extent that the program could no longer proceed in the way that we had earlier 
outlined. It was no longer reasonable or possible to talk about the removal of the non-deductibility because the 
non-deductibility had been built into the tax structure too fully to be easily removed. We were simply not going to 
get anyone to accept that. The proposal was substantially recast — put in a very different way — at the 
federal-provincial conference on energy (or perhaps on the economy) in November 1979. The policy of 
November 1979, together with such elaborations as circumstances might dictate, has been the policy of the 
government since that time. We’d be happy to provide it for you. We have little booklets which outline the 
changes in the policy which occur from time to time. That’s the one which outlines our policy now. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — It seems to me that in the energy debate right now, you’re really letting Alberta carry the 
load. Whatever Alberta and Ottawa come up with, that’s okay with you. You had no hesitation in becoming 
involved in the constitutional question. You gave up your proposal as a failure and fell back into the position of 
the other provinces. Is that why you are a step and one-half behind everyone else, taking a wait and see attitude 
instead of just making the odd statement that you aren’t actively pursuing this energy question? I think it has 
ramifications for the province of Saskatchewan every bit as severe, at least in the short term, as the implications of 
the National Energy Board program. 
 
Why are you not actively pursuing some type of agreement with the federal government on the energy question? 
Why are you sitting idle as the production falls in Saskatchewan? I know from your paper presented in 1979 that 
you really don’t have much time for multinational or large corporations; you want the bulk of it done in the public 
sector. Why are you sitting so idly on a question vital not only to western Canada but particularly to 
Saskatchewan? As our production flattens out and drops, and the activity almost comes to a standstill in many 
areas, why are you sitting on your hands, Mr. Premier, and not becoming more active on that whole question? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I think it would be incorrect to characterize our stand as sitting on 
our hands and not being active. In fact, the former deputy minister of mineral resources, Mr. Moncur, and Mr. 
Douglas, the deputy minister of the Department of Finance, have been and are in regular consultation and 
communication with the appropriate federal opposition members. Mr. Cowley deals regularly with Mr. Lalonde. 
We have gained the impression that the federal government is not going to make an arrangement with us until it 
has one with Alberta, unless it could make an arrangement with us which would improve its bargaining position 
with respect to Alberta. We find that a very difficult position. We have not really been pursuing a settlement 
because it has not been pursuing a settlement with us. 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3048 

The facts are that Alberta has more than 85 per cent of the oil production in Canada. The federal government is 
pursuing a settlement with Alberta. Until there is a settlement with Alberta, I think it is entirely possible that there 
will not be a settlement with Saskatchewan. We simply do not have the negotiating power to force the federal 
government to make a satisfactory settlement with us, which would have massive ramifications for them if it were 
applied to Alberta. We do not wish to make a less favorable settlement with them if we think that Alberta’s 
bargaining power would produce a more favorable settlement. So, the prospects of a settlement negotiated 
between us and the Government of Canada do not appear promising at this time. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Okay. One further question, Mr. Premier, and it relates to the western power grid. Now you 
were at the western premiers’ conference a week or two weeks ago. My question basically is this. Obviously, the 
position of the Government of Saskatchewan (to put it very simply) is that, it would seem to me, there are two 
objectives or possibilities to look at: first, simply allow the lines to transfer the power to the province; or, 
secondly, allow it to go through the province and buy the power. Now that is fairly simple. Were those matters 
discussed with the other premiers? Either one of those options? Obviously, the one with regard to buying power 
was. Was the second option, that is, it would simply allow the power to be transmitted across our province? Was 
that discussed? Is that presently being considered as an option that the government could take with regard to the 
western power grid? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — No, it is not being considered. And no, it was not discussed. Perhaps that’s too 
strong. It might have come up as a casual comment, but there were fairly lengthy discussions. I had some, not 
many hours, but I suppose, an hour or one and a half hours, myself, and I know that Mr. McArthur had further 
extensive discussions. All were predicated on the grid being built and Sask Power owning the grid portion in 
Saskatchewan, and taking a substantial block of power, either 500 megawatts, or the pro rata shares of what the 
dam would produce (which, in a good year, would be something over 500 megawatts, and in a poor year, would 
be something less) or, some bottom guarantees. All of them were predicated on the purchase of power, either a 
firm block or a pro rata share of the river run off the grid. Now, that’s what was discussed. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — So, what you are saying to me is that if Saskatchewan cannot negotiate a purchase from that 
power grid, it would be game over and the power grid question would be set off indefinitely into the future. 
Would that be a fair statement? If you can’t make an agreement with regard to purchasing power through that 
grid, the game is out on the western power grid, at least for the time being? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think that that’s probably a proper conclusion, but that isn’t one which we have 
faced yet. Nobody has been assuming that we can’t make a deal. The entire assumption has been that the grid 
would be built and we would buy a substantial block of power in the general range of 400 to 500 megawatts. 
Nobody has addressed what would happen if we weren’t able to arrive at an agreement to buy the power because, 
I think, we have been operating on the assumption that if that grid crossed the province we would assuredly want 
to buy power from it. We wouldn’t want it to cross if we weren’t buying power and if it crossed, we would want 
to buy power. There is no reason, if we are going to have all the inconvenience and difficulties of having a great 
high line like that across the province, that we wouldn’t want the benefits of having whatever diversification and 
benefits we can get from another source of power. 



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3049 

MR. ANDREW: — Just one more question, Mr. Premier. I just think it is important, in the co-operative spirit of 
the three prairie provinces, that you pursue that and come to an agreement. I hope you won’t stand in the way (be 
it for political reasons or whatever) of the development of that power grid in the very near future. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Let me say that I share the hon. member’s view. Let me make a couple of points. 
The power off that grid is going to be quite a bit more expensive than we could generate for ourselves. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You know that? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes. Therefore, we will have higher power rates for a number of years if we go that 
route. If calculations are right then 10, 12 years later power will be cheaper and for quite a while. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s what we tried to show you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — That’s right. The question of where the crossover point is, is arguable. You have to 
predict the cost of interest rates and all the rest. I won’t go into the pros and cons of it. I am just saying that there 
are some serious downsides on a western power grid, as well as upside benefits. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — One more question, then we can go through the subvotes on both executive council and 
legislation quite rapidly. I received a little brochure in the mail the other day, report from the legislature, with your 
picture on the back. My question is: is this paid for by the Government of Saskatchewan or by the party which 
you represent? If it is paid by the Government of Saskatchewan, would you indicate how many of these were sent 
out, at what cost and where they were sent? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I don’t know whether I’ve seen that pamphlet. Does it have my picture on it? Oh 
yes. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Obviously an old picture! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, the answer is no, it wasn’t paid for by the Government of Saskatchewan. It 
was paid for by the MLAs or the party. It wasn’t paid for by the government. I can assure you of that. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Why would they put your picture on it? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Because, our party, however misguided, believes their leader is a political asset. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed. 
 
Vote 10 agreed. 



 
May 7, 1981 
 

 
3050 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW (SUPPLEMENTARY) 
 

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 10 
 
Items 1 to 4 inclusive agreed. 
 
Vote 10 agreed. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 
 

LEGISLATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 21 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I notice a substantial increase in the expenditures of about $400,000. But there is no 
indication in the estimates book of the number of people-years, or whatever it is. Are you increasing the staff? 
What would be the reason for that rather dramatic increase in expenditure? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I just happen to have that at hand. The number of staff has increased somewhat. 
They are not shown in the blue book to make the point — and a rather important little point — that they are not 
members of the public service but rather employees of the Assembly. It’s a point which we are trying to make. I 
don’t think we need to explain that. 
 
The number of person-years, or the number of permanent staff, has gone up by one — from six to seven. The 
number of part-time staff has gone up somewhat. Hansard is the big one. There are six extra people in Hansard. 
Not many more than that — but six person-years. 
 
That comes about because we’re doing the committees, particularly the Crown corporations committee, which 
wasn’t done at all before. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I have one question, Mr. Premier. The committee on rules recommended, and the report was 
adopted in this House, a committee on internal economy. One thing it does is get rid of the situation where the 
Clerk, who has a very important function of independence (which we all acknowledge), does not sit and defend 
his estimates with the Premier. Can the Premier advise as to whether or not legislation will be in this session so 
that we get rid of that problem, so that next year we will be dealing with that on a committee of internal economy 
basis? Or will we be back and still dealing with the Premier? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think I can say that legislation will be available on Monday. There are a number 
of items and if we have to jettison some because we can’t put it together, the board of internal economy will not 
be jettisoned. Our intention is to have that in this session. We have adopted that and we may as well put it into 
effect now. That is our intention. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Another question, Mr. Premier. Has the television equipment now  



 
May 7, 1981 

 

 
3051 

been ordered? Are we in the process of that? What is the likely date as to the time we will have television in this 
Chamber? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m not sure whether the television equipment has been ordered. It’s clearly been 
priced. I am advised that the matter has been studied. It has been approved by cabinet. It is back with the 
consultant who is designing the equipment. The equipment is in the course of being designed. It has not been 
ordered. It is anticipated that it will be designed, ordered, installed, and ready to operate approximately one year 
from now. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — That would be at the end of the next session. There will not be television at the next session. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I do not think there will be television at the next session . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Oh, I don’t know about that. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed. 
 
Vote 21 agreed. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW (SUPPLEMENTARY) 
 

LEGISLATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 21 
 
Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed. 
 
Vote 21 agreed. 
 
The Assembly adjourned until 7 p.m. 


