






















































Hansard: December 08, 1981


(324) 325 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 8, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 7 p.m. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Address in Reply (continued) 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A few comments further, Mr. Speaker, with regard to the throne speech. I would 
like to direct some attention to the whole question of the uranium industry in Saskatchewan. What we 
have seen, I think, is simply the tip of the iceberg with the announced closure of the Eldorado Nuclear 
mine in Uranium City. I believe that’s the beginning of what could be some pretty rocky roads for the 
uranium industry over the next 10 years and perhaps even longer. 
 
What I am simply saying is this, Mr. Speaker. The problem is that the product is there, as it is in many 
other places throughout the world. The whole question is the market for uranium internationally, and it 
doesn’t make a great deal of difference whether or not you can put your product at a lower cost if there 
are no markets there. When you start looking at the buyers of the world, you realize that they look at 
perhaps two or three important things. Number one is obviously the cost, and that’s pretty much set by 
what is called the spot market or prior on long-term contracts. The second thing they look at is security 
of supply. Of course, what the buyers of the world, who are primarily the utilities of the world, are 
looking for regarding security of supply is not necessarily from one country. They are looking for 
products not only from Canada, but also from Australia and other countries. They want to spread their 
market out for supply. 
 
So we are going to find ourselves in a very intense marketing condition for uranium over the next 10 
years. Now, that market is going into the complex international markets. I think we’re going to see the 
same thing, perhaps, that we saw a decade ago with AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.). To market 
that product you’re going to have to use some very ingenious methods that would not be considered 
proper by Saskatchewan or Canadian standards. We’re going to have some serious problems there. I 
think we’re going to be struggling with SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) to get 
a return on that investment over the next 10 years. That’s going to be the big problem we face. 
 
Has this government really reached a point where it’s concentrating on playing the international 
speculative market? Obviously, that’s what is happening with SMDC today. Governments are starting to 
lose sight of what traditionally governments are supposed to do in this country, and that is to provide for 
the people who are living in the province or in the federal system. I suppose it was put to me best when 
an older gentleman phoned me perhaps a month ago (a former NDP supporter, he claimed). Which one 
of the many thousands was that one? He was a senior citizen and he phoned to complain about the power 
bill he faced, to complain that the power bill was going up and that there were taxes on that power bill. I 
think everybody in the Assembly has probably had that type of complain made to him by a constituent. 
 
I think what that particular gentleman told me is something very significant that is happening in the 
province today. He said, “You know, something changed with the  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
326 

NDP.” It was back, he thought, in 1977 when they won that landslide victory. He said that when they 
won that landslide victory, they forgot about the people. They forgot about the people after they won, 
and they are concerned about themselves. They’re concerned about the elite people within the central 
operation of the party. They forgot the little guy who was traditionally what governments in this province 
were all about. They forgot the little guy and his telephone bill and his power bill. He doesn’t count 
anymore. They’re more concerned with some speculative capital-intense venture with uranium. They 
can’t put the money out to lessen the tax load on an individual in the province, to lessen the load on his 
power bill or his gasoline bill, or any of those things that really count to the average person. 
 
What the average person is facing today is a very tight economic condition. He doesn’t have enough 
money to go around. That’s the reality; that’s what the people are telling me. And the individual is 
looking to government for some help. But what is the government saying to him? “No, we don’t have 
any money for that. No, that’s not our responsibility; go to Trudeau — he’s the guy that can help you.” 
 
But in the end, the big question is that the government no longer has the money to help the little guy. 
They say they are going to help the people. They say, “Watch us; trust us. We’re going to take this 
money into the uranium industry. We’re going to turn a massive profit, and then we will give it back to 
you in glowing terms.” The individual person is going to start to question that policy. He’s accepted it 
for the last 5 or 6 or 10 years and he is now starting to wonder if they are so wise. 
 
I wonder if their priorities are really in the places where I thought they were. They seem to me to be 
more interested in the elitist policy, not unlike, I suggest, the corporate structure in the private world, 
because what is more important to them over there now is what their department does, or how they 
become involved in this, or what type of office they have, or how big their office on the 13th floor is, or 
what venture they can get into so they can rub elbows with the Bob Blairs of this world. Those are the 
things that turn the people on, on that side of the House now. 
 
It used to be that you had some concern and that you had some compassion for the little guy out there, 
for the small businessman out there, and for the person who was facing financial troubles. But no, you 
don’t have money for those people any more unless they fit into one of your grandiose plans. 
 
To help the beef industry, to solve the problems of the farmer, what you are going to do in concoct a 
scheme by which he can market this products. But the big problem that the farmer is facing is that his 
costs are going up and his income is going down. You don’t ever think that perhaps you could do 
something to help that man’s cause, or do something about giving him a different fuel source such as the 
rural gas distribution system. 
 
You know, we will have farmers, this winter in the province of Saskatchewan, living in a small home on 
a small farm. With any kind of cold weather this winter those people are going to be facing power bills 
of $400 to $500 per month for bunker heating fuel. Those are serious cost problems for those people. 
They are going to be driving their vehicles — the farmers and the people of rural Saskatchewan haven’t 
a great deal of choice — if they have to go to a doctor in Saskatoon. That’s a distance of 100 or 200 
miles for a lot of people. It costs them money to drive there. Their gas bills not only for their homes but 
also for their automobiles are going higher and higher. Two-thirds of the price of gasoline goes to the 
government today, and that is escalating. 
 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
327 

The member for Saskatoon-Sutherland talked about how great this new energy agreement was. I’m glad 
to see that it has finally been resolved. Everybody should be happy about it, but I’ll tell you the one 
person who is paying on that energy agreement, the one person who really wasn’t consulted and who 
was neglected was the consumer. What the consumer of this province is going to be paying by the end of 
that energy agreement is six-dollar gasoline. To fill up your tank it’s going to cost you $6 per gallon, and 
the reason for that is that conventional oil is running out. 
 
We are going to be using more and more enhanced oil — Syncrude oil, oil from Hibernia, oil from heavy 
oil upgrading. That particular feeder stock now constitutes something like 10 per cent of our crude oil 
source in this province. Within six years that’s going to be closer to 40 per cent, and the cost is going to 
be horrendous. The individual person faces a problem there. He faces a problem with escalating 
telephone costs. Yet, throughout the United States today, through its deregulation program, the cost of 
telephoning is in fact going down. But it’s not going down in Saskatchewan; it’s going higher. The 
prices that they have to pay are what the people are concerned about in Saskatchewan today. 
 
That is what this throne speech did not address; that is what the members opposite are not addressing 
because, Mr. Speaker, they have become elitists. They have become corporate socialists, if you like. 
They are more concerned about their own little power group within the government. They have, as the 
old gentleman told me on the phone, forgotten the people, and by forgetting the people, the members 
opposite are going to come to task some day. Some day that is going to come home to haunt them, 
because what happens when a government forgets the people is that the government becomes arrogant. 
When the government becomes obsessed with that, then there are going to be problems for the 
government. 
 
I think you can see that reflected, perhaps, in the way that the members opposite are having trouble 
rallying their forces. The people over there are having trouble rallying their forces; I can see it in their 
faces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me tell you about the NDP nominating meeting held in Kindersley the other day . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Of course, I wasn’t there, and I didn’t have any spies there. I had to go by the 
newspaper, and the newspaper, of course, is the only source I had to tell what it was all about. According 
to the newspaper, they had a crowd of 45 people at that nominating meeting — 45! That is the lowest 
number of people at an NDP nominating meeting in Kindersley in 40 years. The paper went on to say 
that most of them were over the age of 50. 
 
What is that saying, Mr. Speaker? It’s saying basically this: the NDP, when it comes down to the people 
out in the field, is becoming old. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, consider a nominating meeting held by the Tories last night, in an area 
that has never really been a strong point for the Conservatives — the constituency of Kinistino. Can you 
imagine the constituency of Kinistino? I don’t think we ever got our deposit back in that riding before. 
At the nominating meeting last night there were 400 people! There were four candidates seeking 
nomination in the riding of Kinistino. What does that say for what is happening in rural Saskatchewan 
today? I’ll tell you what it’s saying: it’s saying exactly what the throne speech is saying — you people 
over there are becoming old. They’re becoming old; they’re becoming bankrupt of ideas. They don’t 
have any new programs. They’re becoming tired. That, in the end my  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
328 

friends, is what really, turns political parties out of power, when they lose that youthfulness, when they 
become old, when they want to live on their laurels, when they want to talk about a throne speech which 
deals with medicare. 
 
They want to deal with the battles of yesterday. They want to deal with the constitution that has now 
gone by. They want to go with the old system of blaming Ottawa for this and blaming Ottawa for that. 
You know, the mentality of Saskatchewan people has always been that we struggle. We have always 
been people who have been downtrodden, relative to our brothers in many of the provinces of Canada: 
Ontario, B.C., and Alberta. We have always been the poor cousins. I think everybody will agree with 
that. 
 
But now we have the resources; we have the land base; and we are no longer the poor cousins. We have 
the oil, the uranium (be that as it may), potash, timber, farmland. As a people and a province, we 
probably have the greatest supply per capita of natural resources of any province in this country. But 
when it comes to the question of whether that money is coming back to the people — it’s not. Our taxes 
compared to Alberta’s . . . I suppose that, really, if we want to get into a comparison of provinces (the 
members opposite like to compare themselves with Manitoba), they have no oil, no potash . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Not anymore! 
 
MR. ANDREW: — “Not anymore,” he says. That’s right, not anymore because it’s not worth the 
comparison anymore — no oil, no potash, half as much farmland. That’s quite a comparison. If that 
doesn’t work, let’s compare ourselves to Prince Edward Island; and if we’re really desperate, like (I 
think) the member for Indian Head-Wolseley said today, we’ll compare ourselves to Newfoundland. 
That’s some comparison isn’t it? The province of Newfoundland, holy smokes, what a grab bag way to 
find some province to compare yourself to. Really, we’re like Alberta. We have to be like Alberta, 
because like Alberta, we have the resources. But, we don’t have what Alberta has — a Tory government 
that puts the money back into the hands of the people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The price of gasoline in Tory Alberta is 40 cents lower. Income tax in the province 
of Alberta is 35 per cent less. The comparison of the province of Alberta for virtually anything we want 
to compare it to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He says medicare. The Attorney General talks about 
medicare. 
 
I will give you an example of what medicare is doing in the constituency of Kindersley. There are three 
hospitals in the constituency of Kindersley: at Kindersley, Eston, and Eatonia. There is one at Dodsland. 
In the town of Kindersley, the hospital puts a mill rate of 6 mills on every property owner. That is the 
biggest town. The next biggest town, which is Eston, adds 8 mills to every person’s property. The small 
hospital at Eatonia adds 13 mills to every taxpayer in Saskatchewan. Do you know what they pay in 
Alberta for hospitals? They pay zero on their property tax. Do you know what the average household 
pays in property taxes in the province of Alberta compared to the province of Saskatchewan? They pay 
about one-half as much property tax in the province of Alberta as they do in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
329 

MR. ANDREW: — Let’s look at the other major item that people buy. You have transportation. You 
have the consumer goods. For every consumer good we buy, of course, we have to add on our 5 per cent 
sales tax. What is the sales tax in the province of Alberta? It is zero. Every item they buy is 5 per cent 
cheaper. What they have done, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Alberta is just exactly this: they have 
taken and used their resources and they have turned around and said, “Okay, we have to put some of that 
money back into the hands of the people, because it is the people who count.” 
 
I will give you another one. People over here are happy about the welfare system we have in 
Saskatchewan and the government’s ability to pay welfare payments. Do you know what happens in the 
province of Alberta? The per capita welfare payments in the province of Alberta are 33 per cent higher 
than they are in the province of Saskatchewan. The people of Alberta, under their dirty Tory government, 
are treating the welfare recipients of that province far better than the people of Saskatchewan are. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will go back to the premise of the old gentleman who phoned. He said, “You people 
over there have forgotten who the people are.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I go back to the Speech from the Throne of the good Premier of Saskatchewan. He comes 
in to deal with the question in the throne speech. Here we are in the province, with recession in the 
country and people staring to feel the burden of the economy, and what do we have for it? We have the 
Premier standing up and taking the first hour to talk about the constitution that has already been passed 
through parliament. And I suspect we’re going to have another go at that. The Premier is going to put 
some stuff into the history books, I suppose. He becomes obsessed with talking about the constitution. If 
we get a question from the media, what’s the Premier going to talk about — the constitution? 
 
Well, I tell you, the people in Kindersley, and I suspect in most other areas of this province, are not 
concerned about the constitution. They’re concerned about the pocketbook issues out there today. That’s 
what the game is all about today. They’re concerned about the cost of living and about inflation — 
they’re concerned about the economy. Those are the issues out there the people are facing, and what do 
we see in the throne speech on that subject? “Oh, we had better blame Ottawa for the economy, because 
that’s where all the fault is,” they say. We don’t hear that the Government of Saskatchewan is going to 
do anything about it, because it’s supposedly all Ottawa’s fault. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Blaming their bedfellows, eh? 
 
MR. ANDREW: — That’s exactly right! Now I say to people out there, what are we going to see 
coming from this government? We’re going to see nothing. 
 
Here’s another example. The Government of Saskatchewan will deny this, but it has prepared an option 
to buy Marathon Oil. Now, as I understand, that option is roughly in the area of $200 million. They have 
also made an option through their people to buy out some property of Gulf Oil in the southern region of 
Saskatchewan. As I understand, the bid put forth by the Government of Saskatchewan to Gulf Oil is 
$230 million. There’s $430 million that the government has with which it can go buy two oil companies. 
 
But what kind of answer do the hospitals get when they come in and say, “Please Mr.  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
330 

Government, could we have a few more dollars because we have to cut back? We have to either deficit 
finance or risk the health care that we’re giving our patients.” The answer is no. There’s no money for 
that, Mr. Speaker. And what do we have when the school boards say, “Boy, we have some tough 
problems and we have to start cutting back our school programs. We can’t provide the system of 
education in rural Saskatchewan that is being provided, let’s say, in the cities.” What’s the government 
saying when the school boards come to them and ask them for more money? “No, no, we don’t have any 
money. We have money for Gulf and Marathon, but we have no money for the education system. We 
have no money for the health care system.” 
 
I don’t suppose there is a member in this Assembly who hasn’t had a request to build another nursing 
home. There are a lot of senior citizens in this province and, whether they like the home care program or 
not, eventually they get to the point where they have to live in an institution. And you call it a senior 
citizens’ home. So each one of those towns wanting a place, wanting to expand its existing facility 
because the line-up is long — 20, 40 people trying to get into those nursing homes — comes to the 
government to ask for some assistance, to ask for some money. But what answer do they get? “No, no 
money for you.” 
 
But they have money to buy an airline; they have money to buy an oil company; they have money to 
speculate in the uranium markets of the world. That is where their priorities are. They have money to put 
in expensive $150,000 offices in a crown corporation building. They have money to buy, as they say, the 
run-down airline; but they don’t have money for the people. 
 
And I think that tells it all, Mr. Speaker. Because the NDP has now become elitist; it has become tied up. 
The NDP is no longer the party out there in the ridings. The NDP is right where you see it, right over 
there — three or four guys in the inner circle of the NDP. That’s what the NDP is, the elitists. And it has 
forgotten the people. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, when the next election is called the people are going to 
forget the NDP. 
 
With that, I can simply advise the Assembly that I will not be voting for the motion, and I think the 
amendment of the member for Souris-Cannington is an excellent motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, in replying to the Speech from the Throne, which contained little 
substance, I would like to spend some of my time speaking on the legacy of the NDP in the field of 
health care. 
 
The government members opposite like to go around the province spouting off on their commitment to 
medicare and their commitment to the health care delivery system in this province. But truly, Mr. 
Speaker, it is nothing more than words. I would say the people of this province must beware of persons 
going around bearing false gifts, because surely that is what the government opposite is doing. 
 
I would like to read into the record a letter received by the Premier on November 27 from the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses. And I might say that these are professional, dedicated people who spend 
long hours working at their jobs ensuring that the health care delivery system in this province keeps 
going despite the cutbacks that they must face each day. The letter was addressed to the Premier and it 
says: 
 

Dear Premier Blakeney: The members of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
331 

(SUN) Local 75, University Hospital, are extremely concerned about the cost reduction measures 
being implemented by the University Hospital administration on the direction and authorization of 
the hospital board. We are aware of the large deficit, but do not agree that measures that will 
decrease the standard of care should be implemented. Our patients deserve safe, quality nursing care, 
and budget problems should not cause any compromise to this level of care. Measures that directly 
affect nurses and patient care include: 
 
1. Not hiring into vacated positions — termination, maternity leave, etc. Not hiring nurses into vacated 
positions is not a result of a nursing shortage. There are nurses willing to work. The consequences of 
this measure are obvious: excessive workloads for nurses and hazard to the patients. 
 
2. Curtailment of sick leave replacement. People have not always been replaced when ill in the past, 
and if this will be further curtailed, nurses will be unable to give safe patient care. If nurses are not 
going to be replaced, they may feel pressured to come to work when ill, jeopardizing the health of their 
patients, their co-workers and themselves. 
 
3. Decrease in educational leaves of absence. It is with some chagrin that we heard of the decrease in 
educational leaves of absences. The leaves are shamefully minimal as it is. Continuing nursing 
education is necessary in order to update skills and increase our knowledge in a rapidly changing field. 
 
4. Not prebooking float staff. This measure places the float in a position where planning ahead is not 
possible. A call at 0600 to 0730 hours to ask if you can come to work for 0730 means difficulties 
arriving on time, getting family responsibilities arranged and being prepared to come to work. The late 
arrival of staff, and lack of staff, is putting added pressures and workload on the nurses. 
 
Other measures being implemented affect nursing indirectly, such as decreasing staff in other services. 
This usually means nurses have added jobs. For example, to lose a physiotherapy position means 
nurses will likely be doing physio. Decrease housekeeping, and nurses will end up doing housekeeping 
duties. By not replacing ward aides or clerks, nurses will be expected to fill in with these jobs. Nurses 
have the unfortunate history of being catchalls, and each one of these and other non-nursing functions 
take the nurses away from the bedside, providing patient care. 
 
We recognize that the present funding system for the University Hospital is not based on the unique 
and demanding needs of our patients or the fact that the University Hospital is the referral and teaching 
centre for the province. The present funding system does not even cover the financial obligation as 
stipulated in the contract negotiated between SUN (Saskatchewan Union of Nurses) and SHA 
(Saskatchewan Hospital Association). This funding must be changed. It is a patient’s right to receive 
safe care, and this care should be high quality care. If a large deficit results from the hospital’s attempt 
to fulfill this obligation, so be it. The hospital board, SHSP (Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan) and 
the Government of Saskatchewan must make the necessary funds available to the hospital in order for 
the staff to deliver the best care possible. We cannot jeopardize the level of patient care, endanger  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
332 

patients’ lives or expect staff to have excessive workloads in order to reduce costs and to decrease the 
deficit. Service and teaching obligations cannot be met. 
 
The government, the hospital and management must take appropriate action (not “in keeping with our 
fiscal responsibility” as stated in the attached letter) but in keeping with their patient care 
responsibility. 
 
Please let us know what you are going to do to ensure that the necessary funds to operate the 
University Hospital are forthcoming. 

 
And it’s signed by G. Poole, president of Saskatchewan Union of Nurses Local 75. 
 
I think this is a damning indictment of the things that are happening in the health care system in 
Saskatchewan today. And I think the problems being faced by the University Hospital are not restricted 
only to the University Hospital. I understand the General Hospital in Regina is facing the same type of 
difficulties and many of our smaller rural hospitals also are facing the same type of difficulties. 
 
It seems to me that the government opposite expects the burden of deficits caused by underfunding to be 
totally absorbed by the people who have dedicated their lives to the well-being of mankind. I think it is a 
shame that the Minister of Health can stand in this House and say to us and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that it is his belief that a long waiting list for a hospital bed is indicative of an efficiently 
run organization. Today he tried to defend his position during question period on psychiatric services, on 
the number of hospital beds, and the number of doctors, etc. 
 
I would like at this time to quote from Justice Emmett Hall’s report, “Canada’s National and Provincial 
Health Program — A Commitment for Renewal.” A question was asked this afternoon by the member 
for Indian Head-Wolsely about the dismal disarray of our psychiatric services in the province and the 
minister said, “Well, mistakes have been made and we’re trying to do this and we’re trying to do that.” I 
would just like to quote from page 58, table 18 — “Psychiatric Hospital Beds per 1,000 Population.” 
 
It is interesting that Saskatchewan has 0.07 beds per 1,000 as compared to a high of 1.6 in Nova Scotia 
and British Columbia, 0.8 in Alberta, 0.9 in Ontario, and the list goes on and on. In fact, there is only 
one province that has fewer beds than Saskatchewan and that happens to be Prince Edward Island. He 
went on this afternoon to cite the number of special-care beds in Saskatchewan. I say we should have 
twice the number of special-care beds in this province, considering the population of the elderly in 
Saskatchewan. It is almost double the national average. 
 
Yet, Prince Edward Island — poor Prince Edward Island — which is not a have province and perhaps 
will not be a have province for many many years to come, has 11.4 beds per 1,000 as compared to 
Saskatchewan’s 9.2. I think it is ludicrous for the minister to stand up and say, “Well, we have this,” and 
then change it to say, “Well, I believe . . .” Well, perhaps he should get his figures straight before he 
comes in with statistics. 
 
It is also interesting to note in the same Hall report on page 55, table 15 — “Acute Short-term Hospital 
Beds per 1,000.” Saskatchewan is listed as having 6.5 in 1978 as compared to 8.4 in 1958. Here we have 
the Northwest Territories having 8.8 beds per 1,000, as compared to our 6.5. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, 
but when they’re talking about beds per 1,000, they fail to also mention the fact that they probably pay 
for less  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
333 

than half the total beds in the province. Funding is cut down every year, as is staff. 
 
The Minister of Health reminds me somewhat of — was it Mr. Chretien who had the visions for the 
‘80s? Several years ago he got up and postulated on several points of what he saw as visions of the ‘80s. 
We have the Minister of Health taking the same kind of stand in the area of preventive medicine. I can 
remember his news conference when he was first named Minister of Health. Three-quarters of the news 
conference was spent on his talking about what he was going to do for this province in the area of 
preventive medicine, yet we see no evidence of it anywhere. Preventive counselling is not covered under 
MCIC (medical care insurance commission). For things like rape control, smoking, drinking, and all 
those things, doctors aren’t paid under MCIC. So we have to have other agencies spring up and provide 
the services, at sometimes very high cost. 
 
Yet in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, reference again for about the fourth year in a row was made to 
what the government is going to do in the area of preventive medicine. I can venture to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that the throne speech of the next legislature (I might say the throne speech that this side of the House 
will be making) will have measures for preventive medicine. But we as a government, unlike the 
government opposite, will deliver on our promise in the area of preventive medicine. 
 
When we talk about the whole scope of health care; Dr. Terry Russell reported to the Department of 
Health, through the Minister, on his review of child and youth health services in the province. Very, very 
dismal were they, and, Mr. Speaker, still are. The suicide rates have not gone down. Teenage 
pregnancies have dropped somewhat; we are now second instead of first. Yet, when this report was 
tabled in the House last year, the Minister of Health got up and made a big production about the task 
force that he was going to institute to study the study already given to him on the problems in the area of 
health for children and youth. Nothing was mentioned of that in the budget. I think the minister should, 
before this part of the session is finished, get up and give at least an interim report on what the task force 
is doing — if any such task force has even been instituted. 
 
We can almost tell, Mr. Speaker, that there is an election coming up. You can tell by the replies to the 
throne speech by the members opposite; you can tell by the little ditties they write in the papers and the 
little ditties you hear on the radio. They’re up to their old scare tactics again. So far they haven’t really 
concentrated or spent much time on health care and what the Tories are going to do, but they’re trying a 
new angle because they realize that the people of Saskatchewan no longer accept their tactics in trying to 
downgrade the Tories when it comes to health care. The people of Saskatchewan look to other provinces 
where there are Tory governments and realize that the health systems in those provinces are working 
very, very well indeed, and will continue to work very, very well indeed. 
 
It was interesting that Mr. Justice Hall said that he found not one government or individual, not the 
medical profession, not any organization against medicare. Yet the government opposite during the next 
election, which I am sure will be held in the spring, will go knocking door to door and any time they find 
an elderly person, a handicapped person, or someone who can’t really fend for themselves, their 
whispering campaign will begin, I’m sure. But this time it won’t work. 
 
I think people in Saskatchewan know that medicare is available nationwide and will  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
334 

continue to be available nationwide. No one would ever dream of tinkering with medicare except to 
improve it, like we will do when we become the government in 1982. 
 
I would like to spend a few minutes on the beef stabilization program. As a party, we opposed the Bill 
when it was introduced last spring. We opposed it because there was no input from the industry which it 
was to affect. There was no input by ranchers, or farmers who had cattle. Basically, it goes against our 
grain to impose anything on anyone. I know that the program is voluntary, and the minister the other day 
said that he thought they had about 900 contracts waiting to be signed, and that that was a great 
indication of the acceptance of the program. I think there are about 22,000 producers in the province, so 
we will see. 
 
I was very shocked and dismayed by the remark made by the Minister of Agriculture yesterday when he 
said that the Tories had their henchmen out to the meetings with their questions and speeches written 
down. Well, I would like to tell the minister that I attended the beef stabilization meeting in the town of 
Maple Creek, which is in the centre of a very large cattle area of the province. I might add that the 
minister didn’t even have the courage to show up for that meeting. He sent one of the board members, 
and I must say that the mood of the crowd was not too good when the minister didn’t show up, to answer 
their questions. The board member could not answer many of the questions they asked, mainly because 
the regulations weren’t in place. As I understand it, they are still not in place, yet the minister wants 
people to sign up for something when they don’t know how it is going to affect them. 
 
These people listened very attentively to the board member who tried to explain the program and how it 
was going to work, and they sat in that audience and took down notes and wrote questions, because they 
didn’t want to forget their points when their turn came at the mike. For the minister to call these 
producers, who were concerned enough to come out to this meeting, henchmen, is just a shameful thing, 
and he should be censured for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne was not an exciting one. I think that is accepted by people on 
this side of the House as well as people on that side of the House. I notice that not many of the local 
papers had glowing reports of the Speech from the Throne — but I think it is an indication that perhaps 
they are frightened, bankrupt of ideas and can’t think of anything new. Perhaps they are scared to step 
out on a limb now, because they know their days on that side of the House are numbered. They are 
scared to get into anything controversial at this time. Even the Bills that have been introduced in this 
session, barring the home-owner’s protection or whatever it is called . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, you have been calling it The Home-owner’s Security Act. All of a sudden it becomes a protection 
act, because you couldn’t offer them any security. You cold offer them protection through the legislature 
but not security. You won’t put up any money for those people. You expect everyone else to do it. 
Heaven forbid you should have to dip into your heritage fund, which I understand doesn’t have any 
money in it — a lot of assets tied up with crown corporations but no actual cash flow. That is the only 
piece of legislation of any merit. Everything else is housekeeping. We could have done that in the spring; 
we didn’t have to come back for this do-nothing throne speech and mostly do-nothing Bills . . . 
(inaudible interjection). 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You guys are counting too heavily on that Blakeney ballot box. It may not 
work. 
 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
335 

MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, he is bankrupt. I agree. The Blakeney ballot box won’t work because the 
people of Saskatchewan would never stand for a shameful thing such as that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in taking my seat, I say with a great deal of pride that I will be opposing the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I want to enter into this debate for just a few moments. I want to talk 
about one topic which is of great concern to a lot of people in my area, but also of concern to a lot of 
people throughout the province — I suppose you could say in isolated pockets. It has to do with a topic 
which we have heard a lot about outside the House; we hear very little about it here in the House. It has 
to do with the whole question of land claims or land entitlements. 
 
I will go on record as saying (and I know there have been a lot of opinions expressed by members 
opposite as to where I and members of our party stand on that issue) that I do believe there is an 
entitlement there for the native people. Having said that, I can’t agree with the way in which this 
government has approached it. We talk about protecting the rights of minority groups. Certainly you can 
say that is an honourable thing to do; I believe it is. We are talking about the native people affected in 
the bands that have claims, or purport to have claims or entitlements. This government and its cousins, 
the federal government in Ottawa, sat down in the back rooms either here or in Ottawa or wherever it 
was, and forgot about the individual rights of the people who are affected. I speak now of the third-party 
interest. Certainly it’s upsetting for people when they see a band coming in to claim land which is 
adjacent to them or land in which they do have a third-party interest, whether they be trappers of two or 
three generations or ranchers. 
 
I think of the area around Paradise Hill and north of there where the Thunderchild Band has a claim. I 
know people have certainly heard about it. There has been a lot of press coverage and a lot of feeling 
close to hysteria over this some of that area. Some of the material which has been coming out from both 
sides certainly has to be put into context. People will be upset, but the government certainly could have 
handled it in a way in which third-party interests were informed, at least about what was going on, 
before some federal government surveyor rolled into the area. Here they are with their survey rods and 
stakes and they say, “We’re surveying this.” “Why are you surveying it?” asks the trapper, or the rancher 
who is out looking over his cattle. They say, “What are you guys doing here?” That is literally how it 
happened. 
 
I see the Minister of Highways chuckling and chortling over there. He lives in that area and he knows, 
and people in his constituency are very concerned about this. He can laugh as much as he wants to about 
this, but that is certainly the way it happened in that area. There is no way you can have any credibility in 
the area if, after having a meeting with your federal cousins, you’re going to go in and tell these people, 
“This is going to be taken over.” You have decided, from your point of view, that this land, which they 
have had an interest in over a long period of time, is going to be taken over by somebody else. 
 
I will give you an example. We had a meeting in the town of Paradise Hill and the Minister of Highways 
attended on behalf of the government. There were something like 400 people there — people with 
legitimate concerns. As I said before, some of the  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
336 

things coming out of that meeting were going off in the wrong direction and not really addressing the 
issue; I admit that. But, there is no way you can handle this thing the way you people over there have — 
no possible way. 
 
I am saying to you that if there is an entitlement, you lay out some money, boys. Lay out some money. 
Get into negotiations with people in the bands; negotiate with members of the band. Don’t get taken in 
by activists that are working with the bands. Don’t get taken in by those people because they don’t 
represent the native people that are members of those bands. That’s what I am saying to you. The 
Minister of Northern Saskatchewan knows what I am talking about, and you can say what you want. 
Don’t get taken in. I didn’t sign any petition. Don’t get taken in by members of groups who suggest that 
they stand for the native people. Don’t get taken in by activists; that’s what I’m saying to you. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you people put your community pastures on the table and said, “Come in and select 
these for the bands.” You’ve said, “Come in and select these.” I hear the minister saying, ‘ Those 
community pastures are good operations.” There are some ways those community pastures could be 
changed, as well, and that’s another topic we could get into. But you people have put those pastures on 
the table without any consultation with people who have had pasture allotments there for a long time. 
I’ve heard members from the Department of Agriculture in this province tell the people there, “What is 
it? You’ve only got a one-year allotment there anyway.” It’s an annual allotment that you have in the 
pasture. So many of those pasture patrons have been there for a number of years. In most cases they are 
relatively small operators who base the future of their herd on that pasture allotment, and once again you 
boys didn’t consult at all with those patrons. You put their pastures on the table for selection, and a band 
comes in and selects the pasture. Where are these guys going to sit? You wonder why some of the people 
in the areas are going off on a tangent in some cases, and getting the wrong idea of the whole issue. You 
wonder about that. I’ll tell you what isn’t acceptable to me, Mr. Minister of Northern Saskatchewan — 
you asked me what’s acceptable to me. It isn’t acceptable to me to sit in some clandestine back bloody 
room like you do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McLEOD: — . . . and have a meeting with the federal Liberal cousins that you have down there 
and just forget about the individuals out there. Certainly there are people living in isolated parts of the 
province. You say, “Well, there are just a few votes out here. They won’t matter. We can kick these guys 
aside, because we’ve got some policy.” That’s exactly how you operate, that’s exactly how your system 
works, and that’s why, when the next election comes, people are going to say they just can’t wait. I can 
tell you, people in our area just can’t wait for that election to blast you guys right out of the water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should really go into that. The Minister of Highways mentions the paved streets in 
Meadow Lake. I am going to tell you something about my community, as well. We will get off the other 
topic; we will get on to the subject of streets of my town. I wish the Minister of Urban Affairs . . . Here 
he comes. Look at that. I wish, and he walks in the door. The Minister of Urban Affairs is here to hear 
this. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Make another wish; make them all disappear. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — I should make more wishes and maybe some more would leave.  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
337 

Anyway Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Highways mentioned something about the paved streets in the 
town of Meadow Lake. I couldn’t think of a thing I would rather talk about. I happen to have lived in 
that town for very many years. In fact we had the celebration of the 50th anniversary of Meadow Lake 
last Thursday night — a very young town. I see the boys laughing over there and saying, “Your mayor 
was there.” I know they are very happy about the mayor of Meadow Lake now because he happens to be 
the candidate for your party. He is so far, fellows, from being the next MLA I couldn’t have selected a 
better candidate for you had I done it myself. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Minister, you talk about pavement. The only thing our people say about that 
pavement in Meadow Lake is the same thing that all of us who have been in that town for a very long 
period of time say. That main street you talk about paving, Mr. Minister, and you gave grants to pave — 
I paid my dues and the people who have been in that town paid their dues over the years. They have 
walked in mud to their knees. We have paid for it many times. Our property taxes are high. My 
colleague, the member for Kindersley, talked about how our property taxes compare to those in Alberta. 
Our people can make those comparisons with towns across the border, as well, because we live close to 
that border. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McLEOD: — The Minister of Urban Affairs tells me about the main street that is paved. I will tell 
you that the very first building that was ever in that new town site 50 years ago was right dead centre of 
where that main street is now. It was my dad’s log shack. You can’t tell me that any guy who comes in 
and says he is going to pave a couple of blocks is going to beat me in Meadow Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to say one more thing while we are speaking of roads and pavement. The 
members opposite continue to talk about pavement. We have a few blocks of pavement in the town of 
Meadow Lake, which we appreciate very much. We don’t thank you for it; we thank those of us who pay 
our taxes in that town, excessive taxes as they are. 
 
I want to talk to the Minister of Highways a little bit about pavement outside the town of Meadow Lake, 
say, from the boundaries going in any direction you would like to go. I asked the Minister of Highways 
last year to come to Meadow Lake sometime by wheeled vehicle rather than by airplane. I want him to 
come over there from Lloydminster where he comes from and drive that highway between Loon Lake 
and through Makwa to Meadow Lake — Highway No. 304, which used to be an LID (local 
improvement district) road. It is a curvy, winding road. You guys call it a dust-free highway in your 
project array, or whatever, in your highways propaganda. I will tell you, you could have made it 
dust-free, all right. You might as well have rolled a roll of tar paper down the top of that bloody thing 
and that’s all. That is blacktop; that is all. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McLEOD: — I will tell you, Mr. Minister, you go in there and do something with that highway 
soon. While we are at it, go the highway from Goodsoil to Meadow Lake, as well, and do something 
with that thing. Our guys have to haul their produce many more miles than any of the people in southern 
Saskatchewan do. We hear of rail line  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
338 

abandonments. You tell me with big crocodile tears (even some of my own colleagues cry about it) 
about hauling grain for 16 miles because some smaller community is closed. Our guys have been hauling 
at least 50 miles for 50 years. You still haven’t got a road in front of them and you still won’t let them 
burn purple gas in their tandem trucks, which they need if they are going to make those trips. They have 
to have bigger trucks to go down the roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sawmill is a wonderful thing. I’m really pleased, on behalf of everybody who lives 
there, that that sawmill is open. I’m not thanking you boys for it. I’m telling you that’s a crying shame 
that you had to be embarrassed into opening it, and that’s literally what happened. It’s a shame that you 
had to be embarrassed into opening it by families who were suffering, and that’s what was happening. 
You leave that open. It’s an excellent industry for our community. You try to play your petty party 
politics with that mill. If you think that the people in Meadow Lake couldn’t see through that ploy, your 
opening that mill and bringing in your mayor out of the woodwork; I’ll tell you the people there think 
that’s the greatest, biggest joke that every hit northwestern Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McLEOD: — I’m not saying thank you for opening it; I’m saying I’m really pleased that we on 
this side of the House were able to shame and embarrass you into opening the mill. It’s open now. Thank 
you very much. 
 
I have one other thing to comment on, as a number of my colleagues have, and that is the lack of nursing 
home beds in our area. The Minister of Social Services has heard on several occasions from the people 
of Loon Lake about the addition to their hospital for nursing home beds. They have received no answers 
from the minister, except the regular delay tactics. They are not hearing anything from you. For your 
information, the community of Loon Lake has a high percentage of senior citizens who want to have 
those nursing home spaces in their own community, where they can be near their families and friends. 
 
The community of Goodsoil, to the north, is in exactly the same position. They need some nursing home 
spaces. They’ve heard nothing from your boys, nothing from your department. We requested it on 
several occasions and heard nothing. What I’m asking you now (and I’m requesting it on their behalf) is 
that you come forth with some nursing home spaces in Goodsoil and Loon Lake, that you fix those 
highways that are an absolute disgrace — No. 55 and No. 304 especially — and No. 26 from St. 
Walburg to Loon Lake and go on up to Goodsoil. And there is the thing that you call a highway, No. 21 
from Paradise Hill to Pierceland. 
 
Just before I close, Mr. Speaker, I should remind the member for Redberry of something. He came to the 
community of Pierceland last year to represent the Minister of Urban Affairs at an opening of a housing 
unit. He arrived late with a civil servant. I understand how that can happen and everyone there 
understood it because they’re used to it. If you hadn’t been there before you would not have realized that 
you would have to leave quite a bit earlier because of the kinds of highways that have to be driven over 
to get there. Your people would not have had to apologize for it; we understand that. 
 
I’m talking about Pierceland now, Mr. Minister. Listen carefully, because they are expecting something 
from you. In his apology, the member for Redberry was telling  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
339 

about the back road, saying that he took the wrong turn at Loon Lake and went west, and then took the 
back road into Pierceland. “I’m very sorry that I’m late,” he said. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What was the number of that highway? 
 
MR. McLEOD: — It was Highway No. 21. My answer to him is this: it certainly wasn’t a back road 
you were on, Mr. Banda; that was Highway No. 21. The only way you could identify No. 21 as a 
highway is that periodically there is a sign that says Highway No. 21, Saskatchewan. It’s a disgrace, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be obvious from my preceding remarks that I certainly won’t be supporting the 
motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, it is always a pleasure to enter into the throne speech debate. It is 
always an honour for any member to take part in the throne speech debate. But I have to wonder as I 
stand up in this debate, after having read the throne speech that came down at the commencement of the 
1981-82 legislative session, why we are here. 
 
I have to ask myself why the government called this session. Mr. Speaker, when you read that throne 
speech, when you go through it and look for some content, the only thing you can find that is worth 
reading is a reference that was put in the Wednesday before it was delivered — 24 hours before — to 
The Home-owners’ Protection Act. Mr. Speaker, I think on the Wednesday before this session opened 
that the cabinet read that speech and it was so empty, so pathetic, that somebody had to, in desperation, 
come up with an idea. In sheer desperation The Home-owner’s Protection Act was shoved in. 
 
Now, that sounds a trifle far-fetched until one thinks back to the performance of the Premier in the 
question period following the throne speech in which he appeared as though he didn’t know anything at 
all about The Home-owners’ Protection Act. He refused to even talk about it, as if he had never seen it 
before. He knew the name but couldn’t divulge details — on Monday! He had the weekend to bone up 
on it, but nothing, absolutely nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that the Act was added to the throne speech at the last second. The 
government has introduced the legislation as though it were handled in this manner. Without it, the 
throne speech would have been a living example of an indictment of the democratic process. 
 
I believe this throne speech, as well as the throne speech of last year and the year before that and the year 
before that, is a living testimonial of the need to streamline the rules in this Assembly. 
 
I cannot help but agree with a Leader-Post editorial writer who Saturday night suggested that the throne 
speech debate this year was maybe the worst ever. He suggested that the entire exercise was one of the 
government’s saying, “We’re wonderful,” and the opposition’s saying, without very much to criticize in 
that throne speech as far as the actual content was concerned, “You’re not so wonderful.” 
 
I cannot help but wonder whether everyone of us (and I’ll take one-sixty-first of the 



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
340 

 blame even though we don’t write the throne speech yet) has not ripped off the taxpayer today and 
yesterday and the days before that when we were sitting. The government across the way called us in. 
They said there’s business to do. 
 
I asked my colleagues to think back to the session immediately following the 1978 election. Do you 
remember anything that we did of any significance, except kill a lot of time with the government’s 
throne speech. We did a budget; we did some inconsequential Bills; we adjourned. Nothing. 
 
Do you remember the next year — 1979? Much the same thing. The government called us in. There was 
a nothing throne speech, 90 or 100 housekeeping Bills. Had they not been passed, the people of 
Saskatchewan would probably have lived to move into the next year. Do you remember anything about 
that session? Nothing. 
 
They called us back again the next year. We had our throne speech, about 100 nothing housekeeping 
Bills; we killed about 65 or 70 days. Again, I’ll take one-sixty-first of the blame. But you called us in; 
you called the shots; and once again we ripped off the taxpayer. In short, since you won that election in 
1978, you have done virtually nothing. Your sessions have been nothing; nothing has happened. 
 
But this year it’s just a little bit different. This year the economy of this country is lower than it has been 
at any time since World War II. We have 20 per cent-plus interest rates; unemployment is climbing; 
agricultural prices are dropping dramatically, the price of durum from $6.50 initial to $4.75 and hard 
wheat from $5.50 down to $4.75; out in the country, production costs are going up and interest is killing 
everybody. Now, we weren’t unique in Saskatchewan. That was a familiar story and there were probably 
50 million or 60 million individual stories like that in the North American continent. They had trouble in 
the United States. They had trouble in eastern Canada. They had trouble everywhere. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we have a government which has always prided itself as having taken 
Saskatchewan from the role of have-not province to that of a have. I think it was fair to say that as this 
session was called, I believe the people of Saskatchewan (certainly those of us on this side of the 
Assembly) believed that this would be a session where things would happen. Interest rates were ravaging 
everybody, all sectors of our economy. The agricultural situation was in a serious mess. The only 
prospect was, if we can believe federal government sources, that it was going to get worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the people of Saskatchewan were looking for something tangible. After all, the 
course of this year has seen much of our time devoted to the constitutional business. The head honcho 
over there has spent the last two years strutting on the national stage, looking pretty on television with a 
good make-up artist. In fact, try to find him in his office or to put a phone call to him. It was pretty tough 
to find him. He was too busy on the national stage. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The darling of the eastern press. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Yes, he did a marvellous job for everybody except the people of Saskatchewan 
and his own department. We will come back to that a little bit later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the throne speech came down it was an indictment of this government, an indictment 
of a government that has grown old and indictment of a government that is bankrupt and has totally run 
out of ideas. If ever there was a period  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
341 

of time since World War II that some firm, decisive action was needed in this province, it was in this 
session of the legislature. Mr. Speaker, what did we get? We got that worthless, useless document that 
we have been aimlessly debating for eight days. I cannot think of a more wasteful process than what we 
have done. I suggest to this Assembly that the time has now arrived to streamline this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it is tradition to have a throne speech, then it is simply time to throw that tradition to the 
winds. It’s a waste of time. Mr. Speaker, another time which I suggest to you is equally wasteful is when 
the budget comes down. The eight days of formal budget debate are eight days that the people of 
Saskatchewan could very easily do without and wouldn’t miss a bit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recall an incident last year when certain events in this Assembly led to the bells ringing 
for a prolonged period of time. The reasons for this aren’t important. But I recall after the bells rang for 
some six or seven hours — I don’t remember which — the Attorney General had a great deal to say 
about the cost to the taxpayer. He went on television and he charged the Conservatives with wasting 
$20,000 of taxpayers’ money. I believe $20,000 was the figure. Well, Mr. Speaker, might I respectfully 
suggest to the people of Saskatchewan tonight that the six hours that were wasted in ringing those bells 
were equally as productive as the last eight days in this Assembly have been. I suggest that they received 
as much for their money in those seven hours of ringing bells as they have for any day that we’ve spent 
since this worn out, bankrupt, short-of-idea government called us back into session. 
 
It is time to streamline this Assembly and it is time for us to move more vigorously into the committee 
system. This question of formal debate may have been great in the Victorian ages but it’s 1982, just 
about. It’s 1982, and it’s too expensive to have us in here with support staff, and to go on in the 
pointless, silly, unproductive fashion in which we have been forced to proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think in this country we should be too proud to learn from others. Everybody has 
weaknesses in their system, but it is time that we moved far more extensively into the committee system, 
and in this province, through the efforts of members opposite, the predominating economic forces today 
are in crown corporations. I in no way suggest that that is the way to go, but it is a fact of life. That’s 
what it is today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do a disservice to our taxpayers as we spend all our time in this Assembly debating 
chicken feed compared to what’s out there in the Crown corporations. Probably next spring we’ll debate, 
what, a $2.5 billion budget or closer to $3 billion? Mr. Speaker, compared to what our crown 
corporations are taking in and disbursing in the course of a year, that’s not very much money. At the risk 
of being tagged with a C.D. Howe comment, $3 billion is chickenfeed compared to what our crown 
corporations are playing with. 
 
And what do we do? How do we look into our crown corporations? We have that pathetic excuse for a 
committee known as the crown corporations committee. Mr. Speaker, when you people are in 
opposition, I promise you one answer you are not going to get. When the books of the crown 
corporations are made available to you, we’ll say to you, “There it is; ask whatever you want. Here’s the 
head of the crown corporation. He will personally answer your questions.” The one answer I promise 
you are not going to get is, “It is not in the public interest.” 
 



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
342 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, when we are running crown corporations, you’ll have it all. You 
won’t be dealing with matters that happened two years ago. The head of the crown corporation will be 
sitting right there. He will answer your questions. He is not going to be prompted by us. All the crown 
corporation heads are paid a lot of money; why shouldn’t they answer the questions? They will under us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a disservice is done to our taxpayers by leaving our crown corporations the way they are. 
Consequently, that’s why our crown corporations, in many respects are in many instances, are not being 
run effectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there were any doubt as to how badly this government is slipping, how quickly it is 
losing its grip, that doubt was dispelled in question period about three days ago. The Premier took a 
question from me, and the subject was the price of gas. We have been through the price of gas before. 
Just very briefly, I will repeat some figures. I asked the Premier to comment on why the difference in 
price on a gallon of gas between Calgary and Regina was 40 cents a gallon. I then asked him, “Isn’t it a 
little unusual that the difference between Regina and Toronto should be 7 cents?” In other words, 
Ontario residents, in downtown Toronto, are buying gasoline for 7 cents a gallon less. They are buying it 
from OPEC, Mexico and Venezuela. We have it right here, and they are paying 7 cents less. 
 
I put those questions to the Premier. Do you know what the Premier’s answer was? How many 
remember what the Premier’s answer was? The most pathetic, worn-out cliché answer they use over 
there — Alberta has a medicare premium. That’s the stock answer to anything over there when you point 
to Alberta. The Premier, when asked to justify 40 cents a gallon, answered, “Alberta has a medicare 
premium.” I’ve heard that worn-out cliché used by the Minister of Finance a dozen times; I’ve heard it 
used by some of your junior cabinet ministers, used countless times by the Minister of Health. Those 
people would give those kinds of answers and that doesn’t surprise me. They have to hang their hats on 
whatever they have. 
 
The Premier is usually pretty good in question period. Then, of course, when you take a close look at the 
Premier, you will note that he has aged quite a bit, that he isn’t that cool cat which we have become 
accustomed to. You will notice the Premier just doesn’t have the grip that he used to have. Mr. Speaker, 
I don’t say that disparagingly about the Premier, because that is a brutal job he has. Nobody knows how 
brutal it is better than my family. It is a brutal, horrible job. It is a tough, demanding job. With the 
problems we face in our economy today, certainly it takes its toll on him. The comments I have made I 
don’t mean disparagingly toward the Premier at all. In fact, for the Premier’s own good, given the way 
he is deteriorating in front of us, I think he should consider packing it in. It’s a heck of a job; he’s had 10 
years of it and that will take its toll on anybody. None the less, when you get to the cold, hard facts of 
running a province, the reasons don’t matter. The reason is simply that the Premier has lost his grip. For 
whatever reasons, it’s not there. 
 
Back about a year ago, when the constitutional debate was going on, Pierre Elliott was sort of probing 
around. He was feeling should or shouldn’t he go with it? Lined up firmly against him were 
Newfoundland, Alberta, B.C. and Manitoba. Saskatchewan was straddling the fence and sniffing the 
wind. Mr. Speaker, Pierre Elliott pushed further and further and, as the Premier checked the political 
wind, he just wasn’t quite able to  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
343 

get the feel of things, so he straddled that fence a little longer. Time will tell whether we got a good deal 
out of that constitution. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, had the province of Saskatchewan not vacillated, had it joined with the other western 
premiers at that time, one year ago, Pierre Elliott Trudeau would never have proceeded in the fashion he 
did. That supreme court challenge would never have been necessary. Instead the Premier straddled that 
political fence back and forth, and Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that he left something on that fence. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I suggest to you that the Premier has not been the same since that constitutional 
debate. I suggest to you that one of the reasons we have a new constitution, which many of us in western 
Canada are not thrilled about but had to take as the best deal which could be manoeuvred, is that the 
province of Saskatchewan was a weak link at a crucial time. I state to you that if the province of 
Saskatchewan had stood up for western Canada a year ago, there would have been an entirely different 
situation come out of that. 
 
The vacillation of the Premier didn’t stop there. We had a nothing session afterward; he changed 
positions and he thought he did it fairly skillfully. He did it for one simple reason: he knew he was 
headed for opposition if he didn’t. It’s pure and simple. That is exactly why he did it. He did it for the 
most mundane, base, political reason. He wanted to keep his job. He was in opposition if he didn’t, so he 
changed his position. 
 
We all know what the results were; we now have a new constitution. The example of the Premier’s 
accident with the picket fence came this fall. The Premier was speaking in Prince Albert, I think. He 
used words to this effect, when he spoke to the followers of the New Democratic Party: “It’s three years 
since we were elected,” he said, and he went on to suggest to the party faithful that an election would not 
be far in the future, to rev them up. 
 
But even more interesting was the electoral office. You can usually tell when an election is coming by 
looking down the hall at the electoral office to see if there is any action. If there’s no action there, 
obviously there is no election coming. That place was a beehive. Even your hacks would run down and 
have lunch and not sit there half the day. They were running back up to do some work, caucusing a 
couple of times a week. Everything happened as we moved toward an election. It looked for a while like 
you were going to get your issue. In fact, the issue was there. You could have provoked a medical care 
dispute with the doctors had you wanted to. By that time, when you had decided not to provoke such a 
dispute, you had decided not to go on with an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no question that the Premier wanted to call an election this fall. No doubt about it. 
He did everything that you have to do to call an election without actually dropping a writ. We saw 
examples of members of the legislature making announcements that they didn’t have to make — saying 
that they were going to run or they weren’t going to run. We saw cabinet ministers saying, “I’m going to 
run,” or “I’m going to quit.” All of these were announcements that didn’t have to be made — but they 
were made because you have to get candidates ready in those seats. Then, Mr. Speaker, they had their 
councils of war and the member for Biggar, who would love an election every six months, was 
counselling the Premier. Elwood is the hawk and he wanted the election, and the dove is the Attorney 
General who didn’t want an election. Somewhere in the middle stood the Minister of Agriculture. Then, 
of course, the Premier weighed  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
344 

the arguments. Mr. Speaker, basically the decision was made to go, and he called the big conference for 
down in Qu’Appelle — Echo Valley. He called the big conference and took all his hacks he had hired 
down there; he took his candidates, old and new, and their campaign managers. He called the meeting. 
But at the same time, before he called that meeting, he brought in a high-powered survey outfit from 
eastern Canada and that survey crew surveyed for 10 straight days prior to that Echo Valley conference, 
or whatever it was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some funny information came out of that survey. The first thing that was pretty significant 
was that the approval factor of the Premier was down dramatically from a year earlier. About a year 
earlier about 75 per cent of supporters of all parities thought the Premier was a pretty capable guy. 
Heavens, I thought he was a pretty capable guy. I still do, as a matter of fact. There was a 75 per cent 
approval factor a year ago. What did your survey tell you this time? He wasn’t even 50 and sliding fast. 
It scared the life out of you, didn’t it? What else did your survey tell you? Your survey told you that you 
were going to be virtually wiped out in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Your surveys told you that there was just a heck of a lot of doubt that you were 
going to win this, just a heck of a lot. Now I see a hand going up. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Let me see if it was Baker’s. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — No, Henry we couldn’t touch. There’s no question about that. But let me tell you 
that you were in trouble and you knew it. But that is the only reason we’re having this throne speech 
right now, because you people lost the nerve to have an election. Mr. Speaker, there’s another example 
of the Premier vacillating — he watered it, went back and forth, whipped up his people and then he 
pulled back. He pulled back for the most mundane reason: he was going to lose. He was going to lose an 
election. 
 
We say to the people opposite, “Heavens, why didn’t you go? Why didn’t you go?” You didn’t go, 
because you weren’t just going to lose that election, you were going to take a pasting. You were going to 
take a good pasting because you were going to be wiped out in rural Saskatchewan. You were going to 
have a few seats in Regina and Saskatoon, and your real hard-core ones. You know very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite members opposite by saying that any time you are ready to face the people of 
Saskatchewan, we’re itching to go and we’re ready. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, the sooner the better, because when the day comes 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
345 

 that we bring in a throne speech such as we saw in this session, then the people should throw us out just 
like they’re going to throw you out. 
 
You know you have let it go too far, because all the hopes on that side of the Assembly are pinned on 
your budget. You’re assuming that when it’s budget time, you’re going to sell the farm and buy your way 
back in. You’re going to buy your way back in. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that it is not going to work 
because, regrettably, people expect you to do that. They are going to receive your giveaways. You know 
what, folks? They are not going to vote for you. That’s a fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move for a few moments, as I wind down my remarks, to crown corporations. 
One crown corporation which has been particularly controversial in the past year has been the SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). It used to be SGIO until some genius in that company decided it 
needed a new image. So that genius commissioned a public relations firm in Toronto, to the tune of 
$65,000, and that public relations company said, “For $65,000 here’s what you should do. You should 
drop the “o” off SGIO and you should be SGI.” I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan will be eternally 
grateful for that $65,000 expenditure. More important, they opened up a new building recently, in the 
last year or so. Yes, that one did cost a little bit more than $68,000. The most important thing that SGI 
did was to lose about $55 million in the past couple of years. Perhaps the reason they lost $55 million 
was that the minister who was saying, “Not so,” seemed to have a little trouble reading his own annual 
reports. Perhaps that’s why they lost it, and if the minister would care to open his own annual report and 
perhaps pay a little more attention to that company, perhaps there would not have been losses like that. 
 
But after SGI had lost over $500 million, obviously they moved to rectify the situation. Obviously, they 
moved to solve the problem, and they got right to the heart of the matter — they fired 13 employees who 
caused it all. They were adjusters and clerks. You remember what they were. They tried to hang that $50 
million loss on 13 middle-level employees. Mr. Speaker, when, in the annals of rotten, foul play, have 
you ever seen anything to top that in crown corporations? Where have you ever seen anything to top 
that? Well, I’ll tell you where. Right back at SGI. 
 
When the subject was being debated on the radio show between the minister and the member for Regina 
South (and this is one of the rottenest stunts I’ve ever seen in politics), when the member for Regina 
South was kicking that minister all over the airwaves, the minister pulled out the personal file of the 
member for Regina South. I’ve seen some low ones, but that one just had to be a honey . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You’ve had your change in this throne speech debate and I’ll be finished in a few 
moments. I invite you to get up. I suggest to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, that 
comment typifies that minister. That is exactly what we have come to expect, precisely. That is perhaps 
why everyone who has to insure with SGI, everyone who has a plate, hopes for goodness’ sake that that 
minister will resign, and that possibly things in SGI will be sorted out without him. That sort of attitude 
and rhetoric coming from his is exactly what we have come to expect. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, SGI loses some $50 million; they open a golden tower, as my colleague for 
Wilkie terms it; they fire 13 employees, on whom they try to hang the losses, instead of cleaning out the 
top four or five levels of management. They got out of their league by playing with the Irish, and got 
hooked up insuring Roman terrorists and the West German Baader-Meinhoff gang, or whatever they call 
it. Instead of firing all of those people, they fired 13 people. Ultimately, a change was made at the top in 
SGI.  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
346 

Murray Wallace, who was probably the best you had in the public service, is certainly a very bright and 
capable individual. He was made head of SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during some of the high points in the debate last year, when the member for Regina South 
was kicking the minister in charge of SGI all over this legislature, I found it pretty amusing that this 
minister with the big mouth tonight, the minister in charge of SGI, when we went into the corridor to 
answer the questions of the press, conspicuously stayed in his seat, and if he left it, he strolled out there 
and ran to his office. 
 
Who was there to answer the questions for SGI — questions emanating primarily from the member for 
Regina South, and the member for Wilkie? Who was there to handle the questions from the press? 
Murray Wallace was brought over here. Murray Wallace handled everything. The minister in charge of 
SGI couldn’t even field a question, mainly because he knew very little about that corporation. Maybe 
this is why that minister is so sensitive tonight about criticisms toward SGI. I suggest to that minister 
that the sooner he retires and gives up that portfolio, the better off every plate holder in this province is 
going to be. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, I guess sitting on top of that tower cold go to anyone’s head. SGI 
announced these tremendous rate increases. What was it — 35, 40 per cent, in that range? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Forty-eight. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — They rattled off these increases . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Is anybody home 
over there? Mr. Speaker, bear in mind this is a crown corporation with a monopoly. Everybody has to 
deal with them if they drive a car. So they put on these 35 to 40 per cent increases in a monopolistic 
position. 
 
One day I happened to tune in to the 6 o’clock news, and there’s Murray Wallace in his expensive office 
up there, and he’s saying, “We’re presently showing a profit of $8 million.” Good Lord, I would hope 
they would be showing a profit. With the kind of increases they announced, if they weren’t showing a 
profit, they should lock the whole works of you up in jail. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — That was just brilliant, just superb management! You jack your rates up in a 
monopoly situation — 35, 40, 45 per cent. Who in blazes couldn’t show a profit under those 
circumstances? But Murray Wallace says, “We’re making $8 million.” 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker, it goes even further than that, because it’s pretty heady up on the top 
floor of SGI. I guess that $8 million was going to his head, because about a week later I saw him on 
CKCK television. Wayne Mantyka was doing the interviewing. The subject had shifted. Murray was 
pointing out the door to the old SGI building across the street, and he was saying, “You know, there 
should be a hotel there. Nobody has bought the building from us to build a hotel. We, in SGI, feel there 
should be a hotel there. What we may have to do is build our own hotel there and lease it out.” Mr. 
Speaker, can you believe it? These guys have taken a bath on everything they’ve touched, and here’s the 
head of SGI talking about building a hotel. 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
347 

AN HON. MEMBER: — And a parkade. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Oh, and a parkade. Mr. Speaker, it defies the imagination . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . Mr. Speaker, it defies belief, absolutely defies belief! We wonder why SGI is such a 
horribly run corporation. We wonder what happened to the $50 million that you lost. We wonder why 
your rates have gone up. We wonder why SGI is in such a mess. With logic like that, it defies belief! Do 
you know what? Well, wait till I come to the high points. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s small wonder that we lost money with SGI. It’s something everybody can see. 
Everybody sees it as they buy their plates. It’s one of the many reasons this government across the way is 
going to go under. 
 
To the Minister of Labour, if I may respectfully suggest, I believe you’ve had your comments and we 
listened to you very politely. I suggest that you go back to counting: the trouble is when he gets over 10 
he has to take his shoes off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move on to Saskair. I think a most shocking thing, in the light of present 
economic conditions, came about a month ago when the public was stunned that this government had 
$100 million to buy a broken-down, decrepit airline called Norcanair. 
 
Now, this is the same government that has no money for the cattle industry — $5 million, excuse me. 
They have no money for mortgage holders; they have no money to keep our hospitals going; they have 
no money to employ doctors, to keep our specialists here so that they don’t go to Alberta. This is the 
same government that says Alberta has a medicare premium. You know what else Alberta has? They 
have good hospitals, good specialists and they have some medical care in their medicare. Oh yes, the 
stock answer is that Alberta has a medicare premium. Shocking! Heavens! You mean the fact that they 
have beautiful hospitals, the specialists, and the fact that they have a medical care program that makes 
ours look sick in terms of quality doesn’t matter because they have a premium. But we had $100 million 
to put into an airline. 
 
You know what you can do with $100 million? You know what you can buy with $100 million? Well, to 
start off with, I’ll just give you one little thing that it will do. It will bring water from the South 
Saskatchewan River right down into Regina. Not only that, it will take it beyond Regina. For $100 
million you could give Regina a decent water supply and irrigate half of southeastern Saskatchewan. 
That’s what you cold do for $100 million. Do you know the people of Regina who drink that rotten 
slough water day after day have made a mistake? And Henry, I don’t know whether you’re going to be 
successful next year or not. But if you are making a representation to these people, even though they 
won’t be there, I want to suggest that you don’t come and say that we need money to bring decent water 
into Regina. Say that what we need is a crown corporation for water, because you people are so hung up 
that if anybody needs something for a crown corporation you have all the money in the world. But if it’s 
anything else, if it’s for ordinary people, you’re going to cut that program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me give them an example of how reprehensible they are. The city of Regina is very 
fortunate. You’re lucky the city of Regina is in Canada because if Regina were in the United States, do 
you know what would happen? The federal department of the environment would walk in and say that 
this water is unsafe and condemn it. There would be no water supply here. Do you know what they’d 
say? They’d say you have a 



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
348 

 river up there that’s the envy of the world. Get your water in from there. You have in this province the 
Department of the Environment and the Department of Health which allow 1,400 parts per million solids 
and bacteria content. They allow it to be as high as 1,400. And what do they say? Tough. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You can chew that. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Just about. Do you know what the standard is in the United States? It is 500 
parts per million maximum. 
 
You know, in Regina it never gets below 500 parts per million — never. You have, to the north of us, 
one of the great resources of the world. Can you imagine what they would do with that river if it went 
through Utah, Arizona, Texas, or any of those arid states, or Alberta? Let me tell you, they would use 
that water. They would use that water and they would turn it into a garden. What do you people do over 
there with $100 million? Oh no, that’s fine, let Regina drink slough water. Let 175,000 drink slough 
water. What do we care? They are only people. Let them drink slough water. Or run irrigation further 
south and irrigate the arid land, the sandy lands in southeastern Saskatchewan, for $100 million. What do 
you imagine the people would do? What do you great thinkers do over there? you buy a broken-down 
airline for $100 million, and you let 175,000 people drink slough water which, by virtually any other 
standard in North America, would be considered unsafe, condemned, and shut down in no time. 
 
But we have a government of the people. We have a government here that says, “We’re for the little 
guy.” Mr. Speaker, I suggest to this government across the way that the signs are there. For the same 
reason Sterling Lyon may have been defeated a few weeks ago in Manitoba, the same fate is in store for 
you if and when you conjure up your courage to call an election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the last few weeks (and particularly the last few days) have seen a thorough 
crumbling of the NDP philosophy. It has happened primarily in the field of natural resources. 
Specifically, I am going to turn briefly to uranium. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have always supported the government in provincial control of resources. On that point 
we are with you 1,000 per cent. But when it comes down to how you do it, that is where we have 
differed sharply. Mr. Speaker, it has always been out contention on this side of the House that there were 
people who were willing to take the risks in northern Saskatchewan and that the people were far better 
served by the government being (for want of a better word) an auctioneer. In other words, you take a 
percentage of what goes out of it. Other people would take the risk and you tax them accordingly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on that side of the House we have the big operators, the big spenders, the high rollers. But 
on whose money? Borrowed money? Heavens no. Somebody else’s money. The taxpayers’ money. The 
heavy rollers over here, the big spenders, really know it all. They went into the uranium business. Lots of 
people were willing to do it. But they said, “Oh, heavens, we are going into uranium. We know 
everything that there is to know about the potash business. We made some profit. We don’t pay many 
royalties, but we made some profit. We know it all.” Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you today that the 
cornerstone of the NDP philosophy in resources is in shambles and is irretrievable. 
 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
349 

Of course, the Minister of Minister Resources in question period said that everything is wonderful, that 
everything is rosy. “It is just coming up roses; there is no problem,” he said. “The uranium market is just 
going to be great; there will be nothing but bundles of money coming in through the ‘80s.” It is a funny 
thing that Esso Resources isn’t saying that. It is a funny thing that Eldorado Nuclear isn’t saying that. It 
is a funny thing that mining publications aren’t saying that. Do you know who is saying it? SMDC is 
saying it. Of course, I think they’ve been reading press clippings of most of the cabinet ministers over 
there. Mr. Speaker, the high rollers over there, the big spenders, the know-it-alls have taken the 
taxpayers of this province into the bath. You’ve taken our heritage fund to the point where we don’t have 
a heritage fund. 
 
Wait a minute. It has assets. What are these assets? Billions of dollars according to, I think, the last 
budget. Didn’t they say it would be a billion dollars? But what is it? About $700 million of that is in 
interest-free loans to the potash business. We will deal with the situation in the potash business in 
coming days. Anybody want to give us a quick rundown on what a p & l sheet for the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan looks like today? Anybody want to do it? Anybody want to bet that it’s not 
in the black? Everybody knows it’s in the red. 
 
What goes into SMDC? Where is the rest of the heritage fund? Would you believe that it is basically in 
uranium? Would you believe it? Where is the heritage fund? It’s a commonly held misapprehension in 
this province that ours is like Alberta’s. The feeling is that ours is like Alberta’s and has money in that 
account. The feeling is that there are funds in that account which are earning interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sad fact of the matter is that we don’t have a heritage fund except in socialist 
imagination. We have no heritage fund. Ours sits in uranium mines and potash mines. Of course, 
everybody knows that PCS is for the best interests of Saskatchewan taxpayers. It will do the right thing 
in the potash field. Tell that to the people involved in that Central Canada plant expansion. Tell that to 
the people around the Colonsay mine. In everything PCS does, in everything the government does, they 
have long-term interests at heart. Oh yes, they told Central Canada Potash. Those people, incidentally, 
had the unmitigated gall and the absolute nerve to challenge this government in court, and you told them, 
“Don’t bother to expand.” That’s just wonderful. But PCS — “Fine, go right ahead.” 
 
Look, we’re going to treat everybody alike. PCS isn’t going to be treated any different from any other 
potash mines. Anybody want to tell us about the potash business? Anybody want to tell us about the 
wisdom of that investment? Tell us about IMCC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation) 
closing for 17 days because of markets. That’s fresh off the press. Tell us about that one. I doubt 
anybody’s going to stand up and talk about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s another reason you’re going at it. You’ve taken our heritage money and made lousy 
investments that you didn’t have to make. Somebody else was willing to take the risk. All you had to do 
was tax them accordingly. They expected to be taxed. Let me tell you, we would have taxed them. We 
would have taxed them as much as they could have handled. But, Mr. Speaker, the high rollers, the big 
spenders, the know-it-alls did it their way. What do you have to show for it? You guys didn’t take a loss 
personally. You potentially blew and put into jeopardy all the revenue of the ‘70s from our 
non-renewable sources. That’s what you heavy rollers, you big spenders have done. 
 



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
350 

Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that when you ultimately call an election, you are going to pay the price for 
that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister of Labour, I suggest you move on and take your other shoe off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have a right to expect some help in their time of trouble. What 
is an average person who is having difficulty with his mortgage or a farmer who is having a dickens of a 
time meeting his interest payments supposed to think when he hears there’s $1 billion in extra revenue 
coming into this province every year? What is he supposed to think? Maybe that the government is 
going to give him some help through this tough time. What does he get? They are going to spend $100 
million for an airline. 
 
I suggest to you that for the very reason that Sterling Lyon was defeated, you are going to be defeated if 
and when you ever choose to call an election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, I want to deal very briefly with the field of education. I do hope the 
Minister of Rural Affairs will stick around for just a moment, since I choose to deal with some of his 
comments. We heard a comment coming from the Minister of Rural Affairs that school units are 
providing Cadillac services. Mr. Speaker, just to the north of where the minister made that comment, 
there is a school district which is primarily in the constituency of the member for Morse. 
 
They did some interesting figuring over there. They looked at where they are and the costs which they 
have. They know it is possibly an election year. They know negotiations are going on with the teachers. 
They know the teachers are asking for 19.5 per cent, and the government through its negotiating 
committee is offering the teachers 10.5 per cent. They have come to the obvious conclusion (it’s an 
election year) that the settlement will be in the range of 15 per cent. It’s pretty good logic, I suppose. 
 
They did some looking around. They get grants on a per student ratio, as does every other rural school 
district. Do you know what they concluded they are faced with? A 32 mill increase. This government, 
which has money for any crown corporation, will not make adequate grants to our rural school units or 
any school unit. Thirty-two mills! Sure it’s an election year and the government will have some goodies 
to pass out in its budget. It had better have; otherwise, do you know what that school unit’s options are? 
I am sure that that school unit is indicative of many out in rural Saskatchewan. Do you know what its 
choice is? To can 20 teachers and close down some schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nobody wants that. They have the option to cut out 25 teachers and close some schools. 
The towns for which they are talking about closure are not exactly towns that are on the verge of dying. 
These are solid towns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to know from this government how it can tell us it is in favour of rural 
Saskatchewan. How can you tell us it is your position to keep people on the farms and in the towns when 
at the same time you are going to take away their schools? Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that this 
government has failed again. It has failed in the field  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
351 

of education because you negotiate these settlements with the teachers. You said, “All right, we can do it 
better.” You said, “We can do it better. We’ll negotiate.” But the very least you can do after you 
negotiate the increase is pay the bill. But what does this government do? It negotiates the increase, and 
then sends the bill to the units and says, “Here, pay it.” Well, what choice do they have? They could 
either jack the mill rate up or they can cut services. Once again, just as we’ve seen in medicare, chop it 
in bits, chop it in statistics. Chop it in expenditures all the way through and now we’re seeing it in 
education . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s exactly what we’re seeing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again, it’s for those reasons I suggest to you that this government is well on its way 
under, because it has forgotten the basic ingredient of what got it there in ‘71. You forgot how you got 
there, and you’ve forgotten the people. You’ve gone on an ego trip. You’ve gone on a policy of 
aggrandizement of the New Democratic policy; crown corporations. You know, Mr. Speaker, in the case 
of SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), in the case of PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), in the case of SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation), I have a very 
valid question to add on to their crown corporation ads. When this guy in the slick voice says, “It’s your 
business.” the very valid question to tag on it, “What the blazes happened to our business?” It’s a pretty 
good question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Fear not, I will. Mr. Speaker, I wish to turn now 
to the Attorney General. I wish he were in his seat, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . If you 
insist, all right, perhaps I shall tell you some stories going back to the period you are referring to. 
 
Those of you who were here then may recall there was then a pretty capable attorney general on that side 
of the House: the member for Regina North-West. You remember him; the Minister of Labour will 
remember him; his name was Darrel Heald. Darrel Heald was a pretty capable individual, and Mr. 
Speaker will recall him. You may not have agreed with him philosophically, but I think most people 
would respect him as being fairly capable. He did bring in some legislation which at that time was 
regarded as progressive. Upon the change of government, Mr. Heald had left quite a bit of legislation on 
the drawing board. Consequently, with the change of government, the new Attorney General had a 
drawing board to use for the next two to three years. Do you know that much or many of the progressive 
things that the Attorney General’s department did at that time came from his predecessor? They came 
from Darrel Heald. But then do you know what happened? The drawing board came to an end and was 
used up and all of a sudden the Attorney General on this side was on his own. He was on his own hook. 
And I ask you to think back to what has really come out of the Attorney General’s office since about 
1974-75. 
 
Well, I suppose it’s fair after 10 years to give him a rating. On a scale from 1 to 10 I think it’s fair to give 
him a rating. Well, I was going to say about 1.5 and then we could debate whether it was on the plus or 
minus side of zero. Mr. Speaker, I think that the Department of the Attorney General is one that has 
suffered the most under this constitutional crisis. I think it’s a fair comment to say that the Attorney 
General of this province has spent far too much time strutting on the national stage and far too little 
looking after the home fires in his office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think any Attorney General in Canada has had as much 
legislation challenged in court as has this Attorney General. Mr. Speaker, in  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
352 

history I don’t think any Attorney General has had as much legislation challenged as he has. Today was a 
prime example of strangely written legislation. The Bill was introduced into this Assembly today and 
we’re all going to watch with interest as to how it is handled. Whether you’re NDP or Conservative, read 
that Bill. Did you ever see a more clumsily written Bill? We’re not all lawyers but, honest to goodness, 
did you ever see a Bill written like that? And before the member for Moose Jaw North makes a 
comment, I invite him to read the Bill. I don’t know whether he has or not. Never mind what they tell 
you. Read it. Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that that is an area in particular in which the Attorney 
General has fallen down badly. 
 
But the area in which I intend to deal for the next few moments is the area of children’s rights. Mr. 
Speaker, last year after waiting it out to see if the Attorney General was going to introduce legislation in 
this area which is so horribly, grossly neglected, nothing happened. So I introduced a Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
that was basically a non-political Bill, but I think it’s fair to say that it did have significant support on 
that side of the House. Many fair-minded people on that side of the House looked at that Bill with some 
sympathy. Naturally they had a problem. Had it been introduced by anybody other than a member on this 
side of the House, it would have gone through like that. But I think basically members on that side of the 
House know full well that Saskatchewan lags sadly behind in the field of children’s rights. 
 
I don’t suggest for one moment that I’m not vulnerable to criticism like, “How come you have taken up 
this issue? It’s only because it affected you.” That’s a valid criticism and I accept it because it’s true. Mr. 
Speaker, it has been brought to the floor of this Assembly. Basically those of you over there know what I 
say to be true. You know that we lag sadly behind. I cannot say more emphatically how disgusting and 
reprehensible I found the Attorney General’s conduct in killing that Bill and using it as a negotiating tool 
in the wind-down of this House last spring. I just don’t know how the Attorney General could use 
children’s rights as a negotiating and bargaining tool as he did. I find it disgusting and reprehensible. We 
lag so far behind other provinces, other states, it’s pathetic. You know when that Bill was in the 
Assembly, all we heard were lawyers’ legal arguments. 
 
I heard a speech from the member for Regina Elphinstone. It was a fair speech; there was nothing wrong 
with it. But do you know what position he took all the way through that speech? He gave it as if he were 
a lawyer in a courtroom. That’s what he was trying to do and I don’t fault him for that. But all of the 
Attorney General’s arguments would be tough from a lawyer’s point of view. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to recount something which happened in a courtroom in one of my famed custody 
battles, from Judge M. A. MacPherson. This was an aside; it shocked me and it had nothing to do with 
the case. Judge MacPherson said, “You know, I’ve been making custody dispositions for some 25 or 30 
years, and we judges just never get to know whether we’ve done the right thing or not. Only in one 
instance did I know whether or not I had done the right thing. That happened many years later when I 
received a letter. I don’t recall whether it was good or bad.” Mr. Speaker, can you imagine that in this 
province today, judges have been making dispositions and they themselves don’t know whether they 
have been using the right criteria? 
 
How many of you on that side of the House are aware that a social worker, who may have knowledge of 
that custody disposition cannot be called as a witness? The Attorney General knows. He cannot be called 
as a witness even if he has useful  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
353 

information. Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General knows all this, and yet, as we closed down the House, 
the Attorney General stood in this Assembly and he acknowledged the problem. He acknowledged that 
we could expect action in this field at the fall session of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I truly missed it in the throne speech. Do you know what I am greatly afraid is going to 
happen? I am afraid that nothing is going to be done. Sure, I can introduce the Bill and we’re back to the 
same old problem. Members over there who know the Bill has merit can’t touch it for fear of breaking 
party ranks. Certainly in an election year you can’t do that. But, for the fair thinking members over there 
I ask, “Can your caucus pressure the Attorney General?” I cannot believe that everyone over there is as 
insensitive as the Attorney General is to an issue such as children’s rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to turn to another area which I suggest typifies the shocking way that the Attorney 
General has let his department go down the tubes in many aspects. I am sure that many of you have 
heard about the Gil Johnson case which came to trial this week. Now Mr. Johnson, for those of you who 
may not be thoroughly cognizant, is a former director general for Employment and Immigration Canada. 
He was charged by the Attorney General’s department for defrauding native people of $72 million. 
 
AN. HON. MEMBER: — Make it thousands. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Excuse me, $72,000. Yes, laugh, gentlemen, just laugh. Let me see if you laugh 
after this. He was charged by the Attorney General’s department of defrauding native people of $72,000. 
Mr. Speaker, like most people, I heard this on a news broadcast some months ago and my reaction was 
to throw the book at him. That was my reaction on hearing it over the news. The man had to face the 
degradation of being transferred to Ottawa where he was until his trial came up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this man was charged by the Attorney General’s department with defrauding native people. 
The Attorney General had to be involved in this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what were the facts that came up when the Attorney General’s people took this matter to 
court? What came out of it? Well, I’ll tell you what came out of it. The facts were that Mr. Johnson 
didn’t defraud anybody. There were 70 people who were freezing to death in northern Saskatchewan, 
and they came begging, hat in hand, to this government across the way, and they said, “Give us anything; 
give us a tent.” Do you know what this government said? “Run along back up north.” 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You’re sick. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Well, we’ll just see in a minute who is sick, Mr. Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan. Tell them about the help you gave them. You sent them back up north; you sent them 
back up that creek. What did Mr. Johnson do? Somewhere out of his budget he found $72,000 to buy 
some trailers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Attorney General charged him and held him up to public ridicule. People jumped to the 
conclusion that that man had pocketed $72,000 and run off with it. That was the impression you would 
get from press reports. He had to go through that degradation. After those people had come and asked for 
help, and you said, “Get lost; go back up to Bear Creek,” this man found the money. What does he get? 
The Attorney General’s department charged him with defrauding $72,000. 
 



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
354 

Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting what happened just the other day. On December 4, the crown entered a 
stay in the fraud trial. Do you know what that means? That’s a legal term for saying it was thrown out of 
court. Do you know what was said? I can quote Justice J. G. McIntyre. He said, “This is only fair.” 
Speaking to Mr. Johnson, he said: 
 

You were charged with two very serious offences, yet I was wondering from the first day of that 
trial where the evidence was. I was in doubt whether or not any crime was committed at all. Now, it 
turned out to be a misunderstanding. 

 
Isn’t that wonderful? 
 
The Attorney General’s department destroyed this man, destroyed his credibility, held him and his 
family up to ridicule because he had a hear — a heart that you didn’t have over there. But heavens, yes! 
You held the man up; you probably destroyed him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now, there’s a good 
comment. You send that to Mr. Johnson’s family from the Minister of Urban Affairs. 
 
The judge went on to say (this is Mr. J. G. McIntyre), “I regret very much that you are in that prisoner’s 
box.” This was in the Leader Post on Friday, December 4, 1981. I invite you to read it for yourself. I 
think it’s a disgusting, reprehensible, revolting example of inefficiency in the Attorney General’s 
department. There is just no excuse for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you the extent to which that Attorney General’s department has deteriorated is 
that the Attorney General is walking around threatening to sue the member for Qu’Appelle, going up to 
the press gallery and threatening to sue members of the press — oh yes, that’s big-time stuff. Do you 
know what that’s indicative of? That’s indicative of a government that is on the way out; that’s 
indicative of a government that has lot its grip; that’s indicative of a government that has to run around 
threatening people. Mr. Speaker, that’s what has happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no question in our minds that the people of Saskatchewan are ready for a change. 
There is no question at all. And for those of you who choose to walk, we invite you to walk out of here 
tomorrow. Do it today! Call it, call it! but they won’t call it because, Mr. Speaker, the people across the 
hall know very well what’s going to happen. They’re not only going to get a beating; they’re going to get 
a pasting. In every single area that you care to deal with, they’re falling down in their actions. Their 
Crown corporations have totally forgotten whom they are there to serve. The Crown corporations think 
they’re there to serve their own bureaucrats. They forgot that they’re there to serve the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, to the Minister of Labour, who has his shoes back on, 
I suggest that you go and talk to the Premier tomorrow and invite him to go out and call an election. Go 
out and call one and you tell the people why it’s necessary to run around threatening to sue the member 
for Qu’Appelle and to sue the press. Tell them about your tactics, how the uranium business has 
collapsed, how you’ve taken the people’s money, how you have simply taken revenue from 
non-renewable resources and tubed it. Tell them about the decade of failure and about how everything 
that you touch is blowing up in your faces. Tell them about how you have all this money for anybody 
and anything, except education. No money for education, no money for health. You tax the people again. 
 
You know, it’s sort of an interesting thing, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how many of you 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
355 

 saw an ad in the Globe and Mail the other night, but there’s a lot of truth in it. It’s a good ad; you may 
see it again. It shows a gas pump. It says, “When you buy $1,500 out of this pump, you know what 
you’re getting? It’s really $500 worth of gas.” One thousand dollars goes to your federal and provincial 
governments, wherever you may be. That’s what you get for $1,500. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, you might think that in this particular province, where we talk about our oil 
wealth or, conversely have proximity to Alberta with that oil wealth, some of that could spill over and 
benefit the ordinary guy. But you know, every time that ordinary guy fills up his car in Saskatchewan, 
it’s about $7, if he has any size of tank at all. Every time he fills his tank, every time he puts that nozzle 
in that gas tank, seven bucks goes to the government. Isn’t it wonderful to live in a socialist Utopia? Isn’t 
it wonderful to live where the government has its own ordinary people at heart? Isn’t it wonderful that 
we have Crown corporations that have everybody’s interests at heart? Isn’t it wonderful? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it may come as a shock after these few brief comments that I think I’ll vote against the 
motion. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I notice by the clock that I have, if the 
conventional time is honoured, two minutes. The agreement that was made by the representatives of the 
Conservative Party, the member for Rostern and the member for Meadow Lake, with the NDP, said that 
the hon. member for Thunder Creek would get up about . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’m having trouble hearing the person who presently has the floor, 
and that’s the Attorney General. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was about to say that the agreement made between 
the representatives of the two parties, as has been the custom of this House for at least the 14 years that I 
have been around, is that there would be one-half hour for the government — from about 9 o’clock to 
9:30. 
 
It is interesting to note that an opposition that is so confident, so tough, and so fearless of this old, tired, 
decrepit, and failing government only gives us two minutes, so fearful are they of a rebuttal. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — So ailing and so failing is this government that the member for Thunder 
Creek (of all of the members opposite) said that he would allow the member for Saskatoon Riversdale 
two minutes. Well, Mr. Speaker, I am going to ask the members of this House — I am sure the members 
on this side will agree — to stop the clock for 15 to 20 minutes for me to make a few remarks in rebuttal. 
Of course, knowing full well how they have this government on the ropes, I am sure that this tough, 
intellectual, mauling, brawling opposition will agree. So I intend to continue speaking until one of the 
members opposite calls it 9:30, if he does. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have just finished hearing from the hon. member for Thunder Creek. I want to tell 
the hon. member that very little, if anything, of the speech is worth rebutting, but I do want to say one 
thing. It is important to note one aspect of this political situation in Saskatchewan as it exists in 1981 and 
that is the parallel to 1971. And the parallel from 1971 is that it was our right-wing government, from 
1964 to  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
356 

1971, that did away with the Hatton gas fields, that did away with the Snakehole deposits of sodium 
sulphates. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What is your point of order? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I believe the rules call for the vote to be called at 9:30. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The point of order raised by the member for Rosthern is valid. 
According to rule 13, subsection (4), it is incumbent upon me to put the question on the motion that is 
before the House at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 34 
 
Blakeney Pepper Allen 
Kaeding Snyder Romanow 
Smishek Tchorzewski Robbins 
Baker Feschuk Rolfes 
Mostoway Banda Vickar 
Hammersmith Kowalchuk Thompson 
Engel Long Cowley 
Cody Koskie Matsalla 
Shillington Skoberg Poniatowski 
Prebble Johnson White 
Nelson Lusney Solomon 
Miner   
 

NAYS — 14 
 
Berntson Garner Birkbeck 
Taylor Andrew Thatcher 
Rousseau Pickering Duncan 
McLeod Katzman Hardy 
Swan Muirhead  
 

MOTIONS 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Labour, the 
member for Moose Jaw South: 
 

That said address be engrossed and presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor by such 
members of the Assembly as are of the Executive Council. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Minister of Urban Affairs, the 
member for Regina North-East: 
 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
357 

That this Assembly will, at the next sitting, resolve itself into a committee of finance to consider the 
supply to be granted to Her Majesty and to consider the ways and means of raising the supply. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:38 p.m. 
 


