






















































Hansard: April 02, 1981


(1742) 1743 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

Thursday, April 2, 1981. 
 

EVENING SESSION 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 
 

ENVIRONMENT 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Before 5 o'clock, prior to adjournment, I understood you to say that the water 
problem in Buffalo Pound is not your problem and has nothing to do with the Department of the 
Environment. I'm not sure if you really meant that or if, in fact, that's the case. I want to talk about the quality 
of water (as did the member for Arm River) in the city of Regina. Of course, we get most of it from the 
Buffalo Pound area. 
 
I can't believe that you would take that approach or that attitude and say that it's none of your concern; it's 
not your department's concern and so on. I also can't believe that eight other members of your party with 
constituencies in the city of Regina — I see one sitting down just now — voice no objections and no 
complaints to the Department of the Environment for the quality of water in Buffalo Pound. If I have to be 
the only one in the city of Regina to do so, as an elected member of the legislature, then I will. I don't see the 
member for Regina Centre doing much talking about it, nor the member for Regina Wascana. I look around; 
I think there are only three here tonight . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, yes, the member for Regina 
North-West is here. 
 
Mr. Minister, what have you done to date to improve the quality of that water? What are your plans? What 
recommendations have you made to whatever department you have to make them to, and when can the 
people of the city of Regina expect some improvement in their drinking water? I'll start with that. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I'll try to avoid an argument or debate with the hon. member. I will 
repeat again that it is not the responsibility of the Department of the Environment with regard to the water 
quality in the city of Regina or in other urban centres in the province. 
 
With regard to Buffalo Pound and the efforts of the government to meet the obligations of Buffalo Pound as 
a water reservoir for the Qu'Appelle chain, on the basis of the agreement that was developed under the Lake 
Diefenbaker project, I want to advise the member that last year we passed 70,000 acre-feet of water down the 
Qu'Appelle River. This is equivalent to a complete turnover of the total water in Buffalo Pound Lake, so 
there was a complete change of water in Buffalo Pound Lake from Lake Diefenbaker. Despite the water 
exchange, Dr. Hammer of the Saskatchewan Research Council was unable to conclude that large quantities 
of water would improve the taste and odor quality problem in Buffalo Pound. The taste and odor depend on 
algae in the lake, basically that's where the problems arise, which are strongly influenced by climatic 
conditions and the nutrients in that particular basin. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1744 

Last year it was noticed that a change in the dominant types of algae had occurred. It is likely in 1981, 
because the conditions seem to be developing in the same way they did in 1980, that that natural phenomena 
can occur again. It's a problem which is predominately brought about by climatic conditions. 
 
One solution to that particular problem offered by the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina, as has been reported 
in the press, is that taste and odour can be cured by activated charcoal filtration at least in the short-term. 
With regard to the responsibilities we have assumed as a province, my colleague from urban affairs and I 
have met with the cities and have discussed a long-term study of water supply and quality. We see those as 
our responsibilities. 
 
What I attempted to tell the hon. members before dinner concerning the pipe that goes out into the river 
(other than that we license the filtration plant) is that, in so far as the taste and odour, the mechanism for the 
distribution of the urban water supply and the system related to it are concerned, that is a city responsibility 
and not one of the Department of the Environment. We don't see that as our responsibility nor are we going 
to assume that responsibility. The hon. members on any other occasion would be saying the government 
should get its sticky fingers out of this local autonomy area and it should leave the cities to decide what they 
want to do. But you can't have it both ways. You can't say, in the case of a water supply system, that the 
government should be running around deciding what is going to be developed in terms of water for an urban 
centre, and in another situation say it should be out of there because of local autonomy, and local 
governments should be able to administer their own affairs without the government interfering. So, I don't 
know which one you want, hon. member. I don't know which one you want, but surely be consistent. The 
only consistency we've seen from you now is that you're inconsistent. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — For a minister who said he didn't want an argument, you're doing a pretty good job of 
arguing. You seem to be enjoying the argument very well, and I guess I did hear correctly before supper. I 
wasn't sure whether I had or not, but that's your concern, and it's tough luck for the city of Regina. I suggest 
to you that if you were sitting over here and it was a different Department of the Environment sitting over 
there, you'd be one of those people screaming about the quality and about the condition. 
 
You don't have to tell me what causes it. I know it's the algae. And you don't have to tell me that it's a natural 
phenomenon, and you don't have to tell me that it's been brought on by climatic conditions. I'm aware of that, 
and so are the people of Regina aware of that. But you're going to sit there or stand there and tell the people 
of this city that it's their problem, and it's tough luck? You have polluted water in Buffalo Pound and the 
Department of the Environment says, "Fine and dandy. That's somebody else's problem. It isn't the problem 
of the environment department." That's assuming and accepting your responsibilities in a very irresponsible 
manner, Mr. Minister. 
 
I must say that for you to indicate that you're talking about a long-term study with the city of Regina and 
your department . . . I can't understand it. You're saying it's not your concern and it's not the responsibility of 
the Department of the Environment, but on the other hand or out of the other corner of your mouth you turn 
around and say, "Well, we are conducting a long-term study with the city of Regina." Well, which is it? Are 
you responsible or are you not responsible? If you're not, then why are you conducting a study with the city 
of Regina? My God, we've been studying it for 75 years! How long do you want to study the problem that's 
existing? And how long do you want the people of 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1745 

Regina to be drinking foul smelling water in this city? And this is exactly what we're drinking. 
 
Now, they tell me you should put it through a filtration plant first . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . By his own 
filter. I know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Minister, I don't see this as a joking problem. I don't see it 
as anything very hilarious. And you're making very light of a very serious situation, and your concern should 
be one far more serious than what it seems to be. The member from behind who just walked in would be the 
first one to agree with me that polluted water is a serious concern, namely the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland. But I certainly never hear this from the member for Regina North-East, or the 
member for Regina Wascana or Regina North-West, or Regina Centre or the Premier, who represents the 
constituency in the heart of this city. 
 
I am told (correct me if I'm wrong) that the water comes in from Diefenbaker Lake into Buffalo Pound, flows 
through the pound and then comes out. The outlet is at the east end of the pound. I don't know whether that's 
correct or not. And the people who tell me are not necessarily experts but perhaps they have a point — by 
putting the pipe (instead of at this end of the pound) at the other end where the intake is, that would perhaps 
resolve some of the problem. Is that possible, or is that something you have looked at? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I can tell the hon. member from the fact we have the information that 
it was considered, but it's not something that the Department of Environment has reason to consider. It's for 
the city to decide whether or not it wishes to move its intake pipe to the west end of the pond or to the middle 
or the top or the bottom of the pond. It's a matter for the city to decide that issue. Surely the hon. member can 
understand that the administration of the city must make some decisions with respect to its water supply. 
 
I did indicate to the hon. member that there is a complete (in terms of volume) exchange of water in the 
Buffalo Pound Lake during the season. And, while the Department of the Environment is aware (because I 
think we have a good and continuous co-operative working relationship with the city) and is concerned about 
water quality, it's a matter (I can't answer the hon. member's question in any detail or with any degree of 
certainty) over which I, as Minister of Environment, do not have any responsibility or control. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Can I just ask the minister one very simple question? What is your responsibility? 
What's the reason for the Department of the Environment? Perhaps you might like to explain why you have a 
department and why you're the minister. What are your rules? What are your guidelines? Would you be 
interested in commenting on what the existence of your department is all about? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — I'm not going to go into a lot of detail about that. I can tell the hon. member, 
however, that we are not responsible (the Department of the Environment) for the decisions with respect to 
water intake lines for the city of Regina. We're not responsible for that and we won't assume any 
responsibility for it. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, you've told me what you're not responsible for, how would you like to tell me 
what you are responsible for? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I expect the minister to stand up and give me an answer to my question. My question is 
intended to be serious and not stupid. I want to know what the function and the reason for your department 
is. You're telling me what you're not responsible 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1746 

for. What are you responsible for? You ordered a clean-up of the PCB spill, because of a possible danger to 
the water supply of the city. What are your responsibilities? You have pollution in the Buffalo Pound area of 
the lake. Pollution is pollution. Now, what are your responsibilities? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, if the hon. member opposite were serious about the 
question he asked, we would be dealing with the estimates on some sort of reasonable basis. The member 
wouldn't be standing and trying to make his political point and argument. 
 
We have in the blue book of estimates for 1982, beginning on page 35, 14 items under environment. (I 
believe there are 14 or more.) They have to do with the administration, public information and education, 
policy planning and research, air pollution control, water pollution control, land protection and mines 
pollution control. I could go through these for you, but if it's a reading lesson you need, then I would suggest 
the hon. member go to day care or some place where he can inform himself on how to proceed on the basis 
of estimates. I can answer the hon. member's question if he wants to direct questions relevant to the estimates 
or some specific issues related thereto. I think it would be useful for us to get on with the estimates and to 
determine for the people of Saskatchewan whether or not the funds being appropriated here, in this 
legislature, for environment are being properly appropriated. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I recall a motion that was introduced in this House about two years ago when they 
voted $1 for your department. I think it would have been appropriate for what you are worth in this 
department. 
 
Before 5 o'clock I listened to the Attorney General criticize the opposition for not discussing policies of the 
government which . . . If you want to talk about it, it's a political forum. This is what it's all about. Now you 
talk about inconsistencies. He says that we don't do a job when it comes down to talking policy and talking 
the political points in this House. You get up, on the other hand, three hours later and criticize us for getting 
up and doing exactly what the Attorney General just finished, before dinner, saying that we should be doing. 
Now you talk about inconsistencies. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That's called caucus schizophrenia. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That's a good word for it. That's a really good term for it. 
 
I still view your answers and understand them as being very flippant and you, for your part, as trying to be 
humorous about a very serious problem. 
 
I'll ask you a question. Perhaps you'll come down to giving me some credible answers after a while. I don't 
know whether it's because you didn't have enough to eat or didn't have a rest in-between times. Maybe you'll 
get down to business and start answering some of the questions. Let me ask you this: is it a concern of your 
department or yours, as minister, to look into noise pollution in this province? Is that of your department's 
reference? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — I am advised, Mr. Chairman, that the department does not have any 
legislative authority for overall noise pollution control. We have been in the process, I guess within the last 
five years, of developing a noise pollution by-law for adoption by municipalities. The by-law has been 
developed and is being used and is 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1747 

there for municipalities to adopt. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I would like you to repeat that because I only caught part of it. You say you have no 
legislative authority? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — There is no legislative authority. We have developed the by-law for the 
urban centres or for those who wish to use them. I understand that Moose Jaw has adopted the by-law. I don't 
know whether Regina at this point has. Regina apparently has not. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I know I could read the act and I haven't done so. I'd like you to tell me tonight, as 
well as the press and the rest of the people, what legislative authority you have in the Department of 
Environment with respect to water, with respect to noise, with respect to environment, period. Just give me 
some indications. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — I don't know whether we have all the list that we can go down, but we can 
list some of them: The Department of the Environment Act, The Water Resources Management Act, The Air 
Pollution Control Act, The Litter Control Act, The Water Rights Act, The Drainage Control Act, The 
Environmental Assessment Act and The Water Power Act. Here's a brochure full of acts for the hon. 
member. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I'll have some reading material before I go to bed. I will look at them. I promise you 
that. 
 
You say that you developed a set of by-laws for noise pollution. I presume you mean guidelines for cities and 
urban areas which they may accept if they want to, but which are not enforceable by your department. Is that 
what you're saying? Are those by-laws you're talking about used by your department and enforceable by it, 
or are they strictly for the urban areas? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — They're for adoption by municipalities in order that they may put them into 
effect in the same terms as any by-law, really. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I brought it up tonight because of the report that was submitted to you by Dr. 
Williams. Do you recall the report I'm referring to? If you do, what action have you taken on that report? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — I believe the hon. member is asking a question as to what authority we have 
in the case of the brief or visit that we had from Dr. Williams. Is that in thrust of the question? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The question was this: what action have you taken with respect to the brief which was 
submitted to you? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Other than (as I've already advised the hon. member) to raise the issue with 
the Department of Highways and Transportation and the city officials, the Department of Environment has 
taken no action. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Have you raised the issue with the Department of Highways and Transportation? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, we have. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1748 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Would you care to table any of the correspondence, reports or meetings that you had 
with them? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — We don't have the correspondence here with us. I don't have any objections 
to tabling any correspondence that we may have had with respect to that subject. I just don't have it here with 
me. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Oh, I can understand that you won't have it here with you. But my question, again, 
was this: will you give us any reports of meetings, correspondence and anything else that you've done with 
that brief which was submitted to you by Dr. Williams? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes. Well, I don't have any difficulty with that. Perhaps we could have the 
officials do as I offered to do for the member for Meadow Lake: develop a scenario of events in a 
chronological order with respect to this matter of the highway, or the noise pollution with regard to the 
by-pass. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you very much. I'll wait for that. Now, are you considering any legislation for 
noise pollution? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — No. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — I'm just going to make a few brief remarks with respect to this estimate. Members 
opposite have been raising some concerns about the quality of water in the province, Mr. Chairman. I agree 
that they have raised some valid points in this regard. What they haven't done is made any proposals with 
respect to how the Minister of the Environment or the Government of Saskatchewan might improve the 
quality of water. Members opposite, Mr. Chairman, unfortunately are not prepared to deal with the politics of 
the agricultural chemicals, which are perhaps one of the major sources of problems with respect to our water 
supplies. We know there are now on average something like seven herbicides and 15 pesticides showing up 
in Saskatchewan water supplies. That is obviously reason for concern. 
 
In contrast to the proposal for a pipeline from Lake Diefenbaker (which is really not going to resolve our 
problem because the water quality at Lake Diefenbaker is not particularly high either), I think what the 
Government of Saskatchewan should be looking at is forming a Crown corporation to deal with the whole 
problem of water. It should be a manager of Saskatchewan water resources and look seriously at the 
possibility of a pipeline from northern Saskatchewan. This should be built by IPSCO (Interprovincial Steel 
and Pipe Corporation) to tap our water supplies in the North, which are known to be safe and clear. 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman, this may sound like a rather radical proposal, but I say there has been a great deal of talk 
in the past. We are prepared to spend money on pipelines when it comes to natural gas and oil. But on a 
resource that's equally important or perhaps more important, water, we've never looked seriously at the 
possibility of such a pipeline. I think that the Saskatchewan government should study the feasibility of this. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Vice-Chairman, if I could intervene amidst the remarks of the member for Souris-Cannington, 
I would say that the government needs, as I've said in this House before, to radically change its policy with 
respect to its total approach to the environment and health. This is most dramatically seen in the whole area 
of cancer and our approach to cancer, and the failure as a government and the failure of all 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1749 

governments across Canada to recognize something. The solution to the problems of cancer and the coming 
to grips with the epidemic of cancer in our society lies with the clean-up of our environment. It lies with the 
clean-up of our workplaces and tougher regulation of industrial chemicals in the workplace. It lies in serious 
attempts to improve the quality of our food supply and to clean up a lot of the problems we have in that area. 
 
I think right now there is a serious lack of co-ordination between the occupational health and safety division, 
the Department of the Environment, and the Department of Health when it comes to handling this problem. 
We've somehow separated the workplace and the general environment and the activities of public health 
inspectors in a way I think is inappropriate to deal with the many health problems now emerging as a result 
of our failure to deal with environmental difficulties. I say that's something the Department of the 
Environment must deal much more seriously with in the year ahead. We should attempt to launch a program 
in this province particularly in the area of cancer, which sees appropriations for the problem of cancer — 
both in terms of environmental research and in terms of the Department of the Environment taking an active 
role in working with the Department of Health to approach the whole cancer problem. 
 
Now, the third area that I want to briefly touch on is the continuing problem associated with IBT (Industrial 
Biotest Laboratories), which I've raised many times in this House. I call again on the Minister of the 
Environment to post in all stores in this province a list of the 89 chemicals on the IBT list, which have still 
not been proven to be safe. In fact, we have every reason to think that many of them will be unsafe, since we 
now know that, of the tests which have been conducted on those chemicals and which have been reviewed by 
federal officials, 94 per cent of the tests for cancer are now known to be invalid. There are similarly alarming 
results with respect to the tests for birth defects and nervous disorders. 
 
Our government, in light of the federal government's failure to act on this matter, has the responsibility to let 
Saskatchewan people know the chemicals on the list, and which products contain those chemicals. That list 
should be posted in every retail store in the province which sells those chemicals. It's not good enough for 
the minister to limit his public notification to an occasional press release; in fact, we should go further. All of 
those products, when they are sold in the stores, should carry a label stating that the provincial government is 
not able to assure the public that these products are safe and informs the public that these products have not 
been properly tested for safety. 
 
I want to add that I think the Minister of the Environment should be going further than that. While we're 
waiting for final results on chemicals such as 2,4-D, the minister should use his powers under the existing 
legislation to ban products to be used in areas where their use is not absolutely essential, such as city lawns 
or the lawn of any person in Saskatchewan. Surely we now know that there are dioxins, not only in the esters 
but also in 2,4-D amines, which is a point that I think we have very much failed to appreciate. 
 
The federal government has announced that esters are to be taken off the market because they've found 
highly toxic dioxins in those esters. What they haven't made very clear to the public is that dioxins have also 
been found in 2,4-D amines. One has to ask whether the amines have more reduced levels of dioxins than the 
esters. Since most parts of the manufacturing process for 2,4-D are the same for esters as they are for 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1750 

amines, and if amines have a lower level of dioxin, what's happening to the dioxin? Are those dioxins being 
left behind in the wastes which come about during the chemical process? What is being done, particularly at 
a national level, with respect to checking those waste products? There's been no examination of that question 
at all. I say that in the interim, while we're waiting for the final results on 2,4-D, the minister should act to 
ban 2,4-D for domestic use on lawns and gardens in this province. I call on him to do that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . My colleague here says, "What about the dandelions?" I say, I'd rather live with dandelions 
than with toxic substances in the environment. 
 
I want to finish off by making a few comments on the problem of acid rain. We're increasingly beginning to 
appreciate the potential problems the tar sands and the heavy oil development pose for Saskatchewan in this 
regard and what the problems of sulphur dioxide and nitrous oxide travelling long distances could mean to 
Saskatchewan lakes and soils in the North. I hope the minister will also pay increasing attention to the 
evidence coming forward, that sulphur dioxide and nitrous oxide emissions may also be linked to increased 
lung disease, and may pose a special problem to those who are susceptible to asthma attacks. This is 
something that is just beginning to come out in the literature, and deserves more attention by the Government 
of Saskatchewan. I think what is particularly of concern is that despite the long time we have known of the 
potential problems that may come from heavy oil sands and tar sands development, we still have no real 
standards in Saskatchewan for nitrous oxide and sulphur dioxide emissions. 
 
I urge the Minister of the Environment to act with all haste to implement standards in Saskatchewan for acid 
rain. It is only when we have our own standards in place, that we will be in a position to sit down seriously 
with the Government of Alberta, and begin asking them to implement proper standards for the tar sands and 
heavy oil sands developments. What is of special concern to me (what hasn't been raised in the House, and 
what, I don't believe, the minister has raised publicly) is the concern I have that the Alberta government is 
now giving five-year exemptions for acid rain standards to companies in Alberta that are developing tar 
sands and heavy oil sands — a five-year period in which the Conservative government in Alberta (as I 
suppose the Conservative members opposite would do, if they came into power here) is providing during 
which the companies don't have to meet the standards for acid rain. That is a problem, Mr. Chairman, that 
will have far more impact in Saskatchewan than it will in Alberta. That is a problem that the Minister of the 
Environment has to begin negotiations on with the Alberta government. 
 
I asked the minister to provide a new section in the environmental impact assessment legislation, that allows 
the government to be able to turn down a development proposal on the basis of the past history of the 
company making that proposal. It makes no sense to allow companies into Saskatchewan to develop mines 
or other types of projects, when those companies have an atrocious record in other parts of the world, or 
Canada, or even Saskatchewan. 
 
Our present legislation and approach, to simply say, ''If you live by our rules here, on this particular project, 
you can operate," makes no sense at all. Right now, under the rules, we pay no attention if a company is 
propping up a military dictatorship in Latin America, or some other part of the world, as many companies 
operating in 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1751 

Saskatchewan are. Noranda Mines is an example of that. It is operating in Saskatchewan with respect to 
potash, and it has several exploration ventures under way in the North with respect to uranium. A company 
like Canadian Occidental Petroleum, which is coming forward with a proposal to develop a uranium mine at 
Midwest Lake, has no business coming into this province. Canadian Occidental Petroleum really is a 
company that is 81 per cent owned by the Hooker Chemical Company. After the disaster and the legacy that 
the Hooker Chemical Company has left to us at the Love Canal near Niagara Falls, after the toxic waste 
dumps they have left there, they have no business coming into the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Companies like Union Carbide, which also have several joint ventures with SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation) in northern Saskatchewan, have no business even coming before this government 
with a proposal for any kind of development in Saskatchewan because Union Carbide, Mr. Chairman, is the 
company that was responsible for training all the South African technicians who came over to the United 
States, in detail, how to operate uranium enrichment plants. Those technicians went back and within months 
of their training put the South African government in the position to develop nuclear weapons. Those are the 
kind of companies that are proposing to develop uranium in northern Saskatchewan. Those are the kind of 
companies, Mr. Chairman, to whom our government is saying, "We don't care about your past activities as 
long as you play by our rules now." I say that's not sufficient and I ask the minister again to add a section to 
the environmental impact assessment legislation that will give this government the power to automatically 
reject those companies, not on the basis of their proposal for development here in Saskatchewan, but on the 
basis of their past record which is truly a disgusting one. I'll close my comments there, Mr. Chairman, and I'd 
welcome the minister's comments on any of the points I have made. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — I really don't know where to start nor where to finish, Mr. Chairman. I am 
not sure that I can sort everything out — I'm sure I can't. Let me try to deal with a few items, as I jotted down 
some notes when the hon. member was speaking. 
 
The hon. member referred to a water distribution plan of some kind — piping water from northern lakes to 
other parts of the province of Saskatchewan. I can indicate to the hon. member that this subject has been 
under consideration for some time in the province, although not in a detailed way. I do believe there has 
been, over the years, some examination by PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration), our 
Saskatchewan Water Supply Board and by, perhaps, the Department of Agriculture's conservation and land 
improvement people and the Saskatchewan Water Resources Commission. It has been looked at. I think what 
is happening now is that we're looking at this in more detail. Whether or not the consideration which has 
been given in the past to piping water from, let's say, the Churchill River system (the northern water supply 
system, if you will) down into the Qu'Appelle or into the Souris or into some of the other water channels and 
watersheds in the province will be followed up on cannot be predicted at this time. 
 
The hon. member talked about chemicals and the use of drugs and what he believes should be the 
responsibility of the Department of the Environment — to advise the people, either by way of signs or by 
way of some public information in the stores which dispense chemicals that these are chemicals which are on 
the IBT list. 
 
He also talked about environmental approaches that could be implemented for the 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1752 

prevention of cancer. I gather the hon. member was saying that our environment is one of the great causes of 
cancer. I don't deny that. I would suspect that, but I read as well that many of the social pressures under 
which we live contribute to cancer and to the problems of health that we experience in our society today. 
 
That's not lifting the responsibility at all from the Department of the Environment to assess and to evaluate 
the contribution of chemicals and drugs to the environment which will contribute to health instability or 
health problems in society. I'm not so sure the Department of the Environment is going to be so all-inclusive. 
I appreciate the member's point of view. But I think we're going to have to invite, at least, the assistance of 
the Minister of Health and some of the other departments of the government in order to be able to deal with 
these problems. 
 
At the present time in the province of Saskatchewan we are not prepared to remove from use 2,4-D. That has 
been said by the Department of Agriculture, and that's been said by myself. I have said that when we can 
receive the same kind of evidence we received in the case of 2,4,5-T, we would initiate an action to take 
2,4-D off the market, as we did in the case of 2,4,5-T. We don't have that evidence. I don't think the hon. 
member has it. I don't think he knows of a source which has it. If he has it, he certainly should present it. I've 
said it on other occasions, and I repeat it again: if that information is available to us and when it becomes 
available to us, we will act. 
 
With regard to a ban on domestic use of 2,4-D esters and amines, I don't know what the implications of that 
would be, and I'm not prepared at this moment in time to consider an active withdrawal or ban on the 
domestic use of 2,4-D. Here again, I believe it's a matter for federal health and welfare. If the federal 
agencies who test these and who register them (or if they don't test them they should, and if they register 
them they should have them tested and know where the testing is done) are prepared to register them, then at 
this point in time I think the responsibility rests squarely upon them. That doesn't mean to say it lifts the 
burden of responsibility from the Department of the Environment. We should continue to press upon Ottawa 
the necessity for it to act in a more responsible way with respect to registration of chemicals. 
 
I don't know how you set a standard on acid rain. And if you set a standard, I don't know what you'd do to 
control it. Because once it starts to rain and you have a standard, if it doesn't meet the standard, I don't know 
what we're going to do to stop it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, maybe we can put that under an 
authority in a new act. What we do have, however, for the hon. member are regulations under The Air 
Pollution Control Act. I can send the hon. member a package of acts and regulations, as well. Under The Air 
Pollution Control Act there are standards — ambient air quality standards, pollutants, suspended particulates, 
P soluble particulates, soil index, potash, sulphur dioxide, sulphation, carbon monoxide. There are 
regulations here where standards are set, but I say again that's what goes up or that's what comes out of the 
stack. 
 
Even being able to control the ambient air standards within the province of Saskatchewan does not mean 
necessarily that acid rain or acid precipitation which comes to this province will necessarily come from the 
smokestacks of our own industries. The situation in Sweden is one in which they have protected their 
industries and have governed and managed their industries very well, but they still have an acid rain 
problem. And it isn't generally thought that it comes from that country, but it comes from other parts of 
Europe. I suggest to the hon. member that I think his proposition is certainly worthy of consideration. I think 
it's a matter which we need to deal with. The 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1753 

hon. member should also recognize that if we are going to deal seriously with this matter of acid rain, we are 
going to have to deal seriously with how we generate energy and whether or not we're going to continue to 
burn fossil fuels. If we don't burn fossil fuels, if we don't want to put dams on the rivers, and if we don't want 
to use various other kinds of resources for the generation of energy, then we're going to have to deal with this 
problem one way or the other. It's all right to say that we should reduce these, but I think, if we improve upon 
the standards of emissions to overcome the acid rain problems, other problems are likely to follow. 
 
The hon. member referred to the question of assessing the background of industries with respect to the 
registration or licensing of industries. He was indicating that the background or the experience of the 
company should be taken into account. We debated that last evening. I said that I was prepared to consider it 
as a matter of interest and as something which should be reviewed. We're prepared to do that. However, at 
the present time, I am not sure that I can agree with the member. If, in fact, there are regulations in place to 
deal with a particular situation, then I think the regulations should apply. If we haven't been applying the 
regulations well enough, I think, then, we should. I probably haven't answered all the hon. member's 
questions but I tried my best. 
 
MR. WHITE: — Last night a subject came up that I wanted to pursue, but time ran out. I listened to the 
member for Kindersley talk about a western power grid when he was questioning the minister and proposing 
this as an alternative to the generating station for SPC that the minister's department is examining. I want to 
pursue this a bit because I don't think the member was too well informed and I wouldn't want the public to be 
misinformed about it. I think they should have a bit more information on it. The western power grid that's 
being proposed is, for those who aren't informed about it, a high voltage line running from Manitoba through 
Saskatchewan to Alberta. A somewhat similar type of proposal was looked at in depth by the SPC some 
years ago and it was rejected. I want to raise a question or two with the minister on this. 
 
The reason for the rejection was that the Manitoba power system was connected with the mid-western U.S. 
power pool through Minnesota. The Alberta power system was connected to B.C. which was connected to 
the western power pool in the United States. And the two power pools were connected themselves. Now by 
joining Alberta and Manitoba through Saskatchewan, we would have been connected to those two power 
pools. The operation of the interconnection was none too perfect. The two power pools in the United States 
were hooked together and then problems developed and the connection broke down. So you didn't have a 
stable situation and on those grounds SPC rejected it. It would have led to breakdowns and outages in 
Saskatchewan and it was felt that it wasn't good for this reason. Now, I would like to ask the minister (he 
seemed to be fairly well informed on this) if he could tell us if this drawback of this technical problem still 
exists? I have some further questions. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — I don't know how this relates to environment, necessarily. In attempting to 
answer the hon. member's question, I say that I don't believe that that problem now exists. I believe that it 
does not exist because the original plan was to deliver 230,000 volts (I don't know if it is AC or DC volts or a 
tie). The new one, nevertheless, will, in fact, deliver 500,000 volts of direct current in its tie. I suggest that, 
while that may be of interest, I really don't know what it has to do with environment. 
 
The hon. member, I think, was making a point with respect to the debate that we were in last night. Some 
members opposite, who are not here this evening, were attempting to 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1754 

make a point about shutting down a proposed operation in the southwestern part of the province, and going 
with that Manitoba power grid system. I agree with the hon. member on the points that he made, as I think 
the assumption that everything is jolly and should be adopted forthwith, without any further consideration, 
only points up what the hon. member has said: that it is not as clear and as concise as the hon. members 
opposite would like to suggest. 
 
MR. WHITE: — I wish the member for Kindersley were here. The member for Kindersley was, in effect, 
suggesting dropping what I see as a very thorough environmental investigation into power plants and rushing 
through a hurried one to approve a transmission line as a replacement for that. And I want to point out to the 
member, just as he was talking about a 230,000-volt line before, that it's close enough there. The original 
proposal, quite frankly, was for 230,000 volts AC. The new one, as he said, is for 500,000 volts DC. The 
member for Kindersley was proposing to bring in this line. Now, the line would be a triple terminal line at 
500,000 volts DC. He is supporting this and suggesting that it be built quickly. There has not been a line of 
that type built on the North American continent and, I don't think, in the world. There have been lines of two 
terminals, but not three. So he is really suggesting dropping this one thing and going for something else that 
costs a lot of money, hasn't really been tested, and doesn't look at the environment properly. 
 
MR. GARNER: — By the minister's own admission, this has nothing to do with environmental estimates. 
Last night it was ruled out of order and now you're allowing this to go on tonight. Would you please rule on 
this? And let's get back to environmental estimates. 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — In allowing the member to continue, I've been looking at the subject matter 
that he's bringing up. It has previously, in the province, been taken under an environmental assessment 
impact study for both the transmission lines as well as the production of power. I think these are the 
estimates under which to listen to it. I think that he has taken a very long approach, but that's normal for this 
committee. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The point I believe you missed, Mr. Vice-Chairman, in your point of order (and if 
you like I will raise another point of order) is the fact that he was replying for the minister. It is not the duty 
of the backbencher to be replying on behalf of a minister. The questions are directed from this side to 
ministers and not to backbenchers. 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman, I want to now go on to my question to the minister. Has a proposal been submitted by 
the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland for the pipeline from the north to the south? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — No, not that I am aware of. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You know, Mr. Minister, I didn't think it had been. The member rose earlier and 
criticized and condemned the opposition for not offering any proposals. I was sure that he had not either. I 
want to say this, Mr. Vice-Chairman, that I will be watching with very deep interest tonight or tomorrow 
(whenever we vote on this item 1) whether or not the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland is going to be 
supporting the government in the environment vote. I say this for this reason. He accuses, condemns and 
criticizes the government for the lack of co-ordination between the Department of the Environment, the 
Department of Health, and the department of occupational health. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1755 

The minister, in reply to the member, indicated that he would review and consider the problem of acid rain. I 
asked him earlier to consider the problem of noise pollution and of the water quality of the city of Regina. Of 
course, he paid absolutely no heed or attention to my request. He heard it, but his reply to me was, "It's not 
our problem. It has nothing to do with the Department of the Environment." The member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland asks him to consider the problem of acid rain. Of course, being a member of the same 
party, he said, "Yes, we will give that serious consideration." 
 
I will finish by saying that I want to see, tonight or tomorrow, whether or not the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland will vote on his principles on his convictions as to whether or not he will support your 
department, because we won't be voting in favour of your estimates or of this vote, that's for sure — not with 
the attitude that you have taken with respect to your responsibilities. At no time did you receive the criticism 
from this side of the House (perhaps we should have been criticizing much more than we have) that you 
received tonight from the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland. Mr. Vice-Chairman, I give you notice now that 
there will be a standing vote because if that member is in this building, I want him in this House to vote on 
this department. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Vice-Chairman and Mr. Minister, I would like to go into the acid rain aspect of the 
environment and go into it with a little more sincerity than the member opposite who raised the question. I 
would like to know what studies your department has done regarding the acid rain problem in Saskatchewan. 
What moneys have been spent in the past? What are your projections for the future? We can take just one 
example of the fish in the lakes in Saskatchewan. The fisherman up North (and this would reflect in the 
Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources, as well) doesn't care whether it is Canadian sulphur 
dioxide or American sulphur dioxide. They are just concerned about the acid rain problem in Saskatchewan, 
how it's affecting them, and what your department and you as minister are going to do about it. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, there has been in my judgment a fairly active program 
by this government and by this department with regard to identifying the problems of acid rain in 
Saskatchewan. We have come to the conclusion that there is at the present no conclusive evidence indicating 
an acid rain problem in Saskatchewan. The hon. members may not agree but that's the conclusion to which 
we've come. Dr. Hammer undertook a rather extensive study in northern Saskatchewan and other parts of 
Saskatchewan. There has been an ongoing series of studies which involve the Saskatchewan Research 
Council. I say to the hon. member that is not sufficient nor is it the end of the study; but it is a serious 
beginning with regard to determining what the situation is in Saskatchewan and what the potential hazards 
are. 
 
I want to give the hon. members some information. I didn't have this available when the hon. member for 
Sutherland was asking questions and I didn't answer them because I didn't have it down. But I want to give 
you the yearly sulphur dioxide emissions for 1980 so that you can get some perspective on how we are in 
Saskatchewan, and whether we will ultimately be able to protect ourselves against what is normally referred 
to as acid rain. Manitoba, for example, produces 718,000 tonnes of sulphur dioxide emissions annually; 
Alberta 704,000 tonnes; Saskatchewan 46,000 tonnes — or 3.1 per cent of the total sulphur dioxide 
emissions. I'm not sure that even with the strictest of standards in Saskatchewan we will be able to preserve 
our northern lakes, which the hon. member has referred to, or whether we are going to be in somewhat the 
same kind of situation the Scandinavian countries find themselves in today. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1756 

The state of Montana is over 90,000 tonnes, and the anticipated Poplar River (the two units down there over 
which we've heard a great amount of debate over the last number of years) was 27,300 tonnes. There is every 
reason to have concern and to maintain a constant vigil with regard to this matter of the burning of fossil 
fuels and to strictly adhere to the emission standards which we have established. I indicate to the hon. 
member that I'm not sure whether even by doing that we will be able to control the problems. They come as a 
result of the return to us of those things we put up in the first place. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Articles that appear in Maclean's, for example — quotations like this are sincere and 
very scary. Finally there are health costs. One study estimated that 5,000 Canadians may die each year 
because of acid rain related sulphates. Mr. Minister, you can point out the figures for Alberta, Ontario or 
anywhere else. What representation or communication have you had with not only your colleagues in the 
other provinces in Canada, but with your American colleagues and the federal minister? There is no point in 
taking the attitude that we have only a small percentage of it in Saskatchewan. What's the point of cleaning 
our own act up if no one else does? 
 
I believe it is your job, as Minister of Environment, to discuss this with the other people, with the other 
ministers in Canada and the Americans, because something must be done. It's for the future; that's what we're 
all here for. As Minister of the Environment for the province of Saskatchewan, it is your responsibility. 
Would you answer me? What communiqués have you had with your colleagues internationally? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — With regard to international communications, that is communications with 
the states of the United States, this really is a matter of protocol. I have had informal discussions with the 
Governor and Lieutenant-Governor of Montana, but with regard to any official discussions, it is a matter of 
protocol which, obviously, needs to be dealt with by Ottawa because the accords between nations are not 
developed by provinces but by the federal system on both sides. We attempt not to offend our federal 
counterparts in that regard. 
 
With regard to our communication with our federal counterparts and the discussions which they have 
ongoing, we have participated in both air quality and water quality through the IJC (International Joint 
Commission) and the long-range transportation committee, and bilateral committees involved with respect to 
that. There has been an ongoing communication by the officials of the department with national counterparts, 
with federal communications going across the border because of the protocol arrangements. 
 
With regard to the Canadian Council of Resource and Environmental Ministers, this has been an ongoing 
subject. I am not sure the agendas are complete for the council this year, but I would be surprised if there 
were not an item on that agenda for discussion about this particular problem. I am going to send across to the 
hon. member Saskatchewan Environment's brief to the subcommittee on acid rain of the standing committee 
of fishery and forestry's public hearing on February 16, 1981, in Calgary. 
 
This is a serious subject; there is no question about that fact. It is treated seriously by the department. I share 
the hon. member's view that this is a subject which. in my estimation. will be the subject of the future — 
perhaps more so than the development of nuclear power. I believe it is a subject which not only parallels, but 
perhaps surpasses, 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1757 

the impact of nuclear power development in North America. I truly believe it is a matter to which we have to 
give immediate and grave attention. 
 
MR. GARNER: — I am going back to my original question that we started out on — talking about studies 
that have been done in the province of Saskatchewan. I would like to know a dollar figure of some of those 
studies but, basically, what I'd like to know is, according to these studies, what damage has already taken 
place in the province of Saskatchewan as a result of acid rain? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — With regard to the hon. member's first question, I think up to this point in 
time between $80,000 and $100,000 has been spent on studies. The study by Dr. Hammer, as I indicated 
already, did not find (and I may stand to be corrected on this) anywhere where damage had occurred, 
although he did find that acid rain was occurring in areas of northern Saskatchewan and that there were other 
areas of risk in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Research Council, I understand, will be writing its final report on the studies that it is 
doing. When that report is released, we believe that there will be some more detail as to whether or not there 
has been damage, although I think, again, damage is not suspected but there are areas of risk. Therefore, 
there needs to be action taken to hopefully prevent such damage. I'm not sure that we can prevent it. But 
certainly we may be able to do something within our province and impress our studies upon the province of 
Alberta and the province of Manitoba particularly, because the area which I understand is at greatest risk is 
around the Flin Flon mine or the Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting Company at Flin Flon. They have been, 
for some number of years, producing an output of sulphur dioxide which exceeds our standards (which, I 
think, the hon. member was referring to but in reference to Alberta). 
 
Manitoba has just given approval for Hudson Bay Mining and Smelting to proceed without any reduction of 
their output. In other words, Manitoba is just relaxing its standards and going ahead with the output that is 
there and not attempting to deal with issue. So we've got problems on the east side of the province, but they 
are problems which we have to deal with other governments about, and I'm not trying to stress that any more 
than just to make the point. I tried to point out to you the difference, in terms of just straight tonnages, 
between the chemical waste coming out of the industries in Alberta and Manitoba as opposed to what's 
coming out of our own stacks in Saskatchewan. Even though we may be able to clean up our act better than 
we have, we can't impose our standards upon other provincial governments, but certainly we can impress 
upon them the urgency of the matter, not only to our own province, but to theirs. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I'm interested in this topic of acid rain also. At present we have two 
thermal generating plants in the province, at Estevan and at Coronach. Discussion over the last few days has 
been about another one for Gravelbourg and I hear a rumour of one being perhaps located just north of the 
city of Regina. Can you, Mr. Minister, give me and this Assembly your assurance that the most efficient and 
modern methods of filtering the products out of the smokestacks will be used? Are the most up-to-date and 
efficient filtering systems in place at present at Estevan and Coronach? Will you give us assurance that, as 
Minister of the Environment, you will make sure that when the thermo-generating plant is built at 
Gravelbourg, and when one is built north of the city of Regina, they will also have the most efficient means 
possible to safeguard this province from their fall-out and the resulting acid rain? 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1758 

HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — I can say to the hon. member that we do not presently have the most 
up-to-date kinds of collectors in our plants. However, we do believe that in the case of Coronach, with the 
electrostatic precipitators, we are doing a good job. What we said at Coronach was that, if it were found that 
they were not going to do the job, then we would require some additional kinds of equipment to be included 
in the stacks there. That will be monitored. Montana and Saskatchewan have an ongoing joint-monitoring 
program to watch that process. 
 
With respect to Estevan, I think that the electrostatic precipitators are not in the stacks there. While we 
believe we have some idea about the tonnages which are going into the atmosphere there, again, they're 
about the same as the number of tonnages out of the Poplar River plant. We feel that those tonnages are 
within our standards. They meet our objectives. We think that that is satisfactory at this time. However, I 
commit to the hon. member without any degree of reservation that, if we find that these industrial 
developments or stacks begin to develop more tonnages or if the standards begin to decline as a result of 
ongoing concern by the public, we'll deal with that issue when it comes. We certainly commit ourselves to 
dealing with it on a basis which will require that they meet the new standards if new standards are set. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — You know, Mr. Minister, I sit with interest listening to you. You're concerned that there 
may be a problem down the trail. That's what I'm talking about. I accept your figures that we may be the 
lowest. But if we're building two, three or four more thermal plants in the near future, I think it's most 
imperative that we have the best material in there to screen these things out — scrubbers or whatever you 
may call them. 
 
I want to tell you why I raised this. When I went home Friday, I received a letter from a 16-year-old kid from 
the Indian Head high school, who asked me to question you on the very topic which I am on right now. She 
said that she had been led to believe that we, in Saskatchewan, do not have the best equipment. That's where 
this question comes from. There's a 16-year-old girl out there wondering about this and wondering about her 
future. To me, that meant a lot. I hope it does to you. 
 
I want to quote just a bit from a recent book published in 1980, on the topic of acid rain. It's called Acid Rain. 
The North American Forecast by Ross Howard and Michael Perley. You may have read the book; I don't 
know. I found some of these things quite startling and quite informative. This book was published in 1980. 
I'll just take a few quotes from it. I'll be glad to share the article with you, Mr. Minister, if you'd like it. It 
says: "One recent prediction runs close to $5 billion over a decade for Canada alone." They are talking about 
the economic cost — $5 billion that could affect the Canadian economy as a result of acid rain. And it says 
that the cost of acid rain is so enormous that it could undermine the financial stability of an entire region and 
national economies. Now things like that are rather shocking to me. It goes on to point out that there was a 
study done by the federal government in August 1977 by the National Research Council of Canada. It 
estimated the direct annual loss of forests due to acid rain at that time to lie between $1.2 billion and $2.8 
billion. 
 
If it's affecting the forests and so on, what if acid rain isn't checked? And that's why I talk to you about 
Saskatchewan. I agree that some of it is going to be coming in from the other areas. As my colleague has 
pointed out, with your work with other environment ministers in other provinces maybe this could be 
stopped. But your mandate and your prime responsibility is right here in this province. If it's causing that 
degree of loss economically in the forests, what is happening to our cereal crops as a result of acid rain? 
What might happen in the future if we do not use every means to check this? You 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1759 

know, if it's affecting the growth of trees, it would seem logical that it will certainly affect our bread and 
butter — our cereal grains. So looking at the economic costs, and then as my colleague pointed out (and I'd 
like to go a little further) there are the health costs. And it says in this article: 
 

One study estimated that at least 5,000 Canadians may die each year because of acid rain related 
sulphates. Other researchers put the figure at 187,000 deaths a year in the U.S. 

 
Sulphur dioxide alone causes $1.7 billion worth of health care costs each year m the United States. The 
costs will almost inevitably be higher by the time the research is in. 

 
Now I just pointed a few of those things out to try to impress upon you the importance of acid rain and what 
it might do to the future of this province unless we take . . . You know I don't think we can spare the horses 
on these scrubbers. If that's the most modern and efficient technology, then I say to the Minister of the 
Environment, "Let's get them in place." 
 
Have you done any studies, or have you consulted with North Dakota or any of them concerning the effect of 
acid rain on the cereal crops? Is there any research into that? I believe there's probably some in the States. 
What do you know about that? 
 
Another thing I was going to mention is the blight and the fall-out from our potash mines. I understand 
there's a rumour around (and maybe some of the members who hold seats m the northeastern part of the 
province could shed some light on this) that there's a bit of difficulty getting the land to build the Bredenbury 
potash mine. The farmers in the area, even though they see the economic benefit of having the potash mine 
in their area, are concerned about the fall-out or the blight upon their farmland. I wonder what studies 
Saskatchewan Environment has undertaken pertaining to this, if this is a serious problem, and if it is correct 
that people are not wanting to have their land expropriated for the proposed Bredenbury potash mine because 
of blight and fall-out from the potash. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Vice-Chairman, I'm really delighted with the comments from the hon. 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley. I think this is an important subject. It raises, however, a point which is of 
interest to Saskatchewan people at the present time. I think it points up a real dichotomy in terms of the 
debate which is going on out there. We are expressing, not only in Saskatchewan, a good deal of alarm in 
some sectors of the public. I am not saying it isn't warranted or that it should be glossed over. There is a 
debate going on about the development of a nuclear energy system or what we are going to use as our energy 
fuel of the future. There seems to be decisions being made out there that are not going to deal with the 
suppression of the use of fossil fuels, but rather with an increase in the use of fossil fuels. 
 
I am sure that the hon. member would have been impressed by the guest speaker, Dr. Hare, who was at the 
recent seminar on climate change. Professor Hare simply took historical and current data, plugged it into a 
computer and moved it forward to the years 2000, 2020 and so on. He wasn't making a case; he wasn't trying 
to sell something. All he was attempting to do was to say that these appear to be the historical and current 
facts. We've put them into a computer and let it do its own kind of drafting from there on. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1760 

He was dealing with these matters of the burning of fossil fuels and the problems of air emissions and so on 
which, as a result, may well affect the climate in the future. I think it is a very serious subject. I agree. We 
have read into the record the deaths which are estimated to be occurring now with regard to acid rain and the 
sulphur dioxide which we are talking about. Yet, there is a debate going on out there about estimating what 
might happen if we use another energy source. 
 
I'm not here advocating that, but it seems to me that we are straining at a gnat and swallowing a camel in 
relation to this whole matter of acid rain. I think it is paramount in real terms because we measure it, we can 
taste and smell and feel it and it is affecting us now. I think that somehow some of the groups out there in our 
society must come to grips with this fact and decide whether we are going to continue to stick our heads in 
the sand with regard to this issue or whether we're going to debate it on the basis of acts rather than a motion. 
 
I'm pleased that the hon. member has raised this issue in the manner in which he has, because I agree with his 
point of view. I believe it's the subject of the present and of the immediate future. He has quoted those things 
and I agree with him. 
 
Let me go on with regard to the buffering action which our soils are apparently able to produce in the South 
because of the particular kind of soils that we have. As I understand it, Dr. Hammer's study did some minor 
assessment of the southern soils. I understand that our crops are not suffering in this case because of the 
particular kinds of soils we have here and because of the buffering actions of the soils themselves against the 
acid rain. 
 
The matter of potash air pollution is just now being recognized. We have, as a result of the recognition of the 
possibility of this, I think developed our first standard with respect to potash emissions, or air standards. I 
don't want to get into a debate again, but now that the member for Regina South has returned, I would like to 
refer him to subvote 8, which puts into effect a mines waste research secretariat for $605,000, and I hope he 
doesn't vote against it. I'm sure he wants to see it; I'm sure he wants to vote in favour of having a mines waste 
research secretariat in order that we might be able to assess some of these problems with regard to acid rain, 
air pollution by potash mines, as well as by uranium mines and so on. I draw the member's attention to it. I 
do it perhaps a bit facetiously, but I do it in response to the hon. member for Regina South. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — You mentioned that the blight from the potash mines was just kind of coming into focus. 
Have you some studies which indicate why you say "just coming into focus" or is that just this year? We've 
been mining potash for a while now. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — As I understand it, the studies were done some three or four years ago. What 
we're doing now is responding to those studies. The officials inform me it is estimated it will cost around $8 
million for potash mines to get themselves into a position where they can begin to put some controls on the 
air emission. So we're moving in that area. I am admitting to the hon. member that probably we should have 
been there before, but the studies have been completed and we are now responding to those studies. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — You say, "We're responding." That means the potash mines in Saskatchewan are starting 
to put in the controls necessary to stop this blight. 
 
MR. VICE-CHAIRMAN: — The member for Kelsey-Tisdale was standing several times. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1761 

Did he have a question? 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, according to Dr. Hammer's report (just leafing through it quickly), by the 
year 1990, while we now are sitting at 46,000 tonnes, we will be at 90,000 tonnes in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and the biggest increase is from the thermopower plants. 
 
Now, I know you are aware of it and I know you are concerned about it. We are sitting at 46,000 tonnes. 
Very hopefully, action will be taken by you and by your department to ensure that we don't reach this figure 
of 90,000 tonnes referred to in Dr. Hammer's report. 
 
I can see now why the people in the Assiniboia area and the Meadow Lake area are concerned about having 
these thermopower projects in their area. I'm not going to dwell on the Assiniboia situation, but we are 
talking about 6,000 acres of farmland down there, and that's a lot of good farmland, Mr. Minister. 
 
Going back to Dr. Hammer's report, from 46,000 tonnes to 90,000 tonnes by 1990 is a scary figure. I believe 
that you, as a minister, are aware (we brought this to your attention) and you will take action even if it means 
putting the scrubbers on at Coronach so we don't reach the 90.000 tonnes level by 1990. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, I appreciate the hon. member's point. I want to correct you. You're not 
reading from Dr. Hammer's report; you're reading from the intervention which we made to the Alberta 
hearings. And the numbers have been prepared by the department. 
 
I'm not taking away from the significance at all of our increase from 46,000 tonnes to an estimated 90,000 
tonnes by 1990, but the same estimation for Alberta goes to 1.056 million tonnes in the same time; Manitoba 
stays roughly at 718,000 tonnes per year. We talk about scrubbers at Coronach. The estimated cost for the 
inclusion of scrubbers into that power plant was around $50 million to $60 million. Now that obviously is 
going to mean something on the power bill when you add that kind of cost to one particular unit and if you 
then go on to other units and add that cost. I'm not saying that it isn't important. It is. But again it's a matter 
of assessing what you want to do. 
 
I just wanted to read a figure into the record so that the hon. members will be aware. You'll remember that 
Inco (International Nickel Company of Canada Ltd.) at Sudbury, requires for that single plant 900,000 tonnes 
a year. We're talking about a total out of Alberta by the year 1980 of very close to the same thing. 
 
MR. HARDY: — Thank you, Mr. Vice-Chairman. I have a few questions for the Minister of Environment 
concerning a proposed route from Highway 168 across to Highway 3. I brought it up with the Minister of 
Highways and Transportation about the highway going across without an environmental study and he 
assured me a few weeks ago that it would be done. I just wonder if he's brought it to your attention yet and 
do you intend to do it? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — One of our officials is coming to give us an official word with respect to it. I 
know the road that the hon. member talks about. It has been a subject of some consideration and of some 
telephone calls to my office and to my home as to 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1762 

whether or not it was going to go ahead. The information which we have (and it may change when our 
official comes in) is that there has been no environmental impact assessment done. It may well be underway, 
but the statement hasn't come to our office with respect to it as yet. But maybe we'll just wait till the official 
comes in and perhaps you have another question. 
 
MR. HARDY: — The question is very similar. Last summer or early spring we had a fire up in Hudson Bay 
area, the Woody Lake fire, and a tremendous amount of forest burned which affected wildlife, a lot of lake 
shores and resort areas. Has your department done any kind of environmental study on the impact on our 
lakes, rivers and wildlife, in particular? Have you done anything toward reforestation of the area? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — No, we don't do environmental impact assessments on forest fires. We would 
find ourselves just run to death on things like that. Maybe we should. I'm not saying we shouldn't; I'm just 
saying we don't. It hasn't been a policy to evaluate or to try to assess from an environmental standpoint. The 
Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources does its own assessment with respect to commercial 
forests and other kinds of considerations relevant to its needs. But so far as the Department of the 
Environment is concerned, we don't do an environmental impact assessment on a large forest fire. 
 
MR. HARDY: — Mr. Minister, I think, with all due respect, that that type or enormous size of fire, which 
has done so much damage in our area, has an effect not just on the forest itself, but on the people around. The 
main impact was that lake resorts which were building up for tourism have now been just about completely 
destroyed. I think maybe it's time that the Department of the Environment took into consideration some of 
the aspects of a forest fire and looked into it. I'd urge you, in the future, if you haven't done it now, to take 
that into consideration where the fire has been of such an enormous size as the ones in the Hudson Bay area. 
I know you're nodding to your Minister of Tourism and he says he has done one. I think last year I asked for 
an inquiry into the Woody Lake fire, but I haven't got it yet. I don't know if he's going to give it to me this 
year. But I would urge that the Department of the Environment look into what happens to everything, all the 
wildlife, the lakes and the rivers, when we do have a fire of that size. I'll be addressing the Minister of 
Tourism later on that. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, I can appreciate the hon. member's point of view, but, boy, there's just 
no way we can do those now. To do a proper environmental impact assessment on a fire the size of the 
Woody Lake fire would probably take at least two years to do. It probably would be in the neighbourhood of 
(and I can only guess) a $100,000 touch or even more, maybe $250,000 if you're going to do it right. After 
the two years is over, you have the study and have spent the money. Maybe you can come to the conclusion 
that there has been some economic and social disaster and a number of other things and you can estimate the 
dollar value, and so on. I think it's a good point. I'm not disparaging what the hon. member says but I think 
it's something that we just can't do at this time. 
 
With regard to the question that you raised on the highway, we're aware that someone is making a proposal 
with regard to that project. It's under review at the moment and we will decide whether or not an 
environmental impact assessment is needed. Because I know the country and the magnitude of the project, I 
could say that it will, very much in my opinion, require some sort of an environmental impact assessment. 
 
MR. HARDY: — In regard to the last answer you just gave me, are you telling me that you 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1763 

are prepared to go ahead with an environmental study before the highway is allowed to go through there? 
You realize full well that in that area there is what we call a wildcat wilderness area. It is probably the last of 
the wilderness left in the northeastern part of the province. Another thing that a lot of people are very 
concerned with is the trappers and the wildlife federation. I would urge that all these people be contacted 
before you make a decision of not going ahead in the environmental study, and I really urge you to go ahead 
with one. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, I said to the hon. member that we will consider it stopped here 
formally, but obviously the magnitude of the project will require an environmental investigation. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, I just have a few questions I want to ask. It seems each time I 
question you, Mr. Minister, we're always interrupted by the supper hour. It's happened twice now, but I'll 
finish up here as quickly as possible. 
 
My questions are concerning the PCB spill at Federal Pioneer. Last year you were not able to answer all my 
questions. You said it was in the courts. Now I understand that it's not in the courts, so maybe you can 
answer some of these questions. We have discussed this very little over this last year and perhaps, just to 
start off, you can tell us what you've done as Minister of the Environment to control the spread of any more 
PCBs at Federal Pioneer. What have you done in this last year? Bring us up to date. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, we issued the minister's order for clean-up. The company responded to 
that order. We didn't get ourselves into court as we thought we were going to, but Federal Pioneer has carried 
out most of the recommendations of the National Research Council. They have spent about $750,000 toward 
the carrying out of those clean-up objectives. I don't want to go into the details unless the hon. member wants 
to know them. He's probably been on the site to see what they're doing anyway. That's what has happened 
since last year at this time. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the PCBs there are all taken care of and that there 
is no more problem? Have you moved them away or have you not moved them away? Are they still there? 
Mr. Minister, in 1976 the total cost of moving those PCBs, I understand, was in the neighbourhood of 
$25,000. In 1979 the cost to completely remove those PCBs was approximately $3 million, as estimated by 
the National Research Council in Ottawa. Now, can you tell me whether the matter has been completely 
settled? Have you and Federal Pioneer completely come to agreement that they will just let them sit there? 
You've never explained to me what you have done. Did you decide on that retaining cement wall? Did you 
go that way or are you some day going to move them out into a cement pit? You've never told me that. I 
want to know exactly what your plan is, Mr. Minister, that figure must be getting close to $5 million. If it 
went from $25,000 in 1976 to an estimated $3 million in 1979, it has to be getting close. If the PCBs are still 
soaking into the soil and you've done nothing to stop them, the figure has to be in the $5 million range; 
there's no other way. 
 
The Attorney General thinks it's a joke. Well, I'll tell you, when it's costing $5 million or $6 million, it should 
be stopped. Perhaps you haven't spent that kind of money yet, but you're going to if you remove the PCBs 
from that site. If you can tell me they've been removed for $750,000, that's fine, the matter is closed. Let me 
know what's going on. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, we could go into all sorts of detail as to what is going on at 
the site. We've been issuing press releases; there has been an ongoing 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1764 

report in the media as to the step-by-step process. The media representatives have been on the site 
themselves and they have been reporting on this. The project is not fully complete; it's still under way. I don't 
know whether we need to take up the time of the House for the details. I'll try to give the hon. member as 
much detail as he wants with respect to the barrier which we're putting around — the depth of the barrier, 
how it's being put in, and the engineering design, if he wants it. Bentonite is being poured into this barrier so 
that there will be a sealing-off of the movement of PCBs laterally, at least. Perhaps I can send him a copy of 
the press release. Some of the details are there. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, I just asked you a very simple question. Are the PCBs still out there or 
are they not? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Yes, they are. Part of the clean-up of the PCBs was to clean up those shallow 
contaminated soils and store them on site. I think that is in the news release. I think that has been the debate 
which has been going on in the media and the public ever since they started there. Yes, they are there. They 
are intended to be there. They are intended to be removed from the position they are now in, and they are 
intended to be stored and covered in a particular way. That is part of the clean-up exercise. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — You can send out all the press releases you want, and I have read them all, Mr. 
Minister. The people out in the country and the people of the city of Regina want to know. You go down 
11th Avenue and ask the first 10 people you see, "What are you doing with the PCBs over there?" They don't 
know. You won't get on the radio or television and tell them what is going on in the city of Regina. You 
won't tell them whether PCBs are still on site or not and whether they are going to cost somebody $3 million 
to $6 million. 
 
You have never answered those kinds of questions in a press release, saying whether you are going to move 
them out to a site or build a retaining wall. Is it going to be a 200-foot retaining wall around Federal Pioneer? 
Have you satisfied the Department of the Environment that this is going to control the PCBs? Can you prove 
to the city of Regina that there are no PCBs in the drinking water of this town? Can you tell them how far 
from the aquiferous system PCBs are at this moment? Because they are soaking more into the ground minute 
by minute, and you know they are. 
 
You know yourself (and we are not going to get into something which is going to take a long time to hassle 
over tonight) that environment was responsible in the first place by going to that site and issuing the order in 
1976 to cover the PCB spot with pavement until it saw what they were going to do. Now, until you come up 
with some concrete answer (and these press releases have not made it concrete to the people of 
Saskatchewan), what are you going to do with them? Are you going to move them away from there, or take 
care of them there, or not? What is your real answer to that? You are not really answering me. We can get off 
this very quickly if you would just answer some questions. Yes or no? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — I tried to indicate to the hon. member that I could give in great detail if he 
wants it, I suppose, the method by which they are proposing to clean up the spill at Federal Pioneer. I can 
bring to the hon. member all of the publicity which we have given on it, all of the statements which we have 
given to the media and to the public with regard to it. But in order to preserve some of the time this evening 
with regard to the estimates, I will just say this. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1765 

The shallow contaminated soils are going to be dug out and stored on site. That is part of the 
recommendation of the national research council. The member has that report. He can read the report, I 
would hope. He knows that is part of the recommendation. We are carrying out the recommendations almost 
verbatim which were given by the National Research Council, with the additional innovation of putting this 
barrier of bentonite down 30 feet in depth and developing wells so they can pump out the sump. The water 
will migrate, of course, to the wells and the liquids will be pumped out and put into barrels and stored — if 
not on site, in a suitable place. All of these are techniques which are being implemented at the site in order to 
be able to clean up. Now, I can't give you the engineering design, the engineering detail and the professional 
response to this particular method of cleaning up. I'm not an engineer, and I'm sure if I begin to deal in 
engineering terms the hon. member won't understand me anyway. I am saying, and I have said publicly, that 
as far as the Department of the Environment is concerned, and, I think in accord with the National Research 
Council's objectives, we are satisfied that the things which are being done now meet the criteria and the 
objectives and the order which we set out for Federal Pioneer to adhere to. 
 
I don't know what more I can say to the hon. member. We're satisfied. You may not agree that it's good 
enough. That's fine. That's your point of view. But I'm saying that as far as we're concerned in the 
department, we are satisfied. I, as the minister, have been satisfied with the actions which are being taken by 
Federal Pioneer, both in carrying out the order and in fulfilling the objectives of the National Research 
Council's report. We are doing as much as is humanly possible to meet the objectives and the criteria for 
cleaning up the site, in order that there will be no hazard to the Regina water supply system. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Now, Mr. Minister, of course I don't agree with the way you've handled the PCBs, 
but I will accept it if you will give me every bit of information that you have on the plan at Federal Pioneer. I 
don't mean tonight, as long as you can get it to me. 
 
But I'm going to tell you, Mr. Minister, that you have completely blundered, which I've told you before. You 
said that you're not a professional and this kind of stuff. There has been so much professionalism in getting 
rid of the PCBs at Federal Pioneer that it makes a farmer like me, who knows how to use a bucket and a 
truck, just sick to death. It's ridiculous. You could have taken some quick action years ago and removed 
them. You never will admit that. You just let them go until it has cost somebody. I know what the plan is: it's 
to get Federal Pioneer to pay the shot here. It's an absolute shame that they have to, when you gave the order 
to let them sit there from 1976 until now. 
 
It would be the same thing, Mr. Minister, if I had a transformer containing PCBs on my farm which broke 
and put PCBs on my soil, and I didn't know what to do with them. So along comes environment and says, 
"We don't know what to do with them either. We'll put some pavement over them and then we'll come back 
and tell you." Maybe I could get them moved for a few dollars now; then you'd come along in ten years and 
say it will cost a few million dollars. Who should pay it, the government or me? Now, that's what you've 
done. 
 
No matter who pays for it, Federal Pioneer or the taxpayer, you can't tell me there hasn't been a terrific cost 
to the taxpayer too, with your ridiculous delay in this. You've never admitted to us that those PCBs could 
have been moved to New York at $500 a ton in 1976, when they would all have gone into the back of your 
farm truck or mine — 1,500 gallons. It's the most ridiculous thing I've ever heard — letting it go into tons of 
soil. We 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1766 

wouldn't have gotten into this little spit match here if you had stood up and guaranteed to the people of 
Regina that there are no PCBs in the water at this very moment. 
 
What have you done for testing? In 1979, when the PCBs were supposed to be in the drinking water, you 
were testing several times a day. Have you done any testing since? What have you done in the last year to 
prove it to yourselves? It's a sure thing that you would never tell the people of this province and the citizens 
of Regina whether there are PCBs in the drinking water. They never would have known if it hadn't been for 
the press. Now, tell us whether you can assure us that there are PCBs in the drinking water and how far from 
the aquiferous system the PCBs are at this moment. That's all I've asked you, Mr. Minister. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I don't think that I'll be able to convince the hon. member. 
We've been at it for many years now — trying to convince the hon. member that, in my judgment, in the 
judgment of the National Research Council and in the judgment of any of the experts who give us advice, 
what we're doing is an appropriate and responsible way of dealing with the PCB problem at Federal Pioneer. 
The hon. member isn't going to agree with that — he never has and he never will. It's a straight matter of 
difference of opinion. I don't know why, Mr. Chairman, we continue to plague ourselves with this kind of 
debate because it's not going to get us anywhere. We're just going around and around in circles. He'll ask the 
same questions and I'll give the same answers. There's nothing more I can give the hon. member. 
 
I suggest to you that the National Research Council was . . . I say it again, you have the report on your desk 
and if you'll open the covers, you'll see there are some recommendations in there to which we are adhering. I 
have issued an order to Federal Pioneer to clean up on that basis: to clean up its site and to store some of the 
contaminated soils on site. We have gone the additional route of approving the installation of a barrier of 
bentonite 30 feet deep. That has been approved by all of the experts and the officials inside and outside the 
province with whom we've consulted. There has been ongoing testing of the Regina water system, by our 
officials, for PCBs. On the basis of their report, there are none. 
 
Now, I don't know, maybe the member has been up there with his little bottle of water again taking tap 
samples. I don't know. I don't know whether he has or not but all I can tell the hon. member, Mr. Chairman, 
is what I have repeatedly told him over and over again. There isn't anything more I can say with respect to 
the matter and if he asks further questions, I'll try to answer them but I think we're just spinning our wheels. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, you're right. There is no sense in our going on because when we come 
to drinking water, you've heard from the member for Regina South. When it comes to you from the nine 
sitting members of the city of Regina and the two sitting members from Moose Jaw, you do not show any 
interest in improving the quality of the drinking water in these two major cities and intervening towns which 
amounts to approximately a third of the population of Saskatchewan. You've shown no interest! We heard 
from the member for Regina Wascana heckling and grinning when it comes to talking about drinking water 
quality. There goes the minister there starting to grin; this is what causes this agitation between us. Why 
don't you be like a man and admit that we've got a problem. There he goes. There he goes. You'd think that 
he was a monkey! I'm telling you. 
 
Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You think that I can't read — of course I 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1767 

can read, Mr. Minister, because it says in here exactly, and you have not followed what Dr. Gordon Butler 
from the research council has said at all. You and I will have to get together and fight it out in the hall, I 
guess. But, we're just wasting time. I have to say to you and put it on the record you're an incompetent 
cabinet minister for the way you've handled the drinking water in this province and the PCB spills and that's 
the last I've got to say. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, I sometimes listen and I listened awhile ago when you suggested that 
perhaps I should reconsider my position tonight. I thought maybe I should because, in all fairness, I believe 
that the people around you are dedicated servants of the public and do a pretty good job in the Department of 
the Environment. Unfortunately, I can't feel the same way and express the same thoughts about the minister. 
That's simply because in your capacity as minister you would be able to direct and offer the solutions and 
provide the assistance that I believe the people of this province need. Without any further argument or 
discussion or debate on the point, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I move, seconded by the member for Arm 
River: 
 

That this committee does not have confidence in the Minister of the Environment for failing to take 
action in providing necessary assistance on noise pollution and water quality control in Saskatchewan 
and therefore, this committee urges this Assembly to reduce the minister's salary to $1 per year, as a 
symbolic gesture of this committee's lack of confidence in his ability to direct his department. 

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I rule the motion by the hon. member for Regina South, seconded by the hon. 
member for Arm River, out of order for the following reason. I refer all hon. members to the second report of 
the special committee on rules and procedures December 10, 1980, which states: 
 

The practice of permitting substantive motions to committee of the whole and committee of finance be 
discontinued. Parliamentary authorities clearly prohibit the moving of substantive resolutions in 
committee of the whole while a bill is being considered clause by clause or in committee of finance 
while the estimates are being reviewed. 

 
I refer all hon. members to Beauchesne's Rules and Forms of the House of Commons of Canada, Fifth 
Edition, paragraph 491, page 170. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 to 14 inclusive agreed. 
 
Vote 9 agreed. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I'd like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 
 

GOVERNMENT SERVICES 
 

Expenditure—Vote 13 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1768 

Item 1 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to introduce my officials: Deputy Minister 
Dennis Foley; Don Nevill, director of property and planning; Ian Laidlaw, executive director of operations; 
and Doug Archer, director of administration. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, first of all I would like to thank the department for their annual report 
— they are finally learning. I notice the questions that I always start with in the estimates are now answered 
in the annual report. The amount of space each department has; the tenders . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
For a rookie member you sure have a big yap. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I was indicating, I notice that the space allotment is all there for the first time; all the 
contracts that you had last year, the bidders and the amounts they bid are now in your report. Going through 
your tenders though, Mr. Minister, I noticed that there was the withdrawal of one that was good. It was a low 
tender, and they withdrew it. Could you advise the House why that happened? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the contractor in question withdrew his bid voluntarily because he 
had made an error and decided he did not want to have the bid stand and withdrew it for that reason. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I realize you weren't the minister of this department during the last year. 
Therefore, some of the issues you will not be responsible for. But to make sure we're on the same ground 
rules here, my understanding is your department only looks after buildings for departments of government 
and not for Crown corporations. In some individual circumstances you lease space to Crown corporations, 
but in most cases you are just concerned with the departments of the government and not the Crown 
corporations. Am I correct in that? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — That's correct. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I think each year in this committee I have indicated my dissatisfaction 
with the accounting method which your government uses on cost accounting for the services you provide for 
departments. For example, the Department of Environment (the one we just handled earlier this evening), 
you have space allocated to them worth about $250,000 in total. That takes in their types 1, 2 and 3 space. 
My estimates, using your data book here, indicate approximately $250,000 is invested on their behalf. Is 
there any move within your department to consider a charge-back situation, therefore showing the true costs 
of all departments, or is it your intention to continue to operate along this line? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the proposal the member makes is that we look at a system similar 
to B.C.'s, something like a Crown corporation for office buildings and space. We have looked at that idea 
and we've dismissed that idea. The main reason is that the money for buildings and for allocation space is in 
our department; one agency does the accounting. The accounting is done in the department as opposed to 
spreading the money all over the government and other departments. To administer that, if you were to have 
it, means double accounting. Having the Department of Agriculture, the departments of health and social 
services and what have you responsible for their own space with their own money and competitively bidding 
means more administration. It means handling money more times and that all costs money. The reason we 
don't do that is for one basic reason: it's much more inexpensive and 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1769 

much more efficient to have the space requirements of government all in one agency, under one roof, and 
have the space provided accordingly. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, let me just change the topic for a moment. Over the past year or two 
there have been new buildings named: the Tommy Douglas Building, the Sturdy Stone Centre and I believe 
even an Auburn Pepper Building of some kind. Could you inform me how many government-owned 
buildings you have named after former members or members? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that we'd have to give the member a list of buildings. 
We don't have a ready number. We couldn't tell him if it was 10 or 12 or 46. We'd have to supply him with a 
list; we don't have that handy. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, maybe you could tell me how many you have named after premiers of 
the province other than Mr. Douglas. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the number of buildings named after premiers in this province is 
two: the T.C. Douglas Building and the Walter Scott Building. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is it your plan or the department's plan from now on to name buildings after (as I see 
you've been doing for the last year) MLAs and so forth? I lay before you my concern; I lay politics aside and 
suggest that you should be considering all the former premiers of the province no matter what political party 
they represented in this House (with family permission, obviously). I suggest you should consider naming 
government buildings after them. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the member asked if we have a policy to name buildings after 
premiers or important people in the province like Tommy Douglas. We all agree he's a very important 
person, both sides of the House. The answer to the other part of the question about Walter Scott is: it was 
part of the celebrate program that we decided we wanted to name something after him, and that is why it was 
done. There is not a readily defined policy of naming buildings after premiers in the province; however, it's 
under review and we'll certainly consider it in the year coming. We'll try to define a policy accordingly. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — You mean you have no policy on naming buildings? That's just what you said. You 
have to have some kind of policy. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I think that the member is asking us to define something which is 
not totally defined. Our policy, in regard to naming buildings, is to recognize people who have made an 
excellent and outstanding contribution to our province. We've named buildings accordingly. If the member is 
asking us to define, specifically, who the next building is going to be named after, I can't do that. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I would just like to ask the minister responsible for government 
services to provide, as the member for Rosthern has indicated in his question, the policy for the naming of 
buildings. For you to say that you don't have one surely isn't going to wash with the opposition. You must 
have a policy. If you don't have a policy, then you have a guy in a backroom who comes running out every 
once in a while and says, "Hey, there's a name and there's a building." I mean you must have something. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That's the policy. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1770 

MR. BIRKBECK: — That could well be the policy as the Attorney General says. That could well be. Policy 
or otherwise (and I would draw the Attorney General's attention to this, as well), for decades this government 
has been naming buildings and streets, and anything they can get it hung on, after themselves. I'll tell you 
that we're going to make it a little bit interesting this evening. I'm going to disagree with the member for 
Rosthern. I don't believe that we should be naming buildings after ourselves, as members of the legislature. It 
wouldn't matter if I was a member of the legislature or just anyone. I don't think that people, generally 
speaking, should be naming buildings after themselves, or having groups of people name buildings after 
them for good works which they may have done as they travelled through the trials and tribulations of 
mankind. I'm sure that the member for Weyburn would concur with what I'm saying, on that side of the 
House, more so likely than any member of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want you to provide to this committee the way in which this government, through your 
department in particular, has handled the naming of buildings or any other artifacts which you may be 
naming after yourselves, before we move off item 1. I contend that there has to be a policy there. I'm not 
going to accept, and I'm sure the member for Rosthern isn't going to accept, that you don't have a policy. We 
know that you must have some means of achieving this wondrous thing. 
 
I would ask that while you're searching through government to find out how this happens, you take a little 
time to search back through history. You might take note, throughout the course of mankind, where man has, 
in fact, named buildings and different things after himself. Let me sum it up this way. Where he has created 
monuments unto himself, if you like, where he has created his own idols . . . The Romans were the best 
example of that. Check and see what happened to the Romans. 
 
That falls into the philosophy of the NDP government: holier than thou and morally upstanding. I would ask 
you to question your own ethics. That's why I disagree with the member for Rosthern. We haven't had an 
opportunity to name anything after ourselves. Maybe some of us would have been led astray with that 
wondrous power that you boys have had, by and large, over the last 40 years. As I say, the member for 
Weyburn is not going to disagree with me. You may do well to check the history of mankind and you might 
read a few verses out of the Bible too, where it says that you should not build idols unto yourself. 
 
You as man, as an individual, whether you are in government or what you're in, are not supposed to take the 
credit. The credit of any government or the credit of any man or the accomplishments of man in society are 
not our own but are God's. That's clear in the Bible. If you are so moral and upstanding as you think you are 
then I suggest that you have a basis right there to cease naming buildings after yourselves as being great 
accomplishments. And there are many. I would just conclude by saying, check the history of men who have 
done what you have been doing over the last 40 years and see what happened to them. While you are doing it 
read the Bible. Provide to this committee the numbers of buildings, streets and maybe there are even trees 
that you have planted in the name of your members. I don't know. But whatever you have done in trumping 
up your glory, we'd like to know how you achieve that wonder. Thank you. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I guess we could spend all night on this issue. The member for 
Moosomin would like us to believe that somehow the NDP government is going to fall on the issue of how 
we name our buildings or who we name our buildings 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1771 

after as did the Roman Empire. I would ask him to search in his memory; generally we decide who falls and 
who rises during election time. That's only a year or two or three away and we'll find out who falls and rises 
at that time. 
 
In regard to the naming of buildings, I can only add that buildings are named after people who we feel have 
made an excellent contribution to the history of this province and I think that nobody would disagree with 
Tommy Douglas or Walter Scott. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, the member for Indian Head says, "What about Mr. Fines and what was his 
contribution seeing as SGI named a building after him?'' I am certain the member for Thunder Creek could 
give us a long story on Mr. Fines but I don't think I'll go into it. I'm not quite as colourful on my feet as he is. 
 
Mr. Minister, the point that I was making is the first premier that you named a building after, other than the 
Scott building. which was because he was the founding premier . . . I am trying to understand why you have 
omitted premiers of other political parties who have made contributions to this province whether they were 
from your party or not. I think that we should consider all premiers. We may not agree with them. We may 
not think that they have contributed that much to the area, but they still were premiers of this province. That 
alone should rate some respect, and significant buildings should be named after them. That's my argument. 
Most of them are deceased. They have given something of themselves for the betterment of the province and 
I suggest you consider that. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the member asks about the C.M. Fines Building. I would only 
submit to him that the C.M. Fines Building is a Crown corporation building and we would not be involved as 
a department in regard to the naming of the SGI building. 
 
In regard to other premiers, he makes mention of other than NDP premiers. Walter Scott was not a New 
Democratic premier (at least to the best of my knowledge, unless someone can correct me.) I think he was a 
Liberal premier, so it's not true that we based it only on NDP premiers. Again I would submit that Walter 
Scott was the first premier of the province and because it was the Celebrate Saskatchewan year it was 
important that we name the building for that reason. If he's trying to search out a policy, we look at those 
kinds of reasons. I guess if you want to look at the T.C. Douglas Building, you'll see that its occupant is 
health. I don't think there's a man who's contributed more to the health program in this province than Tommy 
Douglas, and it's appropriately named because of that. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, if you want to get into a political argument, we can start one. We'll be at 
you for two or three days. If you want to stay on your estimates, then stay on the estimates. You make the 
choice. I don't mind getting into a political argument because I think I can handle you with one hand tied 
behind my back. Let's get down to the annual report and the facts that I have in my computer print-out. 
 
Mr. Minister, your predecessors have always been courteous enough to supply me — at least twice a year — 
with a copy of the computer punch-out of the space allocations of government services. I would ask you, 
being a new minister, if you will continue that practice, which was started over the last year and one-half. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Yes, we will. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1772 

MR. KATZMAN: — I thank you for that. Mr. Minister, all through your computer print-out, the figures and 
the explanation which you give seem to balance very well. I have no argument against the government 
owning enough basic space for its needs. 
 
My concern comes in your annual report. There is indication of an amount of space which you have moved 
out of where there was still time left on the leases. I would like to know if you have the approximate cost of 
the space you vacated in the previous year on which you were paying rent until someone else took over the 
lease or you settled the remaining time on the lease. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it's difficult to answer the member's question. He's asking 
about leases we pulled out of before they actually expired. The answer is that there would be a number of 
leases on which there may have been a couple of weeks or a day or two or three left when we moved to other 
quarters for whatever reason. I guess the only thing we can do is supply him with a list of those spaces. To 
name them, we'll have to sort out which ones were in that category and try to calculate how much was lost in 
revenue. But it would not be a great deal of money and we would have to sort through the computer listing to 
find which buildings or which leases would fall under that category. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, on pages 30 and 31 of your annual report, you show vacant property in 1979-80, 
some of it for 12 months. Now that's property that you own yourself, I believe. Assuming the amount of 12 
months I see here — 11 months — the majority of them are over the six-month period. There must be a 
reason for that amount of space. I would assume that some type of vacancy would also be reflected in your 
rental space. If I'm wrong there, tell me so. Or produce the figures to show it. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — I guess the only thing I can offer to the member is that on page 30 — the page he 
makes reference to — it lists very carefully the amount of square footage that was involved and the reason 
why it was vacated. I'll give you examples: under renovation, surplus space, major renovations, moving to 
other areas, vacant space due to improper size, vacant space again for renovations, and the list goes on and 
on, on pages 30 and 31. I'm not sure if I understand his question. The list is here of exactly what space is 
vacant and the reasons for that. And if you look at the majority of the reasons, they are because of 
renovations taking place, or else the space was not adequate or suitable for the client group and other space 
was being found for them. I guess it's the only answer we can offer. I maybe don't really understand his 
question. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, basically, Mr. Minister, what I'm suggesting if this is the case with your own 
property, that it's vacant due to your not finding a proper client for it . . . You have, over the past years, 
rented space. The agency has grown and had to move to a larger space. The space was left vacant and 
sometimes you could find another government department to move in and sometimes you couldn't. So I'm 
asking you how much space you paid lease rate on that was empty? I'm just using page 30 and 31 to show 
that in your own property you have that problem, so you must have it with the leased space. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, if the member would look on page 30 at the table itself, in the first 
two columns it has the usable area in square metres. And in the first column it states what is leased, and if he 
looks down there he will see that Sask Tel's Lorne Street building has 1,300 square metres under renovation 
for the provincial auditor and social policies secretariat. If he goes on down further, he'll see under leased 
space that the Avord Tower building is under renovation for revenue, supply and 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1773 

services (that's 170 square metres); at Credit Union Central there are 120 square metres vacant due to 
non-availability of a proper size agency — on and on and on. So there's a column for leased space and there's 
a column for owned space. There isn't a total. We'll have to total it up for the member if he wants, but in the 
annual report, on pages 30, 31 and 32, it has the square metres of leased space and the square metres of 
owned space that are available and for whatever reasons the space is vacant, as well. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I realize that is there. My concern is this space that was given up. You 
terminated the lease; you said to the owner of the base building, "We don't need that building. We have no 
agency that can go in there; will you let us out of the lease?" How many months did you have to pay to get 
out? Or did you end up having to pay the lease with the space still vacant? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, for the benefit of the member opposite, we did not leave a lease in 
the year under review on the table here. There's no leased space here that was left prematurely. When the 
agency vacated, that was the day the lease terminated. So there's nobody leaving prematurely and thus no 
extra cost or extra burden. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, we might as well start out with the insurance. Where do you obtain your 
insurance? (I almost know what the answer is going to be.) But, I want to know the dollar figure that you pay 
to that company. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that with respect to capital projects, whenever we have a 
capital project, we ask the contractor that he insure for the capital phase of the project and we review to make 
sure that he has insurance so that the thing is not in jeopardy. 
 
In regard to buildings that we already own, we do not carry any insurance. All government buildings do not 
carry insurance. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you may not keep any insurance on the building itself, you do have 
liability and that kind of insurance I would assume. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — The answer is no. We're self-insured. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Okay, Mr. Minister, we'll come back to that one in a minute. Can I have the list of 
executive employees and the salaries paid to them? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, we'll forward a list over later. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, in your annual report, page 23, I noticed "all tenders rejected;" that 
would be the September 28, 1979 tender. Could you indicate the why all tenders were rejected? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised that the project was substantially over-budget and we 
retendered and redesigned the project so we could come back into a budget we could afford. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, what you're saying is that the tenders all came in much higher than you 
expected. You either changed your specs and retendered them, or you didn't go ahead with the building. 
Which way did you go? 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1774 

HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that the process that went on was that the project was 
terminated. It was restructured so that we dropped one phase of the project and went ahead with the building 
with one phase less and we decided we'd do the other phase (the interior phase of the building) at a later 
retendered date. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, over the past, using the T. C. Douglas Building and the major building 
in Saskatoon, you basically were your own contractor, in most cases, your own general. And, the major 
reasons for that (I assume) is the excellent deputy minister you have and his capabilities in that field. Do you 
use that same criteria when you find you get a bid that you feel is too high and tender yourself on it with 
government services? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — I am advised that in regard to the Tommy Douglas Building the member made 
mention of, he is correct that we worked as a team with the major contractor, Cana Construction. We 
operated on the basis that we were, in large measure, project manager with regard to the building. That's 
basically because of the people we had in the department, who were capable of doing it. It was one of the 
larger projects and that was part of the basic reason why we did it. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I ask the second part of the question: do you tender on some of your 
own work when you feel the prices from outside are too high? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — No. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, last year there were quite a few questions raised on orders for return 
about the costs of renovations within the Legislative Building and there were questions on the Tommy 
Douglas area, which was found unfit by the Department of Labour, occupational health. Could you tell me 
what the costs in both cases were for the renovations, i.e., for the Legislative Building plus the cost to fix the 
Tommy Douglas Building basement because of the occupational health concerns? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the renovations to the T.C. Douglas Building which the member 
wants to know about were carried out by a fellow by the name of Mr. Jones who did a study. The study cost 
us $8,000 and the recommendations and the cost to put it in place cost us $30,000. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Could you send me a copy of what you just referred to — the report? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Yes. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — What is the space now being used for, since his recommendations came through? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised that it's the same space it was originally intended for: 
printing and photography. It's still in place and it's solving their problems. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — So it's the same group of people back in there now who were there prior to the study 
and you spent $8,000 for the study plus the amount of money to fix it up? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — I am advised the only people who are not there are four people who are in different 
office settings. Other than that, the same people are in that area. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1775 

MR. HARDY: — Mr. Minister, I see under tourism and renewable resources there was $18,000 spent on a 
fish culture station at Fort Qu'Appelle. Would you like to explain what was involved there? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the initial study done on the hatchery was by Underwood and 
McLellan and the amount of it was $18,000. 
 
MR. HARDY: — Was that $18,000 spent just for the study to see if a new hatchery should be established or 
what should be done with the old one? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, it's a study that is involved in the designing of the fish culture 
station, and the work in that report will be the standards that will be set for the redesign of the station. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Can we have a copy of the study? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we can supply the member with a copy of it. When I say it's a 
study I shouldn't be referring to it as a study. It's just a list of what the design specifications and plans of the 
new project should look like. But we'll supply the member with a copy. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, on page 6 you indicate that you've done some studies on energy and 
efficiency. Would you like to indicate what the results were? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, to save the benefit of a long explanation in the House, we'll send 
over a report. It's 23 pages long. It shows what the planned maintenance program for energy conservation 
would be in the department. It shows the controls and structures that have been put in place, monitoring 
programs and performance acceptance of all the buildings. It has a list of the buildings that have already had 
work done on them, what the benefit was and all that data. If you want a copy, we would be happy to table it 
for the member. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, just one more time. You assist, occasionally, Crown corporations in 
finding space, or do they find their own space? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, in the annual report there is a section on the space co-ordination 
committee. They are the people who decide who's going to allocate the space and who the project is going to 
be done by. As a rule, we try to assist our client groups, namely the line departments of the government and 
Crown corporations wherever and whenever we can be of assistance. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Basically, I think what you're saying is that only if you're asked to assist Crown 
corporations are you involved. Is that correct? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Correct. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Just one moment, Mr. Minister. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Has Sask Housing asked for any assistance in finding space in its recent move? 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1776 

HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, yes it did. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — An additional question. Services provided — in your department, how many? I know 
your deputy has a government car. How far down does it go? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — People who have vehicles or people who require vehicles are people who do a lot of 
travelling around: project co-ordinators, project managers and those kinds of people. We have a listing of 
who has vehicles, if you want it. I think, Mr. Chairman, it would be more appropriate if members ask the 
question under central vehicle agency. They would have a complete list of which vehicles are where and it 
would be more accurate. I can only ask the members that they direct their question to the Minister of 
Revenue and Supply when central vehicle agency comes in. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 to 18 inclusive agreed. 
 
Vote 13 agreed. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 
 

GOVERNMENT SERVICES 
 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 14 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — As I indicated earlier, you supplied me with enough documentation to make the 
estimates be done very quickly. Will you supply me now with the documentation on items 1 to 9, which are 
all the construction of buildings? Could you indicate what they are on all of them now or when we go down 
to the vote? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to table it. We can table the whole pack from 
agriculture right through if he wants it done. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, I would like a moment or two to peruse that list, if you don't mind, 
before we agree to going through the numbers. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Under the new rules, it is my duty to shut her down at 10 o'clock. Is it agreed that we 
continue? Agreed. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, under, I would guess, government services vote 4, there is an indication 
of the amount of funds for furniture and fixtures. Is that basically the filing cabinets and that type of thing, or 
is it construction furniture and fixtures? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — No, Mr. Chairman, it's the filing cabinets and desks and what have you. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, the past year has been a prime example of a problem within your 
department on this exact item. You continually, I would say from the months of January until March when 
your budget ends, are short of equipment because your budget does not allow you to bring in sufficient 
amounts (and I am aware that you have a large volume of fixtures that probably arrived either yesterday or 
will in the 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1777 

next day or two) so that you can cure the shortage existing in many of the buildings. Could you indicate for 
how many more years that procedure is going to continue, where that you seem to be on a short budget and 
have to wait three months all the time for supplies? Or is there a point when you think you are finally going 
to catch up? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I guess it's pretty hard to solve the problem the member makes 
mention of, because we'd be criticized if we had too much furniture and we're criticized because we haven't 
enough. I guess somewhere you have to strike a happy balance and we are trying to do that. We would be 
severely criticized, I think rightly so, by the member opposite if we had excess amounts of furniture, just as 
we are criticized when we have an excess amount of leased or occupied space. So I guess it's trying to strike 
a balance so that we are not excessive or are spending too freely in regard to furniture. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, at least you're not, as you say, like the potash corporation that leases 
filing cabinets and never even uses them. It has them for 12 months and pays rent. That I can document. 
 
Mr. Minister, most of the items for government services seems to be little bits and pieces. There's no major 
project under government services itself this year; am I correct? I'm just perusing this list. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — The member asks if we have any major projects out of the DGS budget. If he looks 
under the heritage fund budget for major projects, archives and the STI building are some of the major 
projects. Yes, there are major projects. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Lloydminster office building — that is all to be in this year, or is it already started? I 
noticed there were funds last year; it seems to indicate there were funds either coming next year or in this 
year. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the office building the member makes mention of is in Lloydminster 
— the beginnings of the site and the drawings, engineering and design for the P.O. building in Lloydminster. 
That's a major project as well. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — How many years will that take, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — It is to be completed by the end of 1983. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is this the last payment this year for the Sturdy Stone Centre, or is there more to 
come? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, it will only be minor dollars on the Sturdy Stone Centre. We don't 
have the exact figure but we could supply the member with the cash flow on the Sturdy Stone building. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — The sheet you've passed me shows 76.9 — I assume that's $76,900. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1778 

HON. MR. GROSS: — $76,900. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is that the final on the construction? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — That's correct. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 
Item 6 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — On item 6 I notice a large amount of building, as I was indicating, especially one in 
Yorkton. It's a large amount. The others seem to be a smaller amount. Are they finishing those first four 
projects or are they starting projects? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, in the list that we submitted to the member, if he looks at the top of 
the page it has, "ongoing projects — project number HI0673" and a whole list underneath that with a subtotal 
and then it has, "new projects approved." If you want to know which ones are new and which ones are old, 
just look at the bottom of the page and you'll see the new projects. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 
 
Item 7 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is this the finish of the fire-fighting situation, or what is it? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the member wants to know if this is the end of all the fire 
suppression projects. It's the only one that we have in inventory that is in progress at the present (to the best 
of our knowledge). 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — It's a building that you're involved in here. I assume it's in the North or is it in Prince 
Albert? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — It's in the Nisbet Forest right outside the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Item 7 agreed. 
 
Item 8 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, under social services here, you have the Prince Albert, Saskatoon 
correctional and several others which come to the figure that you indicate, as well as the nursing homes. The 
Minister of Social Services has been making suggestions about new programs and facilities. Are they for 
construction next year and therefore we're not seeing some of them here, because they are just in the 
planning stage? The nursing home in Saskatoon, that was referred to in the House earlier, to replace the 
sanatorium, is that under the health budget? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the list of new projects for social services is listed. If you look at the 
bottom page again, you'll see Lakeside Nursing Home, Wolseley; Valley View Centre, phase 2, Moose Jaw; 
Kilburn Hall, and right down at the bottom, 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1779 

Correctional Centre, Regina, $1 million. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I heard you mention Lakeside Home, Wolseley. Will you tell me what 
you're trying to do there? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I'm advised that it's in regard to emergency fire escapes, and 
improvement in that area. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — You wouldn't consider an expansion while you're doing it, would you. Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Well, I think that question should be answered by the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Item 8 agreed. 
 
Item 9 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, we see this Qu'Appelle fish culture station again, that was asked about 
earlier. You have a total cost, you indicate here, and the amount is about two-thirds of the total to be spent 
this year. Could you inform me what you're doing there? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the money that you see allocated here will be primarily for 
equipment and for upgrading of the water supply and water cooling, as well. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I notice that you're going to construct an inn in Moose Mountain Park, and it's going 
to be totally done this year. Could you elaborate a little further on that particular project? At least the funds 
are indicated to all be spent this year. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I don't know what kind of explanation the member wants. It's sort of 
indicated by saying it's in Moose Mountain Park. Planning is under way in the department. I couldn't table a 
copy of the drawings, because nothing is complete yet, but it will be in due course. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, the indication here is, and it's the only one I see, that the total funds will 
be spent this year. The project is going to be started this year, and totally completed in this budget year. I'm 
asking you why no other department has those kinds of benefits coming to it, yet tourism (for some strange 
reason) does? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I have no comment. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — The minister must have some idea, if he has the money allocated, what type of 
expansion or improvement is on line for the current year— in the budgetary review that we're discussing 
tonight — and I think that it would be fair to all members if we had that information tonight. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, we don't have that information with us here tonight. We'd be happy 
to provide the member at a later time with the information that he's looking for. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — All right, then, I can take that as your commitment to the committee 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1780 

to provide that information. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — That's correct. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I'll get back to my concern one more time. You say you have no plans 
available. Last year in the House we talked about it, if I remember correctly. You're going into a hotel or an 
inn, whichever name you want. I don't know if you're going to build it and put it out to contract for 
somebody to run. We don't know if the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources is going to run it. 
Is it being built for the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources and are you going to run it? What 
kind of building is it going to be? You've never managed to do something in one year before. All of a sudden 
you're improving or something. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I don't know what kind of picture the member is trying to paint, but 
the project itself is in the DGS budget. It's an estimate at this time — as close as can be estimated as are 50 or 
60 or 70 other projects in DGS. He wants to know, I guess, what colour the side of the building is and what 
kind of windows it's going to have. We can't provide that right now. We can only go by an estimate of what 
it would cost us to build a similar structure. In order to get a figure on the paper and to build and budget 
accordingly, that's the way it has been done in the past and will be done in the future. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, by this time you know if it's going to be a stick or if it's going to be 
block. You have an approximate idea of the size I would assume, and so forth. You know if you're going to 
have it all done with this fiscal year, you should have by now some of those answers. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, as I indicated to the member from Moosomin, we'll supply the 
information. He wants to know the square footage in it. We can't tell him. We don't have the information 
here. But we'll certainly provide the member later on with the information. 
 
Item 9 agreed. 
 
Vote 14 agreed. 
 

HERITAGE FUND 
 

BUDGETARY EXPENDITURES (RESOURCE DIVISION) 
 

GOVERNMENT SERVICES 
 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Vote 14 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, once again I assume this is the completion of that project? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Yes it is. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1781 

Item 2 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, is this the same again, the completion of a project? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, if the member is referring to the Provincial Laboratory, it's the 
beginning. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — What's the total? I notice there were funds last year and funds again this year. Do you 
know the total cost of the project once it's completed? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I'm advised the total project will be $7 million. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — $7 million. How many years until this project will be completed? I notice in this case, 
you have not quite spent $2 million between last year and this year. How many more years until it's 
completed? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, when I said $7 million, I should have said $7.4 million. The 
completion date is August 1984. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
Item 3 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — What's the total figure that you have spent on the restoration of Saskatchewan House 
and the refurbishing and the furnishing of it? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the total fees for the years 1978-79,1979-80, 1980-81, and this 
calendar year, 1981-82, will be $4.5 million. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Now don't you wish you hadn't let it go into wrack and ruin and kept it up in the first 
place, as it was in 1944? 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, is this the final year? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Yes, I believe it is. Mr. Chairman, the answer is yes. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, does this include the artefacts you've been trying to get back, which 
were sold, given away or disappeared? Have you replaced most of the things you needed? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Yes, the majority have been replaced. 
 
Item 3 agreed. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — This was the 75th birthday project. Do we know the final projected costs for this 
project? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — The costs estimated will be $6 million and the scheduled completion date will be 
July 1984. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, could you inform this House where that project is 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1782 

going to be, other than just in the Wascana area? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised that the preferred site would be the old university 
grounds, but negotiating is still going on with regard to it. The second proposed site is the Qu'Appelle 
Diocese. We haven't decided the exact site; it's under negotiation at this time. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Isn't some of that same area where the CBC was planning to build? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — No. 
 
Item 4 agreed. 
 
Item 5 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is this the expansion of the technical institute in Moose Jaw or what is it? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Yes. 
 
Item 5 agreed. 
 
Item 6 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — How many years until this one is going to be completed? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — March 1985. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I have just one question for the benefit of my seatmates. You might be 
able to answer this one if I can get your attention. Could you tell the members sitting around me what those 
two buildings, which are being built in Wascana Park, are? 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Mr. Chairman, the member will have to wait patiently for the Wascana Centre 
subvote, because it has nothing to do with our budget. 
 
Item 6 agreed. 
 
Vote 14 agreed. 
 

HERITAGE FUND 
 

BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE (RESOURCES DIVISION — SUPPLEMENTARY) 
 

GOVERNMENT SERVICES 
 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Vote 14 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Item 2 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — When you referred to the $4.5 million, I hope you were including the 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1783 

money that came out of the heritage fund. 
 
HON. MR. GROSS: — Yes. 
 
Item 2 agreed. 
 
Vote 14 agreed. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:28 p.m. 
 


