






















































Hansard: May 15, 1981


(3464) 3465 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 15, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you, and to the Assembly, 27 grade 8 
students from St. Pius X School here in Regina. They are accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Sylvestre, who was 
here, I believe, the day before yesterday with a group of students. I want to welcome the students. I will be 
meeting with them for photographs and refreshments later. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join the Minister of Education in extending a 
greeting to the students from St. Pius. I do that particularly because my son is among that group. It is good to see 
them. Many of them come over to our house quite often. I do hope that they enjoy their stay here and that they 
find it educational and very exciting. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Government Action on Inflation 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Finance. We have been presenting proposals to you 
over the last couple of months. It is our view (and I think it is shared by many) that your programs are not in touch 
with economic realities today. Some economists are predicting anywhere from 25 per cent to 30 per cent interest 
rates by September or October. Would the Minister of Finance be prepared to call the session back in 
approximately September to bring in a new mini-budget to adjust the budget presented to this House last March, 
and bring that budget in touch with the realities of high inflation and high interest rates? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, the inflation rate went up again yesterday. It has been going up, 
and the statistics were released yesterday again showing that the high interest rate policy of the federal 
government is a bad policy. It is established, they say, with the intention of reducing inflation. If it is doing that, I 
find it very hard to be able to see it. That is obviously part of the problem. I am not going to say to the member 
opposite that I will call the House back on September 30. I don’t call the House back in September. When the 
government decides that it is necessary to call a new session of the legislature, it will be announced in due course. 
 
MR. LANE: —Perhaps, by way of supplementary, I should advise the Minister of Finance that the cost of living 
rate is up to a record 12.6 per cent. I realize Saskatoon 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3466 

and Regina are not at that level. Rates are predicted, in some quarters, to reach 25 to 30 per cent. Would the 
Minister of Finance not now be prepared to accept what the Premier says, that the province of Saskatchewan has a 
role to play in helping ease inflationary pressures, and to bring in a budget in September 1981 which reflects 
economic realities and brings significant tax reductions for the people of Saskatchewan to help them fight 
inflation and finally, gives some evidence to the people of Saskatchewan that the Government of Saskatchewan 
gives a damn for the people of this province? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I found it of some interest to read in the paper last night that the 
finance critic in the House of Commons for the Conservative Party has proposed to the federal government that 
they reintroduce his budget, on which the electorate of Canada threw the Conservative government out. If those 
are the kinds of policies the member opposite has in mind, I would say that is certainly not the way to go. Yes, I 
agree that the government does have a limited ability to cushion the impact of inflation on consumers and people 
in Saskatchewan. We’ve recognized that responsibility and that’s why we have the lowest taxes and charges for 
low- and middle-income people in Canada, and the lowest sales tax in Canada, along with the province of 
Manitoba, and no medical and health insurance premiums, as they have in the three other provinces where their 
income tax rate is higher and they raise hundreds of millions of dollars through a tax on sick people and a tax on 
health. We already have recognized that we need to pass on the benefits of a buoyant prosperity to the people who 
live in this province and we have been doing that. 
 

Guidelines for Consumers in Inflationary Times 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Consumer Affairs. Mr. Minister, as you’re 
very well aware, we are attempting to express our concerns to the government opposite on behalf of the 
consumers of Saskatchewan. In light of the fact that the Minister of Finance is unprepared to take any initiatives 
or steps or even to consider a special standing committee of the legislature to deal with these economic problems, 
would the Minister of Consumer Affairs put together a proposal which would lay out very clear and succinct 
recommendations to the consumers of Saskatchewan to give them the necessary guidelines in these times which 
are drastically changing economically? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Finance has indicated, this government in its fiscal 
policies has clearly demonstrated, in the overall package that has been presented to the people of Saskatchewan, 
that we are concerned and we are addressing the concerns of the consumers of this province. I want to say, in the 
area of consumer assistance, we have in place a substantial tax reduction in this budget. We have put together, in 
respect to the home-owners, a mortgage rebate program, a renters rebate program. We have put in place under our 
Crown corporations, which the opposition continually attack, the lowest rates for utilities across the country. We 
have put in place those policies which the people of Saskatchewan endorsed. We have put in place, as a 
government, a budget which has been endorsed by the business community of this province. 
 
I think the steps that we have been taking are in the right direction. I think that we have 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3467 

shown fiscal responsibility, unlike the Tory government of Ottawa, in the short-lived term that it had, and the 
subsequent Liberal government. I think that the people of Saskatchewan will endorse our policies, and we are 
heading in the right direction. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: —Final supplementary. In light of the rhetoric that’s just been indicated by the minister, Mr. 
Speaker, I was not asking for the minister to give us a revamp of the history of the government opposite. What I 
was asking was something very constructive and positive for the consumers. I was asking if you would sit down 
with your officials and work out guidelines for the consumers of Saskatchewan so that they will be very clear in 
their minds as to how they should go about borrowing practices, and how they should best manage their money in 
these tight fiscal times that we have today. Do you not see that as a reasonable suggestion and something that you 
could take into consideration? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: —Well, Mr. Speaker, we operate here with a continuity among departments throughout 
government. As a consequence, when we introduce a budget we address the particular problems as we see them 
and as are brought to our attention. This budget which we brought forward has been endorsed. This budget does 
meet the concerns of the people of Saskatchewan and, unlike the Tories who don’t accept it, the people of 
Saskatchewan are. 
 

Impact of Recent Election in France 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Question to the Deputy Premier. A story out of Paris by American Press indicates that the 
newly elected Socialist Party in France will be putting a stop to the proposed 14 nuclear power plants. In view of 
the fact that France is one of the potential strong future buyers of Saskatchewan uranium, could the Attorney 
General advise to the impact that would have on the Saskatchewan production and the Saskatchewan market? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of that question. 
 
MR. ANDREW: —Supplementary question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: —I’ll allow a new question. 
 
MR. ANDREW: —Could the minister advise the Assembly (with regard particularly to the Cluff Lake mine) how 
much emphasis his government is putting on the French market for the sale of the future production of the Amok 
mine? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Chairman, I think a question like “how much emphasis?” is very difficult to 
answer. Obviously, we have viewed France as a potential market for uranium and it is indeed, at this point, a 
market for Saskatchewan uranium from Cluff Lake. It is a market; it’s there. I don’t think it is viewed as any more 
important than any other significant nuclear market in the world. 
 
MR. ANDREW: —What you’re saying to us, Mr. Minister, is this: you aren’t concerned about the stories coming 
out of France. You are not concerned that this, in fact, puts a cloud over the market of Saskatchewan uranium on 
the world market? 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3468 

HON. MR. COWLEY: —I’m always concerned about stories coming out of anywhere, and obviously we’ll take 
them into account. I hadn’t read the article that the member refers to so I can’t comment on it particularly, but 
obviously anything that happens anywhere that has an impact on the amount of uranium that’s required is of 
interest, and may or may not be of particular concern to the Government of Saskatchewan and SMDC 
(Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation). 
 

Calling of Bill 52 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Attorney General. Mr. Attorney General, since this session 
is winding down either today or some time next week, I would like to ask you: is it your intention for this 
Assembly to leave, for six or eight months, the situation of children’s rights as it is? 
 
As the Attorney General is aware, there is a bill before this Assembly which has not been debated (it was a private 
member’s bill — Bill 52), about which the government has not really made its position clear. It is a private 
member’s bill, a non-political bill, and is a bill which has varying degrees of support on both sides of the 
Assembly (and I emphasize varying degrees.) I would like to ask you if you would consider calling the bill by 
leave today, and at least debate the merits of such, or is it your intention to leave children under the age of 14 with 
absolutely no rights before the law, for another six to eight months? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would certainly, as House leader, consider calling the bill for debate 
today by leave, if, by common agreement and consent, possible prorogation was in sight for today. I think that 
would make sense. I think if that, on the other hand, does not prove to be the case as events unfold and we go into 
next week, then it wouldn’t make much sense to call it today, if it were obvious the time would be available next 
week. So that, I think, would probably depend upon the unfolding of the universe, as it does in its inevitable way, 
and we’ll just have to take that as it comes. 
 
As to the substance of the question by the hon. member, with respect to the bill, I should tell the member (as he 
knows; he is the author of the bill) what it proposes to do is to give the preference of the child regarding living 
with one parent or the other in a marital dispute the predominant consideration, before a judge. Our current law 
allows a child to testify his or her preference, whether to live with the mother or father, but it is but one of the 
considerations, as opposed to the predominant consideration. That is a major change. I have expressed to the 
member opposite my general personal sympathy toward the approach that he seeks to articulate in his bill. My 
lawyers do, too. However, we have now ongoing a full review by the law reform commission, which is in the 
midst of (I am advised, near completion) this specific issue. They hope by the fall of 1981. I’m being petitioned by 
my department people, accordingly, not to consent to this bill. They are unable, in the time that is remaining, to 
devise a new bill. What we ought to do is await the report of the law reform commission and work to proceed to 
resolve this problem this fall. 
 
I know how strongly the member feels for a number of reasons (I agree that it is non-political), but I do think 
some of those reasons that I have just set out have some merit for the consideration of the members of this House. 
 
MR. THATCHER: —A supplementary question to the Attorney General. Mr. Attorney General, I think I 
indicated “debate the bill”. I said nothing about passage; I said “debate 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3469 

the bill,” because this is the first we have heard from the government side, officially. My supplementary question 
to you then must be: will the Attorney General by leave call the bill? We will then debate the bill, and hear the 
government’s presentation. Or, is it the Attorney General’s intention to leave things to the law reform 
commission, leave things in the slow-moving bureaucracy, and, I repeat, leave children with no rights for another 
six to eight months, and probably, realistically, for a year? Does the Attorney General feel that this is a 
satisfactory situation, particularly when we lag so far behind, in this area, other province and almost every state in 
the United States? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I do not agree with the hon. member’s assessment that the province 
of Saskatchewan lags behind in this area with respect to other provinces. Indeed, our amendment of 1978, which 
allowed the right for infants to be heard (children of tender years) in a custody dispute before a court, is only two 
years old and is still one of the few leading pieces of legislation in all of Canada. I cannot testify as to how that 
provision relates to provisions in various states of the United States of America. That I do not know. We may be 
behind in that sense. 
 
Let me close by saying, on this particular supplementary question, that this is a major policy decision which the 
hon. member is urging upon the House. We are talking about children, in his bill, 10 years of age or over, who 
would have an automatic right to be heard in a very often, highly charged, emotional dispute between parents in 
the case of marital break-up. Now, that’s not to take away from what the policy is, but I think anyone would agree 
(it doesn’t take much analysis) that that is a situation which is ripe for manipulation of the child by one or both of 
the parents. That is the reason why the courts are currently given a degree of latitude and independence to try to 
bring some objectivity and reason, in the best interests of the child, to where the child should reside. 
 
That is only a two-year-old amendment; it’s a new amendment. I’m not saying it’s perfect, and I’m not arguing 
against what the member is trying to move the law further along to. I’m only saying that his current bill is in the 
midst of a deliberation by the law reform commission. It seeks to amend the law that is only two years old; it 
seeks to hang a major policy decision for children who are 10 years of age and over. I think that obligates all of us 
to very carefully consider what we’re doing, if for nothing else, in the interest of the family. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Another supplementary to the Attorney General. I appreciate the rhetoric, but are you 
going to call the bill today or not? That is entirely at your discretion. Yes or no? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I will repeat again my answer to the hon. member. I am prepared to 
consent to call the bill and have it debated, by leave, on the condition (I don’t mean it as a condition, but if we are 
proroguing today, and we’re stopping the clock and sitting this afternoon, or this evening, and have extra time to 
do that) . . . I would be prepared to have a full, wide-ranging debate with the hon. member. I think that is in order, 
if his House Leader and his caucus agrees. 
 
If, however, we are not proroguing and are going to adjourn at the normal time of 1 p.m., it makes little sense for 
us to stand aside normal government business in order to deal with private member’s legislation, when there is a 
full opportunity, when and if we next convene on Tuesday. So I am prepared to definitely call it. If this is 
prorogation day (if I may put it that way), agreed to by the House Leader opposite, Mr. Taylor, and me, we are 
definitely prepared to call it, and definitely prepared to debate it, have a full 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3470 

exchange of views. As the member knows privately, I even had my lawyers looking at new legislation which I 
could introduce which would try to mitigate some of the concerns that we have, and would go part of the way 
toward your concerns. He knows that we are working on them. I have seen a couple of the drafts. Who knows, we 
may be able to further advance those views? Yes. The answer is yes, subject to the developments of the day. 
 

U.S. Antiballistic Missile System 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — A question to the minister responsible for the emergency measures organization. The United 
States is rapidly working toward implementation of a new antiballistic missile system which is being established 
to defend existing U.S. nuclear missile silos close to the Saskatchewan and Manitoba border. This new plan is a 
special low altitude defence system plan, that would be programmed to intercept and explode oncoming Soviet 
missile warheads at low altitudes, with interception in some cases occurring over southern Saskatchewan. 
 
My question is: because of the obvious danger such an antiballistic missile system would pose to southern 
Saskatchewan (especially the most southerly communities), in the event of any type of nuclear warhead exchange, 
would our government, through the emergency measures organization, investigate and take steps to express grave 
concern over this plan, before the United States gives final approval to a plan for the deployment of these 
missiles? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I would be prepared to have the emergency measures organization of 
the Department of Urban Affairs investigate this proposal that the hon. member makes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that the United States has not given final approval to the low altitude defence 
missile system, but has substantially stepped up its research into this particular area. Mr. Speaker, I believe it is 
the short-range system that is a matter of . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I wonder if the Chamber could come to order so we can complete the question 
and answer. 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — . . . implications in this particular area to the people of Saskatchewan, and it does 
require attention. As the hon. member knows, there are no governments in Canada, neither provincial nor federal, 
which have given any priority to this matter. I can inform the hon. member that on June 5, there is going to be a 
meeting in Ottawa of all the provinces dealing with emergency measures. As well, it is a federal-provincial 
conference called by Ottawa. I have not received the agenda so far. Hopefully, this matter may also be considered 
by all the provinces and the federal government. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Supplementary. My understanding is that this new U.S. proposal compounds the existing 
hazards for Saskatchewan residents. First of all, it involves interception of Soviet missiles at low altitudes instead 
of high altitudes. Secondly, instead of simply intercepting an individual weapon system, it would involve setting 
up a series of nuclear explosions over, in some cases, communities in the most southerly part of our province with 
a view to completely taking out a Soviet missile before it hits the United States. Now, my question is whether our 
government, Mr. Speaker, could . . . 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3471 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I am prepared to wait until we get order returned to the Chamber so the 
member can complete his supplementary. If the members want to waste the question period, I am prepared to . . . 
Order, order! Could I have order, please? If I can have order, we won’t waste any more of the question period. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Mr. Speaker, my question simply is whether our government could look at new steps to 
mobilize public opinion and awareness in Saskatchewan to this plan, and speak out against the continuing 
militarization of nuclear weapons along our border, and whether the governments could ask the federal 
government to take steps to oppose this type of planning in the future and give more attention to the question of 
civil defence on the prairies in the event of a nuclear war? There should be some balance between the high level 
of preparedness in the ’60s, given the concerns which existed then, and the complete lack of preparedness now. 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — The concern which the hon. member expresses is a matter for all of us to be 
concerned about. Obviously, the members opposite don’t seem to want to consider the matter as a serious problem 
from the way they are behaving. As I said, I share the concern of the hon. member. I share the concern about the 
build-up of nuclear weapons throughout the world. It is a matter which governments have to look at seriously. Our 
government, I must confess, has not turned its mind to this problem. I think it is fair to say that perhaps the 
situation is getting more serious. I believe that we should be looking at the matter more seriously because, in the 
event of a nuclear attack, there’s no question that there would be serious radiation consequences to the people of 
Saskatchewan because of our location. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, it’s a matter which we are going to be considering. I 
hope that we can . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I wonder if we could have order in the Chamber. The Minister of Urban 
Affairs. 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — The hon. members know that, in the ’60s, many people were expressing concern and 
creating consciousness, but in recent years there has not been very much attention given to the matter. As I 
indicated to the member earlier, there is a federal-provincial conference being organized by the emergency 
measures organization in the early part of June. It is possible that this item might be put on the agenda. I can 
assure the hon. member that it is my intention to raise the matter with the federal government which has the prime 
responsibility in the area of defence. 
 
MR. LANE: — By way of supplementary, why would the minister be prepared to take such precipitous action on 
this pressing international problem and refuse to take any action to help the people of Saskatchewan fight inflation 
by refusing to give any tax savings or tax benefits to the people of this province? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member presumably . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I wonder if we can have order. Each member has an idea as to the importance 
of his or her question. The member for Saskatoon-Sutherland apparently thinks his question is important. The 
member for Qu’Appelle apparently thinks his supplementary is important. I think we should give the same amount 
of attention to the member for Qu’Appelle’s supplementary as we gave to the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland’s 
supplementary. 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3472 

HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Presumably, the hon. member for Qu’Appelle asked a serious question. I intend to 
give him a serious answer and I hope that he will listen. As Minister of Urban Affairs, I can tell him that a number 
of measures announced in the budget speech will be administered by the Department of Urban Affairs to help the 
citizens of the province. I can tell him that through the various grant programs, including the property 
improvement grant, the rental rebate, the senior citizens’ tax rebate, the grants to urban governments such as 
revenue sharing and community capital grants, individual home-owners will be relieved, on the average by $496 
as property owners from direct grants and assistance provided by the Government of Saskatchewan, as announced 
by the Minister of Finance. That’s only part of it. There are other tax measures which were announced — income 
tax reductions — a whole host of new programs to assist people in the low income categories. In the housing area, 
new programs have been announced particularly to help people in the low income categories to provide decent 
housing, as well as housing which they can afford. I think those are substantial measures that we, as the 
Department of Urban Affairs, will be administering to assist the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — With regard to the priority question raised by the hon. member for Saskatoon, I think 
it is a serious issue and I can assure him and the House that we will be turning our minds to it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Retirement of Sergeant at Arms 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I should like to move, seconded by my colleague the member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley, Mr. Taylor, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the members of this Assembly wish to record their deep appreciation for the distinguished and loyal 
service rendered by Mr. A.R. Ponto of the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly as Sergeant at Arms from 
1963 to 1965 and from 1971 to 1981. 

 
Before I take my place, I should like to say very briefly, that as members will know, it is the intention of Mr. 
Ponto to retire at the conclusion of service at the end of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
He has served the Assembly loyally for (if my mathematics are correct) 12 years in his capacity of Sergeant at 
Arms, a very distinguished and historic position in the place of parliamentary tradition and the parliamentary 
Chamber. 
 
Mr. Ponto has been a man who has fulfilled a distinguished military career, as is obvious by the medals which he 
has on him during the course of official functions, as well has having fulfilled, in all respects, a very remarkable 
and notable community career. 
 
Mrs. Ponto is in the Speaker’s gallery today to commemorate this occasion. Perhaps, Mrs. Ponto, you might just 
stand to be acknowledged by members of the House. We 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3473 

don’t see you; we see Mr. Ponto. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — As members will know, it is the intention of Mr. Speaker to invite all of us to a tea 
to honor the important occasion, at 1 p.m. Perhaps Mr. Speaker will make the formal announcement, at his 
choosing this afternoon. At that time we can all extend our best wishes and thanks to Mr. and Mrs. Ponto for their 
years of service to the province of Saskatchewan. So thank you very much, sir, and the best of luck to you in your 
future years. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before asking if we have concluded the number of speakers on the resolution, I want to 
warn the Sergeant at Arms to stay around the Chamber — there may be a vote on this one. I also want to say that 
the tea is contingent upon the motion passing. In the event the motion doesn’t pass, there will be no tea. Are there 
any further speakers on the motion? The member for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the Attorney General and, indeed, offer 
congratulations, for a long and dedicated period of service to this Assembly, to Mr. Ponto. I’m sure that in the 
back-up position in many cases was Mrs. Ponto, and it’s very nice to see her visiting our Chamber today. 
 
Being a relative rookie in this House, compared to some of the other members, I haven’t known Mr. Ponto as long 
as have some of the members in the House, but since I came in here in October 1978, we have gotten to know 
each other quite well. I appreciate what he does in the Chamber. I think at times, as we all know, his job is rather 
tough, because when the final authority comes, he is the man who must enforce order in here. I suppose there 
have been times when you’ve wondered whether you should rise from your chair or not. However, I think I speak 
on behalf of our opposition when I say that we have appreciated your efforts very much. I wish you and your wife 
a good retirement. I do hope that you find time to drop back and visit us here from time to time, and renew 
acquaintances. Thank you and have a very fine retirement. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join the Deputy Premier and the House Leader for the 
Opposition in extending our congratulations and thanks to Mr. Ponto. I rise to thank Mr. Ponto for the service he 
has given to this legislature and to wish him well in his retirement, because Mr. Ponto is a constituent of mine. I 
hope that Mr. Ponto and I will be able to keep contact from time to time, and I do wish Mr. Ponto and Mrs. Ponto 
a very happy retirement. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think I can conclude that’s nemine contradicente. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3474 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cowley that Bill No. 104 
— An Act to amend The Election Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly referred to a committee of the whole later 
this day. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that Bill No. 116 
— An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly referred to a committee of the whole later 
this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 100 — An Act to amend The Cattle Marketing Voluntary Deductions Act 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, the money that you’re trying to confiscate, the money that you’re trying to 
steal by making it legal (and any other derogatory terminology which could come to mind) is all producers’ 
money that they contributed voluntarily into a fund. I would like the minister to put on record: why does the 
minister feel it necessary, when your department has already done so many wonderful and so many benevolent 
things to producers, to put through a bill to steal a mere $90,000 or $100,00 (and I would like the exact figure)? 
Why do you need that? Why can’t you simply leave it where it is? You have a $2 billion budget. Why must you 
extort, steal (everything else that goes along with it) this amount of money? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member for Thunder Creek will recall my second 
reading remarks. He will have noticed that when the changes were made in this legislation to The Cattle 
Marketing Voluntary Deductions Act by my colleague, now the Minister of Rural Affairs and the member for 
Saltcoats, that the fund which was in place there was not, by legislation, transferred to the new act and to the new 
committee. The amount in the fund at that time was $90,000. The auditor froze that fund and it was not available 
for use by the present committee. All this legislation does is to unfreeze that fund so it’s available for use by the 
committee that administers this fund today. If the hon. member wishes to oppose the unfreezing of $90,000 to be 
made use of by the committee responsible for this program, then I leave that up to him. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — There’s no question that I oppose it. While you’re on your feet, why don’t you tell us who 
is on that committee and where they’re from. I don’t care about the names, tell us who the representatives are on 
that committee and what segment of the livestock industry they represent. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, the current legislation provides for a committee to administer 
funds, made up of: two persons nominated by the 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3475 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association; one person nominated by each of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders’ Association, the Saskatchewan Dairy Association, the Western 
Canadian Cow-Calf Association (Saskatchewan section), and two persons appointed by the minister. The present 
committee consists of Mr. Barry Andrew and Mr. Boyd Anderson of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ 
Association, Mr. Bill Marshall of the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, Mr. Frank Edenoste of the 
Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders’ Association, Mr. Leo Fuhr of the Saskatchewan Dairy Association, Mr. Evans 
Thordarson of the Western Canadian Cow-Calf Association, Mr. Walter Jess of Speers and Mr. Bob May of the 
Department of Agriculture. These are the committee and they remain in place. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, in the present fund where you are going to put your $90,000, what amount 
of money, on a yearly basis, goes in from government contributions? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — This is a checkoff of the cattle sold. There is no money which goes to this fund 
from the provincial government. It comes from the voluntary deductions. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, if this is all producers’ own money which is voluntarily contributed, tell me 
why you are making appointments to that board? It is the producers’ money. Why don’t you leave it to the 
producers to spend the money as they see fit? I have no quarrel with the people who have been listed. The two 
from the SSGA (Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association) are capable people. Frank Edenoste is an excellent 
choice. 
 
I note, with amusement, the Saskatchewan section of the Western Cow-Calf Association. I am wondering whether 
their membership has reached 35. The last I heard, they only had 27 paid-up ones. I understand their objective is 
50 for this year. I question the choice of Mr. Thordarson because he is an individual and I don’t think they are a 
viable group. Someday they may be, but they are not. The two I take exception to are your appointments. 
 
Bob May is a public servant. He may be a very capable civil servant or may not be. I don’t know. But the 
producers need Mr. May’s input into the board about as much as they need two heads. They don’t need a public 
servant, whether it is Mr. May or anybody else from the public service, on that board to tell them how to spend 
their money. We were doing a pretty good job with the checkoff money on a national basis until the big brother 
hand of the Saskatchewan NDP government decided to impose its benevolence upon us. The people who are on 
this board now (and were previously) are quite capable of spending their own money very adequately. I don’t 
know why we need the likes of Mr. May (and I don’t mean that on a personal basis) or any public officials sitting 
on that board to put forward the ideas of the extremely politicized Department of Agriculture. The Department of 
Agriculture doesn’t make a move unless that move is in the interest of the New Democratic Party. I don’t know 
why we have to have two appointments from the minister. I don’t know the other gentleman, Mr. Jess. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He is a good guy. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I am sure he is. Whose campaign did he manage in the last . . . That would be facetious, 
and I will restrain myself from that. We don’t need your appointments, Mr. Minister. The $90,000 was producers’ 
money which is in the fund 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3476 

already. You bet I oppose, and we oppose on this side of the House, the setting up of this board. We say the 
producers can look after the funds very adequately without the heavy hand of big brother New Democratic 
government. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, the amendments which are before us deal with the unfreezing of 
the fund and do not deal with the committee which is to administer the funds. The committee which I outlined is 
in accordance with the provisions of the legislation which was debated in this Assembly in 1978 and subsequently 
passed by this Assembly. I agree with the hon. member that the committee is an excellent committee. I might say 
to the hon. member we had some thoughts and discussions, with respect to the administration of this fund relating 
to the stabilization board. We made a decision after the discussions and after consideration to leave the committee 
in place and the fund and the operation of the fund separate from the stabilization plan, because of the work that 
it’s been doing. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, this bill is part of the overall framework of why the livestock industry and 
the cattle industry distrusts your government. You simply cannot leave them alone. I suppose it’s their 
independent spirit that is an annoyance to you, an irritant to you, but you just don’t seem to be able to leave them 
alone. I don’t really think that it’s your government’s intention to do long-term harm toward the industry, but I 
believe producers all around this province are suspicious of government because, basically, governments — 
whether we are talking the Trudeau government, the Blakeney government, or others — inherently, with their 
bureaucracy, are incompetent and don’t do a good job of looking after their business. 
 
I point to the herd maintenance program very briefly to make this point. Is there anybody in this Assembly who 
will say that the herd maintenance program was successful? Does anybody want to stand up and say that was a 
good, well-run program that really did a job? No way — nobody is going to, not even the member for Morse. I’m 
glad to see that a minister of the Crown stood up to endorse the Eugene Whelan-Hazen Argue mismatch. 
 
Mr. Minister, at the risk of repeating myself, I suggest that your government should get out of this whole area. We 
need a checkoff fund. When we had it, in its former form, going to the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association for the 
promotion of beef, the money was used better than it has been by government. Mr. Minister, you know in the 
make-up of this board, the legislation gives a preponderance of authority to the two individuals you appoint. 
Whether it reads that way, the use of an “if” or an “and” gives you complete control over this money. We object to 
that part violently. That money comes voluntarily from cattlemen when they market their cattle. When those funds 
went to our national association, we think the interests of the cattlemen were served better than they are now. 
Some places this money is used now are questionable in respect to their value to the beef industry — very 
questionable. We knew what the function was before. The function was to promote the increased consumption of 
beef by Canadian consumers. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Minister, when you took over this fund and removed it form its original purpose, the beef 
consumption in this country was well over 100 pounds per capita. You know, since we had the incursions of 
politicians into our business with this fund, it is interesting to note the per capita beef consumption dropped about 
20 lbs. 
 
Is that the kind of job that your agencies are going to do for us? Is this typical? I suggest to you that it is. And I 
suggest to you that you drop this bill, leave that $90,000 and invest it well. After the election this fall, when some 
degree of common sense returns to 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3477 

that side of the House, we can return that money were it belongs, into producer control. I ask you to drop this bill. 
You don’t need that money. It is producers’ money. Leave it; preferably drop the entire board and the concept. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, I make two points. I will be glad to inform Mr. Barry Andrew, 
Mr. Boyd Anderson, Mr. Bill Marshall, Mr. Frank Edenoste, Mr. Leo Fuhr, Mr. Evans Thordarson and Mr. 
Walter Jess that the hon. member for Thunder Creek and all hon. members opposite say that Bob May is running 
them. I’ll be glad to inform them, because that is what the hon. member said — that they can’t, as a committee, 
collectively decide the best use of these moneys. 
 
Mr. Chairman, If there were any other way of freeing up the $90,000, other than the legislative route, to make it 
available for the use of this committee to spend as they see fit, then we would have done it. There is no other way 
than the legislative route to make this $90,000 available to the committee and therefore the legislation. We intend 
to proceed with the legislation, based on the advice we were given legally and, if the hon. members opposite wish 
to oppose the freeing up of the $90,000, making it available to the committee (because as the hon. member for 
Thunder Creek attempts to imply they are not capable of making decisions of this nature because they are 
dominated by a staff person of the Department of Agriculture), then I think we will let them know that. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, most of the names that you have put out, I’ve been to bull sales with. I have 
roped with them. I don’t know how many things I have done with them. Mr. Marshall’s career within the wheat 
pool doesn’t . . . Well, you know very well he is a person of unquestioned ability and integrity. Thordarson, I may 
disagree with philosophically, but he is a capable individual within the framework of his own views. 
 
If you are going to quote me, Mr. Minister, at least do it accurately. What I am saying is that you should turn 
everything over to these people. Give them total control. Get your government people off that board. Let these 
people that represent an association or some segment of producers or whatever — let them control it all. Don’t 
you misquote me by saying that I’m saying these people haven’t got ability. I know most of them better than you, 
far better, and they have ability. I was talking about ability. That is a word you would not understand, something 
you have really never been associated with. So when you are out of your league, why don’t you simply remain 
silent, because your contribution, when you do have the floor is usually so negligible that . . . 
 
Again, if you are going to quote me, quote me accurately. I say very clearly, get rid of your government types and 
turn all of the money — this $90,000 — over to those people. I am saying quite the reverse. Get the government 
people out of there. Put that money where it belongs and let the producers, the proper people who should be 
spending this money, spend it free of political interference such as from your department. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, in 1978 you moved a bill in this House to give the veto power to the minister 
(at that time it was Mr. Kaeding) over the final decisions of an existing board, one which had existed for a long 
time previously. The difference between the bill you brought in in 1978 and what existed before (be it by bill or 
by practice, take your choice) was that the board in place made the decision; the minister did not have veto power. 
At least he never did it before, and the current custom has developed such that the board made the decision, and 
that’s how the money was spent. The minister did not interfere. In 1978, you brought in a change that allowed the 
minister to have the final say. Am I correct in that statement? 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3478 

HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know all of the history, but I understand that the principle 
to which the hon. member refers has always been there. The principle (as he described it) of veto power, in my 
time dealing with this legislation, has been that the board has always made the decisions. I think they are 
competent in making the decisions. I’ve left those decisions to them. Mr. Bob May is with me now. I think that 
Mr. Bob May makes a valuable contribution to that board. I think the hon. member for Rosthern would agree to 
that. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, yes, part of what you say is correct; the board does make 
valuable decisions. But the point is, Mr. Minister, prior to the 1978 bill, which legalized or changed a custom 
which had always existed, the cattle checkoff board had made the decision where the money would be spent. They 
made the decisions, and it became an automatic thing after that. There were members of your department on that 
committee giving assistance. In fact, I think Ernie was the name of the fellow that used to be there before. Bob 
May, Ernie Spencer had many good contributions, I am told. 
 
The point is that the majority of the producers, the majority of those putting the funds in, made the final decision. 
They made the final decision. The minister did not put his sticky fingers in it by saying, “No, that can’t go 
through.” It was just automatic. 
 
During the time Mr. Kaeding was the minister of agriculture, something changed. He changed the procedure by 
saying no to some particular amount of money that was being allotted. If I remember, the case regarded the 
cattlemen’s information centre out of Ontario, into which we paid a portion, the same as your government pays a 
portion into the Yellowhead Route, or the same as your government pays portions into many other national 
associations promoting something that we have some interest in. 
 
That being the case, am I incorrect when I state that that’s the first time the Minister of Agriculture interfered, and 
the board was not left autonomous? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — I’m trying to be, Mr. Chairman, in a position to respond to the point the hon. 
member is attempting to make. I don’t think the legislation, in terms of legislative power, has changed from before 
to now. 
 
The hon. member says that there was a change in custom, that the custom was always that matters were left to the 
board or the committee administering the fund. He says that the break in the custom occurs when the Minister of 
Agriculture interprets, as he did in one case, the direction of the fund. There has, in that sense, been a break in the 
custom, according to his interpretation of the allocation of the funds. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — That’s the point we are arguing. There is one simple solution to this, which nobody has 
talked about: we should handle that $90,000 plus interest that has been sitting in the fund by the old method rather 
than by the new method. It’s the same act, but let’s back up a step and suggest that the fund could be used under 
the old method. Have you checked to see if the auditor, or whoever is freezing the funds, has indicated whether, if 
done under the old concept, before the 1978 bill, these funds can be released to be used by the producers for the 
benefit of producers in the way they so choose? Have you got a ruling on that type of discussion? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — I don’t follow the hon. member. It’s $90,000 frozen, and to unfreeze it we have 
to legislate the thaw, according to what all the legal advice is and what the auditor says. The only committee in 
place now is the legislated committee, 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3479 

representation of names I brought before the Assembly. So they are the committee to discharge the funds. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — The committee that existed when this money was put in the account should still have the 
authority, under law, to spend it. The new committee may not have (and you may be right there), but the old 
committee, which existed prior to the time of the change, should still have the authority to use those funds. 
Therefore, you may have to go back to that committee to allow them to disperse the funds under the old rules, 
making this bill unnecessary. Therefore, the producers should be allowed to use the funds in a method of their 
choice, without the interference of the government. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, our legal advice says that that’s not possible. The legal advice 
says it must be possible to distribute the moneys, and that they should be distributed through the existing 
committee. This is the same representation as the previous legislation. The only change was that the consumer 
representative was moved out, and the Western Canada Cow-Calf Association was brought in. I am sure the hon. 
member would not disagree with that. 
 
Our legal advice (and we have to base it on legal advice and the advice of the auditor) is that we have to legislate 
the fund, to make it free for the committee to distribute. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister could indicate to the committee if he feels that it 
was a fair basis to transfer the funds which existed in the original checkoff fund to the new plan? If so, could you 
give us some reason for your supporting that particular change of the funds over to the new one? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, obviously what happened, when the 1978 legislation was drafted, 
was that somebody missed the cog or the fund would have been transferred as part of the 1978 legislation. The 
auditor identified the problem; the legislation wasn’t complete in terms of handling the fund. He therefore closed 
it. After a couple of years of searching as to how that could be accommodated, it was said that it has to be by 
legislation — hence, the legislation. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, we’ll just move back to that question in a few moments. I wonder if I might 
have leave of the committee to introduce a group of students to the Assembly? 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Chairman,, and to the other members of the 
Assembly, a group of grade 5 students. They’re seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re from the Whitewood 
School in my riding. They’re here, of course, to visit the legislature. I’m sure that they have a busy and full 
schedule for the balance of the afternoon. They are 23 in number. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mrs. 
Santo, the principal, Mr. Russell Hamilton, parent, Mrs. Bouton, and the bus driver, Mr. White. The itinerary for 
the visiting students is to be here until approximately 11:30. They will be meeting with me in the rotunda area for 
pictures at approximately noon. Then they will meet with me in the members’ dining hall for questioning and 
refreshments. 
 
I would want to take the opportunity to advise the students in the Speaker’s gallery that 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3480 

what we are doing now is a committee of the legislature. As you will note, the Speaker is not in his chair. The 
chairman is in his place. We’re in what we call the committee of the whole. We are in the process of discussing a 
voluntary checkoff bill as it relates to the cattle industry. With those few words, I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming the students here this afternoon and in wishing them a good afternoon and a safe trip home. 
I appreciate your being here and I look forward to meeting with you later this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 100 (continued) 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you didn’t answer the one question which I asked before. Did you or did you 
not check with your legal solicitors? By allowing the board which existed prior to the new legislation (the ’78 
legislation) . . . if the funds were turned over to that board, I believe it would have the authority and the right to 
spend them under the old rules. They cannot be turned over to the new system because the authorization is not 
there, as the auditor and other people have said. The difference between the two systems is that in the one system, 
it is very precise that the Minister of Agriculture (and now with this particular bill, also the deputy minister) will 
have the authority over the account and the final decision. Under the old system, and by custom and practice, 
which is defined by law to be a law in itself . . . If you talk to some young lawyers who are going to university, 
they will give you a long speech about daughters and mothers, and all the rest of this. That’s how custom and 
usage is just as good a law as written law. 
 
With that particular argument I suggest that the former board has the right to take that $90,000 plus interest and 
put it into any particular program, events, or whatever they think will help the industry. We don’t need this bill. 
The difference between this bill and what I am suggesting is giving the deputy minister control of the money. That 
is the whole difference we are discussing. I say we don’t need the bill. Allow the old board which had a consumer 
on it (as you indicate) to decide how the money should be spent for the betterment of the producer. It is producer 
money. The minister should be left out of the picture, other than signing the cheque or whatever procedure is 
involved there. The old board should have the authority. That is why it is tied up. When you moved it over you 
didn’t take the authority with you. Have you had that legal opinion, or are you just guessing? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, the legal opinion is that in order to do what the hon. member 
wants to do we would have to have an amendment in this act. That’s the legal opinion. So, we would be debating 
an amendment in this act to give the old board power. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Chairman, and I say this sincerely, the hon. member for Rosthern is saying, “I don’t have 
confidence in this existing board to make proper use oft he $90,000. I don’t want to agree with this amendment, 
but I would agree with another amendment to establish the old board to spend the $90,000.” I think we would be 
debating the amendment one way or the other, according to the legal advice we’re given. We think this is the most 
sensible one. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you are developing the habit of the Attorney General of 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3481 

twisting words. The facts are that there is no dispute against this group of people. The whole difference is in the 
control the minister and deputy minister will have. That’s what it’s all about. 
 
Under the old system the board made the decision; the minister was not to interfere. The former minister did 
interfere and that was what started the problems. Then you brought in the 1978 legislation to allow the former 
minister to interfere as he so wished. The fact is, you people didn’t have the confidence in the producers — not us. 
You are the people who put the veto power in the hands of the minister and deputy minister. When former persons 
sat on the committee they made their decisions with a member for the Department of Agriculture who gave them 
advice and made suggestions. The veto power was not there until the former minister put his big foot in it and 
said, “I want veto; I’m not letting you spend the money where you want to spend it.” 
 
That’s what we’re talking about. Now, you’re trying to say that the $90,000 the old board left in the bank at the 
time should be under the control of the minister. We’re not even talking about the competence of the board 
because everyone on both this board is, and the former board was, very capable. Some on this board were on the 
old board. 
 
The only different animal in the thing is your minister and deputy minister. We’re saying to you that the trust 
should be put in the hands of the producers who put the funds in the kitty. Those producers should make the 
decisions. We said that in 1978 when you . . . we spoke against the bill you brought in then. We said the 
producers should have the right; the government should keep its fingers out of it. The minister should keep his 
fingers out of it and let the producers decide when to spend their money. 
 
That is not what you fellows are doing. That’s not what this amendment does. You are now taking in another 
member of the government to have another bit to say over the producer who put the money there in the first place. 
It’s a voluntary checkoff fund. You mark either yes or no, when you go to the stockyards and sell you cattle, for 
some of you city members. 
 
When I go to the stockyards I mark yes or no. That puts the money in the fund and the board makes the decision. 
It shouldn’t be the Minister of Agriculture who makes the decision. It should be the producer. He is putting the 
money in there. It’s what is best for the producer that we are talking about, not what is better for the Minister of 
Agriculture. That seems to be your attitude. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Looking it over very closely, Mr. Minister, it is quite obvious that you’re taking the powers 
from the Minister of Finance. Now, instead of giving it to the minister or to the cabinet, you are going to start 
throwing some powers out to the deputy ministers. Let’s just regulate the cowboys some more; let’s just control 
them some more. I’ll point it out to you — section 6(1): 
 

The Minister of Finance shall establish a trust fund to be called The Cattle Marketing Voluntary Deductions 
Act trust fund in a chartered bank or credit union. 

 
Now, we go to the amendment, Mr. Minister — section 2, clause 5: 
 

The deputy minister of agriculture is deemed to have authority and control over the special trust account 
established pursuant to section 6 of The Cattle Marketing Voluntary Deductions Act, 1970, as it existed on 
July 31, 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3482 

1978, and shall transfer the assets and liabilities of the special trust account into the fund, and upon 
completion of the transfer, the special trust account is terminated. 

 
So you are just taking (correct me if I’m wrong, Mr. Minister) the power away from the Minister of Finance and 
giving it to the deputy minister. When are you going to quit regulating and quit asking for control and authority 
over the cattle producers in Saskatchewan? When are you going to get off their backs? Governments are there to 
assist and help, not control, an authority. Then you wonder why they doubt your stabilization plan. Of course they 
doubt it because they can see another amendment coming down later on, where you take a little more control, a 
little more authority, and it’s no wonder that the cattlemen in Saskatchewan not only do not trust you, but now 
they won’t even be trusting the deputy minister. Whom are they going to go to when they have problems? When 
they have a problem, what happens? They get controlled some more. Mr. Minister, you know it’s wrong. That is 
the truth. You’re taking the power from the Minister of Finance and giving it to the deputy minister, who next 
year, in another amendment — who knows? When are you going to start trusting the people to handle their own 
money? That’s the key to it. 
 
You birds have to grab it, control it and maintain it. So to try to ease things, you take the power away from the 
Minister of Finance and give it to the deputy minister of agriculture. Are you going to start giving the secretaries 
in your department power next? It’s wrong. That’s why the cattle producers in Saskatchewan don’t trust you. 
They never have, and this surely isn’t going to help improve any trust or relationship. They cannot trust your 
government, Mr. Minister. 
 
That’s why we voted against the stabilization bill; there is not trust between the cattle producers and the NDP 
government in Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — I note that the hon. members opposite are having an awful time struggling with 
the stabilization act and the stabilization plan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It seems to be getting into every 
debate here, including this debate. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the simple facts of the bill are that we have a frozen fund of $90,000, and we want to turn it over 
to a committee to be spent. Our legal advice is that this is the way to do that. Now, the hon. members say that we 
shouldn’t do it at all, that we should leave that $90,000 frozen, and not turn it over to the committee for the use of 
the committee. I find that very difficult to accept, because that’s what the bill does. 
 
They can talk about all of the powers of the minister, and all the powers of the deputy minister, and all the politics 
of the minister, and all the politics of all the staff of the Department of Agriculture, but what this bill does is 
unfreeze $90,000 to be spent on behalf of the farmers, on behalf of the beef industry; it’s farmers’ money. If the 
hon. member wishes to oppose it — fine. But I think the opposition’s arguments are not strong in terms of dealing 
with this particular piece of legislation. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I think it is fair to say that we know where you stand on the question of the 
cattle industry. You are a politician and you represent a philosophy. You are in charge of the department. When 
we say we don’t trust you, I want to make it clear that we don’t trust your government. When we say you 
(sometimes my colleague and I slip), we are not talking about you personally; we are talking about your 
government. Every cattleman out there knows we can’t trust your philosophy or your government. 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3483 

Mr. Minister, as you present Bill 100, you use the term “deputy.” Now, normally deputies are impartial. Your 
deputy isn’t impartial. You deputy is not immune from political criticism in this Assembly, because he has thrown 
that immunity aside by his own choice. Your deputy, as have several of his predecessors, entered the political 
arena of debate. The moment one does that, if he is a public servant, he is wide open and fair game. We make no 
bones about it; there’s no question about. After the fall election and you are not there any longer, deputies, who 
have made the choice to enter the political arena of debate, and have discarded their normal immunity from 
criticism, have a very bleak future with a Conservative government. Make no mistake about that. I am not saying 
anything shocking. 
 
You brought your deputy into the debate on Bill 100. The deputy minister is normally impartial. You introduced 
this bill saying your deputy minister will run the debate. This is a deputy minister who is a partisan (in our view) 
politician, who put forward an NDP philosophy; this is a deputy minister who sent out internal documents, 
instructing Department of Agriculture employees to further and promote the overriding NDP philosophy toward 
agriculture — orderly marketing. Knowing full well this deputy minister’s personal philosophy, and the 
philosophy he put forward to everyone in his department by personal memo, you expect that he will impartially 
use the cattlemen’s money? Every cattleman knows that if your deputy had his way, they would be under an 
ironclad marketing board. 
 
I agree that something must be done with this $90,000, but not in the fashion that you are proposing in this bill. 
The livestock industry does not trust your deputy to be impartial. You will get up in a moment and kick the blazes 
out of me for attacking a public servant; go to it, and we’ll have a debate all day about that. I make no apology, 
because your deputy (by his own free will, I assume) lost his immunity from criticism the moment he jumped into 
the political arena of debate. Get up and kick me, and we’ll go all day on the subject. 
 
Mr. Minister, the livestock industry would much sooner, I believe, see this money stay where it is. At the very 
least, if we are going to proceed with this bill, I would like to ask the minister if he would delete amendment 5 
under section 2. Then we could perhaps support the bill. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member knows that the deputy minister is the 
administrative head of the Department of Agriculture. He may disagree with our appointment of a deputy 
minister. He probably disagrees with my appointment as the Minister of Agriculture. Fine. But that’s not his 
decision to make; it’s our decision to make as a government, and we have made it. We are convinced that the 
deputy minister is doing an outstanding job for agriculture in Saskatchewan. I’m not going to argue that. I only 
make the point that since he is the administrative head of the Department of Agriculture, legally he assumes 
responsibility to make sure that the funds which are frozen are transferred to be available for use by the 
committee. That’s what the bill does. It says: “You, sir, are responsible to make sure that that money is 
transferred. As soon as it is transferred, the special trust account is terminated and the money is available to be 
spent by the committee.” 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, responding to your initial comment, I think I welcomed your appointment as 
Minister of Agriculture. I don’t know whether I ever said it publicly, but I think you are a pretty good Minister of 
Agriculture as such. But you are also a 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3484 

politician and I know where you stand. But that’s just fair game; you know where I stand. I say none of this 
disparagingly. 
 
Mr. Minister, it is the philosophy of your government that we disagree with in the cattle business. We don’t trust 
your government. We don’t trust your philosophy. We don’t think that you should be involved in the spending of 
the cattle industry’s own money. I object to the guise of neutrality that you give your deputy, this kind of what you 
term authority and control over the special trust account. Your deputy minister is committed, in his own hand and 
in his own internal memos, to having the Department of Agriculture promote and enunciate the philosophy of the 
New Democratic Party on agriculture. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Why not? 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Because the role of a deputy minister is certainly to perform the task that his minister 
instructs him to do. I cannot believe that there were very many deputies in the public service who would take a 
directive from their minister and circulate an internal memo in their department which would instruct employees, 
department heads and field staff to promote a certain ideological concept. I can’t believe very many deputies 
would do it in that form. They may say that the minister has ordered me to say this, or that, or this. But I can’t 
believe very many deputies would take an order from their minister and put out a memo such as the deputy 
minister of agriculture did. 
 
As I have said many times before, when he did that and when the document became public, he became an NDP 
partisan politician and fair game here or anywhere else in the Assembly. I doubt very much if the Attorney 
General’s deputy minister would have circulated a memo like that. I’m quite sure Mr. Goose wouldn’t do that. I 
don’t think Mr. Douglas would do that. I don’t think Tom Gentles in highways would do it; in fact, I’m sure that 
he wouldn’t. But certainly you get these partisan deputy ministers in agriculture. They’re dangerous because they 
set a precedent. Look at the member for Regina Lakeview. There is the gentleman who finally got out from under 
the guise of the public service commission and got into the Assembly where we could talk to him. Talking about 
precedents, you’re the one who established that; you’re the one who took one of the most prestigious posts in the 
public service and turned it into a political gamesmanship role. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have spent too much time on this already. We’re going to oppose this. I hope you’ll reconsider. 
This is producers’ own money. Mr. Minister, with the make-up of this board that you have with your 
appointments and the role of your deputy minister that you’re describing (“authority control over the special trust 
account”) were there government funds in this, then yes, you would have justification for what you’re doing. I 
want to say categorically that we oppose this government control over what is exclusively producers’ own funds. 
 
I hope you will have second thoughts about that. In many ways, what you are doing is really very contradictory to 
the traditional forms of democracy. I agree where there are government funds, certainly there should be 
government input — maybe even some government control. But this is producers’ own money, voluntarily given, 
and I ask you to have second thoughts about this. I’m all done. 
 
Section 1 agreed on the following recorded division: 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3485 

YEAS — 35 
 
Pepper Kaeding Romanow 
Smishek Tchorzewski Baker 
McArthur Gross Rolfes 
MacMurchy Mostoway Banda 
Vickar Hammersmith Kowalchuk 
Dyck Thompson MacAuley 
Engel Feschuk Byers 
Cowley Cody Koskie 
Matsalla Shillington Prebble 
Johnson Lingenfelter Long 
Nelson White Solomon 
Chapman Miner  
 

NAYS — 14 
 
Berntson Thatcher Birkbeck 
Duncan Lane Taylor 
Rousseau Swan Pickering 
Katzman Garner Andrew 
McLeod Ham  
 
Section 2 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, on this bill, is there any thought you could delay this for six months or 
something, or give it sufficient time to get a legal opinion to allow us to do it the other way? This would mean the 
former producers, who were on the former board, would get to choose to spend the money. I don’t believe you 
have an interpretation that says the old board, which was in existence prior to 1978, couldn’t take the money to do 
as it pleased under the old rules. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the hon. member we have been researching this in 
a legal way for over a year. This is the conclusion, the legislation which is before us. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, I assume your researching was not along the lines of letting the old board handle it; 
everything was about getting that doggone political deputy minister to be able to handle it, rather than allowing 
the old board to handle it. That’s what we want to see. 
 
Section 2 agreed. 
 
Section 3 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill, on division. 
 

Bill No. 113 — An Act to amend The Agricultural Implements act 
 
Section 1 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3486 

HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, during committee of the whole last evening I indicated to the hon. 
member for Qu’Appelle, the hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose, that I would phone the Saskatchewan-Manitoba 
Implements Dealers’ Association. The phone call was placed this morning to Mr. Truman Smith, 
secretary-manager of the association, to ask him about the issues raised here in the Assembly. He reported that he 
had received no such complaints from any of the dealers of the association and that as far as the association was 
concerned, they are satisfied with the legislation that is before us. 
 
MR. SWAN: — What you are saying then, Mr. Minister, is that the implement dealers feel they will not be 
unnecessarily hindered by any additional charges from the company. Is that the essence of what you are saying? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Chairman, I report what Mr. Truman Smith said. I think one can imply from 
what he has said, that as the secretary-manager he has had no such complaint from any of the dealers in the 
association, and so far as he is concerned and the association therefore is concerned, they are satisfied with the 
bill. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, I think that all of us appreciate some change in this bill coming forward because of 
the concern raised by the court case. You have made an indication before that you are willing to go partway to 
help the farmers there and I hope that once this bill is in place that will indeed happen before too much time 
lapses. A number of these young people are in trouble because of the court cases that are being held. Now, with 
those few comments, our caucus is in agreement that we will support the bill. 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Sections 2 to 6 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 104 — An Act to amend The Election Act 
 
Sections 1 to 16 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 17 
 
MR. LANE: — Why do we need the provision? I know that the NDP in the last election had its candidates’ 
representatives identified at the polling station. I always felt that if the candidate knew who his representatives 
were it wasn’t necessary. I frankly don’t agree with the section. It’s kind of like Tammany Hall politics. That’s 
what they used to require. In the old days of Tammany Hall the representatives were required to wear an 
identification so they could keep track of the voters. So I ask the minister why we break with a long-standing 
principle to endorse an activity which started, after 25 years, in the last election, and why are we now enshrining it 
in the law? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I’m told that the reason for it is because some political parties are using colored 
tags (and I’m sure the member is aware of it) to identify their scrutineers from other people’s scrutineers. The 
chief electoral officer tells me that he had a couple of complaints about it. The federal act allows for a white tag to 
be worn. The provision here is a white tag with only the person’s name on it, if indeed the 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3487 

organization wants to have them. Otherwise no one has to have a tag on. 
 
It’s permissible legislation, not a requirement. That’s the rationale for it. I don’t feel particularly strongly about it. 
The recommendation came out of the chief electoral office because they had had a couple of difficulties. It’s not a 
big problem, and this seemed to be a way to solve it. 
 
MR. LANE: — Where did the problems arise? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — North-West and the by-election in Estevan. In North-West the complaint was from the 
Conservative organization with respect to the NDP using pink tags. I don’t know why that would be thought to be 
identifying a political party particularly, but in any event that was the complaint. In Estevan the complaint was 
from the Liberals that the NDP were wearing orange tags which were close to their party colors. The chief 
electoral officer asked the party to desist from using an orange tag. This seemed to be a way to solve the problem. 
The person’s name on a white tag obviously doesn’t identify a political party. The objection seemed to be that the 
people were identified politically because of what they were wearing. The member for Kinistino at this rate won’t 
be able to wear his orange suit on election day. 
 
MR. LANE: — Well, there should be a law on that anyway. The way that the section reads is that there is no 
prohibition about putting the party affiliation under the name. The way it reads, is that the representative’s name, 
printed in black ink, that tag must not resemble or display any campaign literature or emblem, ensign, badge, 
lapel, etc., that could be taken as an indication of support of a candidate or political party or group. 
 
I come back to the basic question again: Why should we allow any candidate’s representatives to be identified? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I don’t know how you run campaigns, but from my experience you often have people 
from outside the poll working as outside scrutineers. They may know who the inside scrutineer is, but they 
perhaps haven’t met the individual. It’s a convenience for political parties. I don’t think it is anything more than 
that. That would be the rationale. It is just a convenience so that then you walk in and you’re looking for Gary 
Lane who is the inside scrutineer, there’s the guy with the Gary Lane tag on and if you’ve never met him before, 
you’re able to identify him. The other option, of course, is simply to ask, “Who is Gary Lane?” (of the three or 
four people sitting there). Anyway, that’s the reason for it. 
 
MR. LANE: — Under other provisions of the act, the scrutineer’s papers are filed and it is very easy for any 
outside scrutineer to merely ask the poll clerk who the representative is. That is without any identification. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t feel very strongly about this. If this is going to hold up the bill, 
I am quite prepared to drop the provision. If the Clerk will advise me how to do that without having the bill 
defeated, which I presume is to put in an amendment deleting section 17 and renumbering all the other sections 
from 18 to 27 (as whatever) . . . So if you will give us a couple of minutes, we’ll get the amendment and do that. I 
understand we’re not in a big rush right now anyway, so everybody can have a cup of coffee. 
 
I have an amendment to offer, seconded by my colleague, the member for Kinistino, 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3488 

which reads as follows: 
 

Strike out section 17 of the printed bill and renumber sections 18 to 28 as sections 17 to 27 respectively. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Section 17 agreed. 
 
Section 18 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 19 to 25 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 26 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 27 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 117 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 
 
Section 1 to 2 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 3 
 
MR. LANE: — Could you explain section 3(7)? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — It is just a matter of relettering. Apparently there was some improper lettering under the 
revision and as a consequence that has been corrected. Accordingly, you end up with the (d) and (e) items instead 
of (e) and (g). 
 
MR. LANE: — Would you be a little more specific? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — In the revision it goes (a), (b), (c), (e), (g) and so that has been corrected. 
 
Section 3 agreed. 
 
Sections 4 to 9 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 10 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 11 to 37 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 38 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 39 to 54 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 55 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 56 to 60 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3489 

Bill No. 116 — An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 
 
Sections 1 and 2 agreed. 
 
Section 3 
 
MR. LANE: — Okay. Would you explain the effect of section 3, please. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — This just makes clear that the additional contribution of 2 per cent and 4 per cent in 
the money purchase plan, by the employer, is paid to members who elect to transfer to the new plan after April 1, 
if you were between 40 and 50 and over 50. This was a provision in the money accumulation plan, which was 
brought in two years ago, whereby the contributions are 9 per cent by the member and 9 per cent by the 
government. If the member is under 40 and between 40 and 50, it’s nine by the member and 11 by the 
government. If he’s elected when he’s over 50, it’s nine by the member and 13 by the government. The rationale 
for that, at that time, was that when an older member is elected, with the money accumulation plan, the money 
doesn’t have as much time to accumulate. That was the rationale at the time. That is the provision. This is simply 
to clarify it. The policy has not changed. 
 
MR. LANE: — In fact, you’re better off waiting until you’re over 50 to get elected. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, no, I don’t think that’s the case because your contributions will not grow very 
rapidly if you’re 53 and you’re in there for four years and take your pension immediately. With any money 
accumulation plan, the advantage is that the younger you are, the longer the money stays in. That’s all other things 
being equal, not getting into inflation, etc. That was the rationale behind it. 
 
MR. LANE: — It was never expected that someone who’s elected when he’s close to 55 retirement age is 
supposed to have a significant pension. This is really what this does. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — This doesn’t do anything. As I said, the provision has been in there for two years. I 
don’t think that the additional 4 per cent paid by a member over a four-years term is going to triple his pension or 
give him some huge pension if he retires immediately. What he would have in extra contributions . . . Let’s say he 
was contributing on a basis of $20,000. The extra 4 per cent would be, if my math is correct, $800 a year. In four 
years, there would be an extra $3,200 in the fund which would buy him an annuity of $300 a year or $25 a month. 
It would be a little more than that because of the interest over the four years. That’s the effect of it — to increase 
the allowance by $25 to $50 a month depending on what assumptions you make about interest rates and the cost 
of annuities. 
 
MR. LANE: — The contribution being made under the act from $350,000 to $500,000 annually is nearly a 50 per 
cent increase. That’s well over any cost of living, consumer price index or any other schedule. Is that not a little 
extravagant? 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3490 

HON. MR. COWLEY: — It’s just a matter of trying to keep the fund somewhat closer to being actuarially 
sound. As with most pension funds, this fund is not actuarially sound. There was a study done and a 
recommendation made three or four years ago that there be an ongoing extra contribution made to the fund. It’s 
deemed, because some of the provisions in this act with respect to increasing the pensions of people already on 
pensions and the fact that we have, as the members have noted in question period, some inflation in Canada, that 
these funds have been found not to be sound actuarially. It was deemed that it was reasonable to put the money in 
at this time to increase the annual contribution to try to bring it close to being actuarially sound. 
 
MR. LANE: — I have some reservations about the timing. We’ve been urging, for a couple of months, that the 
government opposite take some action to help the taxpayers deal with inflation. We seem to be protecting 
members of the Legislative Assembly without difficulty. I question the minister’s timing as to that significant 
increase. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — That increase has no impact on members’ pensions. The government has the liability 
for the pensions anyway. It’s a question of whether it puts the money in now or allows the fund to run down and 
puts it in later. That’s the issue. With the public service, we have introduced The Public Service Superannuation 
(Supplementary Provisions) Act to increase public servants’ pensions as well. There the fund is not actuarially 
sound. Indeed, there isn’t a fund for people outside of the money purchase plan. The government simply makes 
annual contributions in the amount of whatever the pensions are the people are receiving. It’s apples and oranges, 
but it’s one way or the other. The government’s liability does not change with this provision and this increase 
from $350,000 to $500,000. The liability is there for the pensions. There is a liability for the pension of the 
member opposite, when he takes it. It’s there and whether or not there is money in the fund, the government is 
liable, as it is for public service pensions, to pay the pension. Changing this is not enriching the pension at all. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, I submit to the minister that there is no reason in the world why this should 
not be actuarially sound; there’s no reason at all. You are not facing the problems in this pension plan as you do in 
some others, where you may have an increasing number of people to be pensioned off and a decreasing base. You 
have the same number of members in here, basically year after year. There is no reason it should not be actuarially 
sound. Frankly, there seems to be something relating to pensions for MLAs almost every year. What are we here 
for? Are we here for a retirement program or are we here to do a job? Certainly, it may need upgrading from time 
to time, but about this time of year in the session, every single year, there’s always something pertaining to 
pensions. Particularly in this year when everybody else is being ravaged by inflation, you don’t seem to have 
legislation to deal with high interest rates; you don’t seem to have legislation to deal with pensions on fixed 
incomes that are being crucified. You don’t seem to have money to come to grips with our economic problems, 
yet we seem to have time and the ability to deal with pensions for MLAs. That’s a bit of a contradiction. I submit 
to the minister that perhaps he should take another look at this one. 
 
MR. LANE: — I think it is worthy of a response. We have been trying since last year to get some significant tax 
relief for the people of Saskatchewan. Obviously, we have been unsuccessful, but at least we kept fighting on it. 
You have come in protecting the pension of the MLAs. I think the minister’s priorities leave a lot to be desired. I 
would ask 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3491 

the minister if he feels that the timing of this bill is less than opportune? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — No, I think it’s consistent. We passed a supplemental act with respect to public 
servants and former employees of Crown corporations. To pass an act with regard to former MLAs and MLAs’ 
spouses, who face the same difficulties in terms of inflation as other people, I don’t think is inconsistent. That is 
what this act attempts to do. It has been done in the past for MLAs at the same time as it has been done with 
respect to public servants. The number affected isn’t large. I believe there are 69 persons, former MLA and 
spouses, who are on pensions. I think some of those are people who have been retired for a long time and their 
pensions are relatively small. I don’t think there’s anything inconsistent with what we are doing here. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I don’t know how your government has the gall, when you have refused to 
take action for people who can’t afford a house, or to help people who are on a fixed income and, as I indicated 
earlier, are being crucified. 
 
You absolutely refuse to take any action to soften the effect of terrible interest rates and overriding inflation. You 
bilk (with a capital B) car consumers with gasoline at exorbitant prices, because of your provincial gasoline tax. 
You force everybody to pay 40 cents more in Regina for a gallon of gasoline than they do in Edmonton. You 
don’t do anything to help our young farmers who, even in the best of times, have difficulty making it. You don’t 
do anything to help them, when they haven’t a prayer to make it with these interest rates — you have no money 
for that. You don’t have any money to help the first-time home buyer. Suggestions that are brought to the Minister 
of Finance are scoffed at. But we’ve got lots of money for an MLAs’ pension package, that may be eroded slightly 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, it’s a very sensitive subject. I tell you, it must be hitting a nerve when I start 
hearing that crap over there. Let me tell you, I know I must be doing something right when I start hearing that. 
 
But when everybody else is suffering, you can’t help them. You won’t help the home buyers. You won’t help the 
young farmers. You won’t help the people being ripped off on gasoline prices. But oh, yes, the MLAs’ pension is 
being eroded. It’s probably the most actuarially unsound pension plan that’s in existence. It’s a totally unfunded 
program; it never was actuarially sound. When the minister suggests that he’s trying to make it remotely 
actuarially sound now, he is, in effect, misleading this House. Well, maybe not, because it was so grossly unsound 
before, maybe this manoeuvre is making it one iota’s worth more actuarially sound. But who is trying to kid 
whom? As usual over there, look after number one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! Let’s have a little order here. The member for Thunder Creek has the floor. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I’m quite prepared to yield the floor to the member for Regina Lakeview to let him tell us 
what he believes about his government’s refusal to act on the crisis situation in this economy, and why everything 
else out there is not a crisis situation — but MLAs’ pension, oh, that is a crisis. We have to act. We’ve got to look 
after number one. 
 
I challenge the member for Regina Lakeview to get on his feet and tell his constituents where he stands on the fact 
that first-time home buyers aren’t going to be helped in his constituency. Tell them why young farmers from his 
home area around Watrous are going to be allowed to go under, into bankruptcy, with no help from his 
government. This government is going to say, “Let the banks do it.” Let him tell them how he justifies 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3492 

his government’s inaction, and all these awful things that are happening. But yet this government has the time and 
money to look after number one — all 45 of them over there I invite, I suggest — I’ll sit down — I challenge the 
member for Regina Lakeview to get up and tell us about that. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Chairman, I listened with interest to the member opposite speak on this bill. First 
of all, the basic intent of the bill is to provide supplements to members who are on existing pensions, which 
doesn’t include any of the members on this side of the House or that side of the House. I don’t know where the 
member opposite is at best, but regardless of whether I’m re-elected or not, I’m 20 years away from a pension. 
While it is of some interest to me at this point in time, I tend to think it’s a more or less academic interest. 
 
On the other hand, I make no apologies whatsoever for bringing the bill into the House. We have provided 
supplements for public servants; we’re doing that for MLAs, former MLA, MLAs’ spouses, people who have 
been on pensions (some of them for 20 years) when salaries were a lot lower and pensions were lower. I make no 
apologies whatsoever for that and I am quite prepared to go out in public and defend the action we’re taking. If 
the members want to take some cheap political shots and get a little mileage out of it, that’s fine with me. I’m 
prepared to take that; it’s part of the game. I make no apologies at all. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The Provincial Secretary has just mentioned that he is 20 years away; that would make him 
35 years of age. I wonder if everyone in this room will believe that today. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I’m sorry. I’m 36. I’m 19 years away. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I can assure the members opposite that I would not support this bill. I can 
assure the members opposite that our concern for the senior citizens of this province is a heck of a lot deeper than 
the concern we have for members opposite who may not be running the next time and who want to fatten their 
own pockets. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — I can assure the members opposite that I, for one, did not come into the legislature for how 
much money I can put into my pocket, whether or not . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right and I would 
challenge again the member for Regina Lakeview to stand up and defend this policy. 
 
I would ask the members opposite and I would ask the minister, are you as prepared today to bring in legislation 
to assist the senior citizens of this province who are on fixed incomes, as you are to look after the incomes of the 
MLAs who won’t be coming back next time, who won’t be running again and those who quit prior to today? Are 
you as prepared to look after the senior citizens of Saskatchewan who can’t afford the high cost of living, who 
can’t afford the taxes that you’re imposing on them, as you are to bring in this bill to help out the MLAs who will 
collect this money at 55 years of age? 
 
Mr. Minister, that’s not being responsible to the people of Saskatchewan. They elected 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3493 

you; they expect you to help them, not to help yourselves first. They elected you to assist them; they elected you to 
make it easier for them to live, not to make it easier for yourselves to live and that is exactly what this bill is 
doing. 
 
I suggest that you have forgotten what compassion is for the people of Saskatchewan who elected you. I suggest 
that the only compassion you have is for what you can put into your pockets at this point in time. I say that is 
disgraceful. I say to you that is not the role of members of this legislature. I say that it is going to be a shameful 
day in the history of this legislature when we put ourselves ahead of the people of Saskatchewan who elected us. 
That is not the role of members of this legislature. 
 
Support the bill, if you wish, on the other side. Support it and explain it to the senior citizen who can’t afford his 
light bill, can’t afford his telephone bill and can’t afford to operate his automobile. Explain it to him. I have never 
seen anything as disgraceful as this kind of bill that is being introduced in the legislature today. Explain it to the 
senior citizen who can’t even afford to buy the proper food and necessities of life. You come first and he gets 
whatever crumbs you have left over. We have asked you throughout this session to reduce taxation. You talk 
about taxation that was reduced $15 a year for the average person in this province — a few crumbs for the people, 
and fattened wallets for you. That’s what it amounts to. 
 
Mr. Chairman, there is absolutely no way I can support this kind of legislation. The people of Saskatchewan must 
be recognized before the members of the legislature are recognized. 
 
We asked in this legislature to have $100 million, at no cost to the government (it wouldn’t cost the government; 
in fact, it could make money on it), for mortgage assistance for first-time home buyers. They scoffed at the 
suggestion. We wanted $100 million to assist first-time home buyers. What would it do? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Let’s not go into that at any great length. I think we should try to stick with the provisions 
of this bill. You can make analogies, I suppose, but we shouldn’t be having a general kind of debate. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — That is exactly what I was attempting to do — make an analogy. The amount of $100 
million, put into the construction and housing industry in this province would generate a business of $300 million 
to $400 million. In turn, they would make more on income tax, sales tax, and everything else that they so deeply 
desire to charge the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, what steps has the government taken to reduce taxes for the number of people in this province who 
are below the poverty line? Of our population, 16 per cent is below the poverty line; 37 per cent of the unattached 
is before the poverty line. Are they concerned about that? 
 
Their concern is what they can put in their pockets for their retirement. Not many on the other side are going to 
retire this year. Many of them are going to say, “I’ve had enough now. I’ve put in 15 years or 20 years. Now I can 
go home and collect from the taxpayers of Saskatchewan a decent income for the rest of my life. I don’t give a 
damn for the rest of the people of this province.” That is exactly what they are saying. 
 
We are concerned with the senior citizens. We are concerned about the people who live below the poverty line. 
We are concerned about the young people who can’t afford to 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3494 

buy their own homes. We are concerned for the population, in total, of this province, and their income below the 
national average. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I cannot comprehend why the members opposite are so anxious to have this kind of legislation, 
and to hell with everyone else. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Chairman, I find the performance of the members opposite just short of 
incredible. A little over an hour ago, this bill received second reading, which is agreement in principle. That is 
when I would have thought members would have discussed whether or not the principle of doing something for 
MLAs who are already on pension would have been discussed. Not a single member on that side of the House 
said one thing — not one thing. I can’t believe that in the last hour and a quarter the world has changed so much 
so that a bill to which they had no objection in principle is now a major principle problem for the members 
opposite. I can’t believe that. It would seem to me that any reasonable observer sitting here would come to some 
different conclusions about the reasons for the tactics advanced by the members opposite. 
 
I want to leave it to the spectators here to decide why the members are giving this great acting display that they 
have given us for the last hour or so. I suggest to you that it has nothing at all to do with the bill before us. I make 
no apologies for introducing this bill. I am quite prepared to go out in the country and defend this bill. I won’t 
have any trouble in my constituency. The member for Thunder Creek can spend another three or four days in 
there the next election if he wants and he will get the same reaction he did last time. He will get the same results. I 
think that is really what is at the bottom of the problem of the members opposite. They know where the people of 
Saskatchewan’s views are. They know they are doomed to sit over there for another decade or two. That is what is 
really the problem. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — So that the hon. minister understands, I believe that when the matter came up earlier we had some 
very deep concerns about the provision which allows former MLAs to become members of boards and chairmen 
of commissions and government agencies and still collect their full pension. We raised that in this Assembly at 
that time and expressed our concerns about it. Let me tell you that our concerns have not changed. Why do we 
need the power to allow former members who happen to become chairmen of boards and agencies to maintain full 
pension? They are getting money from the public and they don’t need to receive their pension. 
 
We have had examples where defeated members have become chairmen. That should be the prerogative of any 
government which makes the appointment, but it shouldn’t be a doubling up. I put it to you that we raised that the 
other night when this bill was brought up. We expressed our concerns at that time. So I suggest the statements of 
the minister really don’t hold much water. In fact, I suggest that type of provision, which allows us to double up 
on payments to former members, is inappropriate at the best of times. The point we have tried to make to you is 
that the timing of the legislation is, I think, more inappropriate. So I ask the minister if he would be prepared to 
repeal that section. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I just want to make a couple of comments. First of all, the 
member’s comments about the provision with respect to a member continuing to be in some sort of employ with 
the government was mentioned, but it certainly wasn’t mentioned today prior to the member’s speech. It seemed 
to me he 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3495 

wasn’t following at all whatever the concerns were today. I want to say what the provision was before, and I will 
read it to the members just so you are clear: 
 

Subject to subsections (ii) and (iii) any allowance payable to any person under this act or any former act shall 
be discontinued while that person is a member, is employed in the public service of the province, or renders 
service, remuneration for which is paid out of the consolidated fund or by a corporation board or commission 
that is an agent of Her Majesty in Saskatchewan. And where that person is a member or so employed or 
renders such service at any time during a month, the whole amount payable on account of the allowance in 
that month shall be withheld. A person mentioned in subsection (i) may be employed in the public service of 
the province or render services mentioned in clause 1(c) for any period or periods not exceeding the aggregate 
of six months in any fiscal year without discontinuance of the allowance. (I may point out that is being 
reduced to 100 days.) Where any person mentioned in subsection 1 is employed as a member of a board or 
commission or is chairman of a board or commission, the appointment does not require the person to be 
engaged in continuous full-time employment in carrying out the duties of the position, the person may be so 
employed for any period of time without discontinuance of the allowance and no periods of employment in 
such a position shall be taken into account for the purposes of subsection i(ii) 1979 ch 12.1 S24. 

 
All I want to suggest there is that the existing provision, I believe, entitled the member to work for the government 
up to six months and continue to receive his allowance. It was put in here. We changed it to clarify it, to make 
sure we reduced the six months to 100 days. I don’t think there is any dramatic change there. It clarified the thing 
with respect to corporations as chairmen of boards, which was in before. It is simply a clarification and nothing 
else. 
 
MR. LANE: — I think there’s a significant extension in the individuals appointed as chairmen of the corporation, 
board or commission. I know that, should the hon. member who just opened his mouth want to run in Qu’Appelle 
again, he may have to be appointed to another board, agency or commission. I know he has a great deal of 
concern about this. 
 
I suggest to the minister that there is a significant extension of the bill, in the provision, as it pertains to the 
positions of chairmen of any corporations, boards, or commissions, which agencies of Her Majesty in right of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I think it’s a moot point. I didn’t want to put the thing in the bill originally. The 
lawyers advised me to. As far as I’m concerned and as far as some lawyers are concerned, the old provision was 
fine, which said: 
 

. . . is employed as a member of a board or a commission, or chairman of a board or a commission, applied 
equally to Crown corporations as to other boards. 

 
It’s a moot legal point which you can get a lawyer to argue either side for, and it’s simply a clarification and a 
reduction from six months to 100 days. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I won’t support this bill, just as a matter of principle, simply because of this 
kind of a session. This is the kind of session where we haven’t 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3496 

done anything for anyone. We haven’t attacked any problems; we haven’t attacked any of the economic malaise 
that is affecting us; we put some money into a marketing board which no one wants; we’ve passed legislation 
which makes it illegal for a cow to step on a prairie lily. We haven’t done very much of anything that we can be 
proud of in this session. 
 
I can only endorse all of the comments made by the member for Regina South, and those of the member for 
Qu’Appelle, and go along with them 100 per cent, and again, ask the question when you have done virtually 
nothing for anyone in this session of the legislature, how, or by what stretch of conscience can you do this for 
yourselves? 
 
You can say, “All right, you guys are speaking against it, and you’re taking it over here.” If you gave me the 
option to get out of that pension plan, I would get out in a moment. The only reason I’m in it is because by law, I 
have to be. I want no part of it. I think it’s shameful that the government places all 45 of you ahead of everyone 
else — ahead of the home buyers, ahead of the senior citizens, ahead of the young farmers, ahead of everyone! Oh 
yes, “Our 45 MLAs will be looked after. We’re number one.” This is ironic, coming from the government that 
says, “We care about people.” Have you seen the NDP’s little decals — “We care”? Yes, you care all right. Why 
don’t you just add to that slogan — “We care for me”? That’s the NDP slogan that very clearly emanated from 
this House today. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I reiterate that the changes in terms of the allowances affect only 
members now on pension. That’s the purpose of it; that’s the effect of it. Some members opposite might not have 
any concerns with respect to pensions. They might be in the very fortunate position of being able to provide their 
services to the public of Saskatchewan and not be concerned about the future. Some of the people who are 
affected by this bill have provided many years of service to the public of Saskatchewan, at great personal cost to 
themselves. Whether or not it was financial depends upon their circumstances. Some of these people on these 
pensions undoubtedly don’t need any additional funds. There are other people who are marginal and there are 
other people who have very little in the way of income. I think it would be irresponsible of us, as MLAs, to ignore 
the needs and the concerns of former MLAs on pension. It seems to me that that would be irresponsible. But I 
take the member at his word. He says he is going to vote against it on principle. I hope he will not accept his 
pension on principle, too, if that’s the way he feels about it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Put an opting-out clause in there; I dare you. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — If the members opposite want to raise it some day, we’ll take a look at it. He has never 
raised it before. 
 
I said before, and I say again, I don’t make any apologies for putting this bill forward. I’m quite prepared to 
defend it. I think the opposition which is coming from members opposite makes me somewhat skeptical as to the 
rationale for it. Be that as it may, I’ll let the public be the decision-maker there. 
 
Section 3 agreed. 
 
Sections 4 to 6 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 7 as amended agreed. 



 
May 15, 1981 

 

 
3497 

Sections 8 to 10 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended, on the following recorded division: 
 

YEAS — 30 
 
Pepper Romanow Smishek 
Tchorzewski Baker McArthur 
Gross Rolfes MacMurchy 
Mostoway Banda Vickar 
Hammersmith Dyck Thompson 
MacAuley Engel Feschuk 
Byers Cowley Cody 
Koskie Matsalla Johnson 
Long Nelson White 
Solomon Chapman Miner 
 

NAYS — 14 
 
Berntson Thatcher Birkbeck 
Duncan Lane Taylor 
Rousseau Swan Pickering 
Muirhead Katzman Garner 
Andrew McLeod  
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 100 — An Act to amend the Cattle Marketing Voluntary Deductions Act 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — I move the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division and bill read a third time. 
 

YEAS — 29 
 

Pepper Kaeding Romanow 
Smishek Tchorzewski Baker 
McArthur Gross Rolfes 
MacMurchy Mostoway Banda 
Vickar Hammersmith MacAuley 
Engel Feschuk Byers 
Thompson Cowley Cody 
Koskie Johnson Long 
Nelson White Solomon 
Chapman Miner  
 



 
May 15, 1981 
 

 
3498 

NAYS — 14 
 

Berntson Thatcher Birkbeck 
Duncan Lane Taylor 
Rousseau Swan Pickering 
Muirhead Katzman Garner 
Andrew McLeod  
 

Bill No. 104 — An Act to amend The Election Act 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I move the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — By leave, I move that the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 117 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, by leave I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title at the next sitting of the House. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Bill No. 116 — An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979 

 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — By leave, I move that the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title at the 
next sitting of the House. 
 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 

MOTION 
 

House Adjournment 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, before you call it 1 o’clock. I would like to introduce a motion, by 
leave of the Assembly, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Smishek. 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns on Friday, May 15, 1981, it do stand adjourned until Tuesday, May 19, 
1981. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:09 p.m. 


