






















































Hansard: May 13, 1981


3305 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
MAY 13, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. BROCKELBANK: — I would like to take this opportunity to introduce a very important group 
of guests who are in the Speaker’s gallery today. They are 16 students from the University of Saskatchewan 
Department of Economics and Political Science, and they are accompanied by 16 people from Memorial 
University in Newfoundland Department of Political Science. The purpose of the exchange with Memorial 
University, as I understand it, is to acquaint the participants with the essential features of Saskatchewan’s 
cultural heritage, major political and constitutional issues, and the province’s economic and social 
environment. 
 
The group here today is led by Professor Hans Mitchelman, Professor Graesser and Professor Gilchrist. I’m 
sure all members will join with me in welcoming this group to the Saskatchewan legislature and we hope 
that their stay here will be interesting and productive. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. members for Saskatoon Eastview and Saskatoon Riversdale 
are not able to be in the Chamber this afternoon. Consequently they have asked me to perform a very 
pleasant task, and that is to introduce to the Assembly, two groups of students from Saskatoon schools: 26, I 
believe, from St. Mary’s School and 10 from St. Charles School. They are seated in the west gallery and they 
are accompanied by two teachers, Mrs. Noonan and Mrs. Karwacki. I understand that the students visited the 
RCMP depot this morning and also the Museum of Natural History. I know they enjoyed themselves there 
and it is my hope that they will enjoy themselves here in this Chamber, particularly in light of the fact that 
we are in the dying days of this session. I will be meeting the students later and it is my hope and the hope of 
all members here that they have a very pleasant day in Regina and an extremely safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — Mr. Speaker, last but not least, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to 
you and through you to the members of the House, a group of 31 grades 8 and 9 students from Grayson 
School in the town of Grayson. They are accompanied by their principal, Mr. Ben Appell and Mrs. Audrey 
Bogdan. Their bus driver is Bill Ottenbreit. They have made a yearly visit to this legislature and every year 
they stay for two days. They started their tour of Regina yesterday, visiting the University of Regina, the 
RCMP barracks, Sask Tel. I guess this morning it was the Leader-Post and CKCK. I know they want to visit 
a number of other places and I am sure we all appreciate the fact that they came to see how this House 
operates. I’m sure it will be of some 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3306 

benefit to them and I hope it is going to be of a great deal of benefit to them to see the happenings that occur 
in this House on behalf of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that all 
members want to welcome them here, wish them a very good afternoon and a safe journey back home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Water Level of Boundary Dam 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Question to the minister responsible for Sask Power. It’s my understanding that the 
water level of Boundary Dam is down eight to 12 feet, and there’s some concern that for lack of cooling 
water, unit six may have to be shut down at the Boundary Dam power generating station. Would you confirm 
or deny these reports? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, with the water problems that we are having this year, 
particularly in the southern part of the province, there is concern about whether we are going to have 
adequate cooling water. But I cannot say at this time that there are any definite plans or contingencies with 
respect to how to treat that. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister will be aware that Boundary Dam has the 
capacity of about 60,000 acre feet, and another dam, Rafferty Dam, five miles up the road, which has been 
on the drawing board for some time, has the capacity of about 600,000 acre feet. Has the minister 
responsible for Sask Power made any representation to the Minister of the Environment to advance the 
argument in favor of Rafferty Dam, which would obviously give you the capacity that you would need 
forever? If you haven’t, would you give that some consideration? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that there have been discussions 
between officials of the Sask Power Corporation and officials of the Department of the Environment with 
respect to that project. The hon. member will understand that a project of that sort involves many 
considerations, and it is not simply a decision of the Sask Power Corporation, but is rather something that 
would have to be looked at comprehensively. There have been discussions involving the Sask Power 
Corporation and the Department of the Environment. 
 

Government Action on Inflation 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, 
tomorrow we’ll be hearing again some sad news from the Bank of Canada on new interest rates. The 
Minister of Finance of the federal government has indicated (as headlines in today’s newspaper will show) 
that high interest rates are here to say. Today in his press conference, the Premier indicated that your 
government has not made any representations to Ottawa regarding high interest rates, and has also admitted 
that there is no quick and easy solution. Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: isn’t it time that the high 
interest rates, inflation, and general economic chaos we could be facing very shortly became a top priority of 
your government? Should you not make representation to the federal government, and should you not take 
action yourselves to control government spending, which increases inflation and causes high interest rates? 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3307 

HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I was not at the Premier’s press conference so I do not 
know exactly what he said. But I do not think that he would have said, “We have not made any 
representation on the situation of high interest rates,” because if the member had been reading the press 
releases I have sent out, he would have know that every time I have gone to a meeting with a finance 
minister, whether he be federal-provincial, as well as just provincial, we have raised on every one of those 
occasions the questions of inflation and high interest rates. What appears to be taking place on the part of the 
federal government is a massive disregard of those issues, as of recent a date as yesterday. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy, the Minister of Agriculture, who is not here today, made a very strong statement at a 
meeting of ministers of agriculture called by Mr. Whelan, the federal Minister of Agriculture in Ottawa, on 
the question of high interest rates, and what effect they are having on farmers throughout all of Canada. 
 
So, we have been making those submissions. We will continue to make those submissions. We are urging 
the federal government that economic meetings should be reinstated between the provinces in Canada, so 
that we can begin to come to grips, to our best ability across this country, with the issue that faces Canadian 
consumers because of the high interest rate situation, which is not, as some people claim, improving the 
inflationary situation but is (I happen to believe) aggravating it and making it even worse. 
 
MR. LANE: — A question to the minister. There have been recent reports that interest rates may in fact 
attain a level of 30 per cent by the end of the summer. For the first time in this legislature, last Friday, the 
Premier of Saskatchewan finally admitted that the Government of Saskatchewan has a role to play. Would 
you not be prepared to put the financial ability of the province of Saskatchewan to immediate use to reduce 
mortgage interest rates for new home buyers, and to reduce the borrowing costs for the consumers of 
Saskatchewan, in particular, the farmers of Saskatchewan? Would you not set these two immediate priorities 
for the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, it has been a priority of this government for some time. It 
is not a question of all of a sudden considering it a priority. Maybe the members opposite have just 
discovered that it is a problem, but we have spoken of it for some time as an important issue. Therefore, the 
nature of the budget, which we have been considering in the legislature since it was introduced on March 5, 
was such that it was an attempt, within the ability and the capacity of the province, to assist people because 
of the impact of the inflationary situation and the interest rate situation. 
 
We have introduced a beef stabilization plan, which is one way of assuring that there will be some returns to 
farmers on the beef production which they make. It will work as well, I predict to the member for Thunder 
Creek, as SHARP (Saskatchewan Hog Assured Returns Program) has been working for hogs. We also have 
a mortgage interest rebate program which is in existence. The FarmStart program provides subsidized loans 
to farmers in a very substantial way. So it is not as though there has not been some effort made by this 
government to meet the pressures which are being caused by inflation and high interest rates. 
 
If the member for Qu’Appelle is suggesting that somehow the Government of Saskatchewan has a role in 
controlling the interest rates (which I don’t think he is suggesting, because he knows we can’t), I would have 
to disagree with him. That is strictly a national policy of the federal government and the Bank of Canada. 
That is 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3308 

where it has to change. We are going to do all that we can to try to convince them that the route they are 
taking is not going to meet the objectives they have in mind, and that it is going to do more harm than good. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary to the minister. Is the minister not saying that while farmers and small 
businessmen of Saskatchewan are going bankrupt, the Government of Saskatchewan is bankrupt of ideas? In 
fact, we have made several practical suggestions to help the consumers of Saskatchewan and none of them 
have been accepted. 
 
As well, every one of the program you have announced (except the beef stabilization program, which the 
farmers out here certainly do not think is a fight against inflation) have become irrelevant in times of 17, 18, 
and 19 per cent interest rates. Would you not now admit that it is time for the government to call an 
economic conference in the province of Saskatchewan with businessmen, farm organizations and, I suggest, 
members of the opposition because we seem to have more positive ideas, to take immediate action to assist 
the consumers of Saskatchewan and to use the financial resources of the province to give direct and positive 
aid to the consumers of this province? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the member for Qu’Appelle would like to take 
the heat off the federal government in Ottawa and his colleagues, who are the official opposition in Ottawa 
and who were recently the government. Whether it is the Liberals or the Conservatives who are elected, it 
doesn’t seem to make any difference. Mr. Joe Clark, the former prime minister, supported high interest rates, 
as did Mr. Crosbie, in the same way as are Mr. MacEachern and Mr. Trudeau. 
 
Now, if the member suggested that we should somehow establish an economic conference in Saskatchewan 
in order to take the heat off the government in Ottawa, he is not being very accurate in what he thinks might 
be a potential solution to the difficulty which is there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have had some suggestions, two or three, which they indicate would 
control inflation. I should have brought my file with me because I have a couple of clippings which quote the 
Leader of the Opposition (not the one who sits in the House, but the one who sits in the gallery), in which he 
had some suggestions. I was going to point out that somehow they were not going to deal with the question 
of inflation. They have had suggestions which have not been practical so we have not implemented any of 
them or considered them. Our mortgage interest rebate program, for example, returns a lot more money to 
home buyers who have a mortgage in Saskatchewan than the proposal that the member for Regina South 
indicated which would return about one-quarter as much money. 
 

Mortgage Proposal for New Home Buyers 
 
MR. THATCHER: — My question is to the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, you have indicated that your 
government has very little concrete action to propose for new home buyers. In most parts of the United 
States and some of the more progressive parts of Canada, such as Alberta and British Columbia, developers 
and builders of homes are helping new home buyers on a private basis by reducing the interest rates and 
building the amount they are reducing it into the overall purchase price. In other words, they are offering 
homes for the first couple of years at 12 per cent and 13 per cent. This is quite common. This is something 
which the private sector is doing. 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3309 

Mr. Minister, the same people who are doing this say that if the government were to guarantee the mortgage 
(put the credit of the government behind that), they could make these mortgages available for about 10 per 
cent. Have you ever investigated this procedure which is working relatively successfully in many parts of the 
United States and very commonly in Alberta? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, first of all let me indicate that the government of this 
province does provide mortgages (financial assistance) for home buyers and home builders. In addition to the 
many others which exist, this year we introduced a program dealing with energy efficient homes where a 
loan of $3,000 will be available at no interest charge. I think that is a fairly significant innovation. Not only 
will it assist a new home buyer but it will also provide some incentive to build a higher quality home from 
the point of view of energy conservation. We have a co-op housing program which provides a very 
substantial subsidy, as high as $150 a month for people who want to take advantage of it. We have a massive 
public housing program which is probably the best and the most substantial in all of Canada. We have 
considered some of the things which are happening in other parts of Canada (and that was what the member 
was asking me). We have not, at this point in time, considered that those program which we see across 
Canada would meet the need in Saskatchewan as well as programs which we have already established. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question to the minister. Mr. Minister, we have heard a lot of talk 
from you and we have heard a lot of speeches. Mortgage rates are about 17.5 per cent. Are you going to take 
action such as they are in other parts of Canada and the United States, to make some first-home buyers 
available in the 12, 13 and 14 per cent bracket? Give us a yes or no, and for once spare us a lot of talk. 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — I practised up on the talking when I was telling the member for Thunder 
Creek how he should pitch the ball the other day. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that we are always 
interested in programs that exist in other jurisdictions. We make a point to look and find out how effective 
they are. Up to this time we have not implemented anything that the member may think is a good idea, 
because we think some of the programs we have now meet the needs in areas where the need is the greatest. 
 
There is one other aspect to mortgages and home buying which I think we should not lose sight of. If you 
take a three-bedroom house in Saskatchewan, the cost is about $63,500, give or take a little bit. If you go to 
Alberta, it’s $115,000 a home for the same kind of house; in British Columbia it’s $175,000. Now, that is a 
pretty big difference. I think it is a good reflection on the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

Relief from Financial Strains 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Finance in light of the fact that we 
have before us a very serious situation here in the province of Saskatchewan, here in the country. We have 
these given facts: nationally, we have a $127 billion deficit and that breaks down, Mr. Minister, so that you 
can see the seriousness of this matter to the people of Saskatchewan, to $4,390 per capita for all of Canada, 
and $11,970 per taxpayer. We look at a $126.4 million increase in the provincial government’s borrowing; 
we look at mortgages at 17 per cent to 18 per cent; we look at consumer and business loans at 20 per cent; 
inflation at 12.4 per cent. 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3310 

Mr. Speaker, what do we have from this government? From the Premier, this morning at his press 
conference, we heard a defeatist attitude. Today we hear no answers from the Minister of Finance. Simply 
my question is, Mr. Minister, would you not agree that you and the Premier are prime candidates for 
Saskatchewan’s own Herbert Hoover? Would you not agree that it is now time for the government to take 
some positive action and reduce this immense strain on the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know much about Herbert Hoover but the last time 
we had the kind of situation to which the member alludes is when we had a Conservative government in 
Canada led by someone by the name of Bennett. I don’t think we are about to reach that under a government 
in Saskatchewan which is NDP. We have not ignored — I don’t want to make light of the situation — the 
impact that inflation and high interest are having on Saskatchewan people. 
 
We have very substantial financial transfer programs to municipalities and individuals. We have a very 
substantial amount of assistance to families on low incomes, through the family income plan. We have a 
very substantial and probably the best revenue-sharing program for municipalities anywhere in Canada, 
including the province of Alberta. All of those things, Mr. Speaker, are meant to assist not only those 
individuals and those municipalities, but are meant to assist them in meeting their increased costs, which 
obviously are being created because of inflation which affects them as it affects anybody, whether they are 
individuals or whether they are municipalities. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan indeed is going to be borrowing money. We don’t borrow money for the 
consolidated fund expenditures and operating expenditures of a government like they do in Ontario or like 
they do in the federal government. We borrow money for investment purposes which will have a return in 
the power corporation, the potash corporation and so on, so that we are better able in the future to pay for the 
programs and services that Saskatchewan people might have. We will have a balanced budget this year. 
Alberta (and I don’t know why) will have a $300 million deficit. I think that’s a pretty good explanation and 
a pretty good tribute to the kind of management we have had in this province since 1944. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Minister, somehow I get the impression there is a lead shield around your head 
and we are not getting through, we are not penetrating it for some reason or other. I don’t think you will 
disagree that governments, generally speaking, will cause inflation or are a great cause of inflation — 
whether they be provincial, federal or whatever they may be. The worst cause or the greatest cause of 
inflation is governments. 
 
You have shown — not very often, but once in a while — during your 40 years of tenure as government in 
this province, some leadership in some areas and some aspects. It didn’t happen very often, but it has 
happened. I would ask you today, Mr. Minister, to take some leadership in the crisis that is facing the people 
of Saskatchewan today. 
 
The member for Thunder Creek and the member for Qu’Appelle talked about the high interest rates for 
mortgages and the suggestion that we made to you to borrow on the government’s credit, $100 million or so 
to assist the people of Saskatchewan to build homes at subsidized interest rates. We have asked in the past 
for public utility rates to be frozen. We have made a number of suggestions. In light of all the suggestions 
that we have made, will you and your government take some action to help the people of Saskatchewan 
where they have the greatest concern, that is in pocketbook issues 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3311 

where they are being taxed to death? They can’t afford any more of the kinds of taxation that you are 
imposing on them. 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I would be most happy to commit the government to taking 
that kind of leadership because it is already being done. I am not saying there are not areas which, as we 
review the things that we are doing throughout the year, we may not need to change. I am always prepared to 
consider the kinds of changes that may be helpful and may be useful and may be reasonable to implement. 
 
I want to address the member’s comment about governments causing inflation. Indeed, expenditures by 
governments can cause inflation. But I want to remind the member that governments which have balanced 
budgets do not contribute in a major way to inflation. The biggest contributor to inflation is budgets which 
are not balanced. That is not the case in Saskatchewan, and we have been very careful to make sure that 
would not happen in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are further showing leadership, Mr. Speaker, by having in this province one of the most progressive and 
one of the lowest taxation systems in Canada for low- and middle-income people. I think even the member 
for Regina South couldn’t argue against that. 
 
We already have a mortgage interest rebate program. I am not sure that the member’s suggestion that we 
establish a public utilities review board would achieve anything other than higher utility rates than would 
otherwise take place and remove the responsibility for having to answer for those higher rates from the 
government. This is the case in provinces where they have public utility review boards. You can name any 
province you want or the CRTC when it comes to Bell Canada — bar none. In those situations, utility rates 
have been increasing at a more rapid rate than have been the utility rates in the province of Saskatchewan. If 
you take the province of Alberta the utility rate review commission has guaranteed to the utilities of power 
there a minimum of a 15 per cent return. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Telephone Rates for 1981 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of Sask Tel. In light of the comments 
just made, Mr. Minister, will you guarantee the people of Saskatchewan, and will you take the lead role in 
promising to the members of this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan, that there will be no increase in 
telephone rates in this year 1981? And will you try to help the people with the financial problems they are 
having due to the high interest rates and inflation running out of control? 
 
HON. MR. CODY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be very foolhardy on my part to guarantee to the 
member opposite that we will not have an increase in telephone rates. After all, it is incumbent upon the 
management of Sask Tel and the board of directors to review constantly what the rates in any Crown 
corporation should be — the utility rates in this particular case, or the Sask Tel rates. I certainly couldn’t 
give a commitment such as that. After all, if we see that materials and costs are extremely high and want to 
continue to give the top service that we do in Saskatchewan, I think everyone knows that we need the 
additional money to do so. For me to now guarantee to the member that we will not have a rate increase 
would simply be foolish and I cannot do that. 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3312 

Power Rate Increase in 1981 
 
MR. GARNER: — A question to the Minister of Sask Power. Mr. Minister, Sask Tel will not take the lead 
in Saskatchewan. Will you, in light of the fact that you’ve had $60 million in excessive profit in Sask Power 
in the last two years, now tell the people of Saskatchewan that there will be no power rate increase in the 
year 1981 to help combat high interest rates and inflation? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, our power rates are reviewed on a regular basis and the 
consideration of those rates will be taking place when the time is due. I can’t make any commitments on the 
outcome of those reviews. I can tell the hon. member that costs are obviously increasing significantly with 
inflation and so on. The electrical system basically runs on a break-even basis and therefore, it is impossible 
to give any kind of guarantee that there will be no rate adjustment as costs increase. 
 
MR. GARNER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I take it then, Mr. Minister, you are not going to 
guarantee the people of Saskatchewan that there will not be an increase, but you are saying we are going to 
have an increase in Sask Power rates at a time when inflation and interest rates are out of control. This is 
nothing more than ripping off the taxpayers of Saskatchewan by the NDP government. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I could not find a question in that remark, but I will remind the 
hon. member that Calgary Power (a privately owned power corporation in Alberta of approximately the same 
size as Sask Power) on electrical production alone made profits this past year of over $100 million. In the 
Sask Power Corporation, the profits on the electrical system were of very little significance. So I would point 
out to the hon. member that Sask Power has been producing and supplying electricity at as low a cost as 
possible and must face the realities of cost increases. We do, therefore, have periodic increase in rates. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Regrets on Attempted Assassination of Pope John Paul II 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I would like on behalf of the government to make a short statement 
on the attempted assassination of His Holiness Pope John Paul II. This morning, Premier Allan Blakeney 
issued a statement expressing, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, our shock and dismay at the attempt 
on the life of Pope John Paul II. 
 
It would like to add here, to this Assembly, that all of us were deeply disturbed at the news of the attempted 
assassination. We can only hope that the Pope’s injuries are not serious and that his recovery will be rapid. I 
am sure this hope is shared by all of us here in this Assembly. 
 
As the Premier said this morning, Pope John Paul is a man who has taken his faith, his moral leadership into 
a world threatened by violence. He has spoken out fearlessly against the violence of war, the violence of 
hunger and the violence of repression. It is sadly ironic that such a man should fall victim to the very forces 
he has attempted to combat. I sincerely hope that the Pope recovers quickly from his wounds and continues 
to be a voice for peace in the world. As we all know, voices like his are desperately needed in our world 
today. 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3313 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add to the words of the minister, on behalf of the 
members of the opposition, our sincere concern and regrets for the unfortunate attempt on Pope John Paul’s 
life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, His Holiness has shown to all peoples of the world in his short time as the spiritual leader of 
the Roman Catholic Church his deep concern for justice and peace throughout the world, not only through 
his words, but also through his actions. 
 
I would ask, Mr. Speaker, all members of this Assembly and indeed all the people from all the faiths in the 
province of Saskatchewan, to say a special prayer for His Holiness’s speedy recovery. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 116 — An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 
1979 

 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979, and I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honor The 
Lieutenant-Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of this bill, recommends it for the 
consideration of the Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to and by leave of the Assembly ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

Bill No. 117 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Statute Law. 
 
Motion agreed to and by leave of the Assembly ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

Bill No. 118 — An Act to amend The Executions Act 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Executions Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and by leave of the Assembly ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

Bill No. 119 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend the Legislative Assembly 
and Executive Council Act. I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, having 
been informed of the subject matter of this bill, recommends it to the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to and by leave of the Assembly ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3314 

Non-Controversial Bills 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the select standing committee on non-controversial bills, I 
present the first report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee met for organization and appointed me as chairman and Mr. Johnson as vice-chairman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the non-controversial bills committee, I wish to report Bill No. 41 — An Act to 
amend the Department of Health Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee of the 
whole be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Family Services Act, as 
being non-controversial. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: —Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee of 
the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Assistance Act 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Assistance 
Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee of 
the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Rehabilitation Act 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3315 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 77 — An Act to amend The Rehabilitation Act, as 
being non-controversial. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee of 
the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Housing and Special-care Homes Act 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Housing and Special-care 
Homes Act, as being non-controversial. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee of 
the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 114 — An Act respecting The Consequential Amendments resulting from the 
Amalgamation of Her Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan and The District 

Court for Saskatchewan 
 

MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 114 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments resulting from the Amalgamation of Her Majesty’s Court of Queen’s Bench for Saskatchewan 
and the District Court for Saskatchewan, as being non-controversial. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee of 
the whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 115 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of 

The Medical Profession Act, 1981 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to report Bill No. 115 — An Act respecting the Consequential 
Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Medical Profession 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3316 

Act, 1981, as being non-controversial. 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I move that second reading and consideration in committee of the 
whole on the said bill be waived. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the said bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

MOTION 
 

Legislative Library 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I wish to beg leave of the House to 
introduce a motion consequential to the report of the special committee on the Legislative Library. Just by 
word of explanation, that report recommended that the standing orders as they applied to the Legislative 
Library be consolidated covering the general management of the library, the regulation of admission hours, 
the management of the collection, and the publication of a catalogue of books. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to move, seconded by the hon. member for Rosthern, that: 
 

Pursuant to recommendation 20 of the report of the special committee on the review of the Legislative 
Library, tabled and concurred in by this House, May 7, 1981, rules 105 to 111 inclusive of the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly shall be abolished as of the first day of the next session and 
replaced by the following: 

 
Rule 105 — The management of the library, including regulation of admission, library hours, and 
security and preservation of the collection is the responsibility of the legislative librarian, subject to such 
special orders as he or she may receive from the Assembly, and the legislative librarian shall make an 
annual report to the Assembly through the Speaker. 
 
Rule 107 — A catalogue of books belonging to the library shall be kept, and pertinent statistics relative 
to the collection and its utilization shall be maintained and reported in the legislative librarian’s annual 
report. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Koskie that Bill No. 
111 — An Act to amend The Condominium Property Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly referred to a committee of the whole 
later this day. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3317 

McArthur that Bill No. 70 — An Act to amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments on Bill 70. I have noted with some 
concern a number of the amendments that are proposed and I would like to deal with those amendments 
briefly. 
 
The proposal of the ward system has been discussed to some extent in the House, though I haven’t taken part 
in the discussion until this point in time. I have a real concern that the Minister of Education is overlooking 
the fact that the trustees in the province are on elected boards, and that they are elected by their constituents 
the same as we are. Now, when you look at the constituency of the trustees as being the city of Regina or the 
city of Saskatoon, it’s not an extremely large area. It’s much smaller than the constituency that I represent, 
even though it’s more heavily populated. There is opportunity under the system as it exists now for people to 
get to know the candidates who are running for trustee. I see no need at all of moving to the ward system 
process that is being proposed here. 
 
The trustees in both cities, from all four boards that would be concerned by this amendment, have registered 
their concern with the minister. The minister refuses to listen. I think that is a very clear indication of the 
way the government of the day is operating. It doesn’t pay attention to the people out there. It would rather 
force things down the throats of the people. That is what the Minister of Education is about to do again. I 
believe that the minister is making a very wrong move, and should reconsider his position on this matter. He 
is moving on into a number of other areas that have been of much concern to trustees and to ratepayers in the 
province who understand what is in The Education Act. I’ll admit that a number of them do not understand 
what is there because they don’t have time to read acts as large as this. 
 
I want to deal specifically with one area of the bill, and that is the one that is changing section 232. I would 
like to draw to the attention of the minister a note from Judge MacPherson in a hearing that was held in 
Moose Jaw dealing with exactly this section of the act. They are the words of the judge in his judgment on 
that particular case. I am only going to read one paragraph of it. The rest of it, I’m sure, is on file and can be 
reviewed by the minister at his leisure. He says: 
 

Most importantly, the statute forbids the collective agreements to contain any terms concerning selection 
of teachers, administrative or instructional duties, or regulating the nature or quality of the instructional 
program. These, if I may say so, are certainly rights and privileges which the plaintiffs have every right 
to claim. The absence of any one of them would remove the ability of the board, as delegates of the 
minority, to operate the school system. Such would be a denial of all the rights and privileges protected 
in section 93 of the BNA Act as amended, and therefore, unquestionably prejudicial. But they are here 
preserved untouched. 

 
I believe that’s as clear as anybody could state the concern about that particular section of this bill. That was 
the judgment of Judge MacPherson in the Court of Queen’s Bench. This judgment was taken to the 
Saskatchewan Court of Appeal and it was upheld in its entirety. There was no change in the appeal court. So 
I believe that if the minister moves to change this particular section of the act in the form that he is 
suggesting, he will again see that the department and the province will be before the courts of our land to 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3318 

review the very same thing. It seems to me that he’s flying in the face of the laws of the province of 
Saskatchewan when he makes the suggestion that this is to be changed. 
 
I would encourage the minister to bring forth a House amendment that would, indeed, leave this particular 
section of The Education Act in force as it presently exists. 
 
There are a number of other amendments that I don’t feel quite as moved about. There are some of them 
which are going to have some effects that I don’t think are going to be beneficial to boards. Some of them 
are going to have effects that will not be beneficial to teachers. 
 
I don’t understand the minister’s reasoning in some of the areas when he suggests that he wants to change 
them. When he is amending section 92(j), dealing with the right of a board to hold property in its name and 
to lease it out, I think he is looking at a very serious move indeed. 
 
Many of the properties about which we are talking are older schools that have come to the end of their 
lifetime of usefulness as schools. They are being rented to other community groups for a short term. Most of 
these schools were built at a time when the boards, indeed, paid practically the complete cost of construction. 
The schools should really be considered as being properties of those school boards. 
 
Under the amendment the school board is going to lose its right to hold the property in its name and to bring 
in revenue for the school system by the leasing out of the property. 
 
I think the minister is making a move that is not going to be beneficial to the province. The province has 
very little need of a bunch of older school buildings. If the board can benefit the system and perhaps save its 
taxpayers something in tax dollars, I think that the right should be left for the school board to make that 
move. Now, they aren’t going to be making large windfall profits but they can at times make a few dollars. 
Anything in this area can be beneficial. 
 
We may see as well a time in the downtown core (and this is usually where these older schools are finding 
that they don’t have population at this point) when these buildings may again be needed as schools. If they 
are taken back by the province they will likely be converted to other uses or destroyed and the land used for 
other purposes. 
 
I see a concern here. I ask the minister to respond to some of my concerns. He may have other reasons, but 
these are the ones I see. They are the concerns that are being raised by the boards. They feel these buildings 
should be left in the hands of the boards and that the boards should have the opportunity to derive some 
usefulness, and in some cases, some revenue from these particular pieces of property. 
 
Because of the items that are in this bill, I would not be able to support the bill in its present form. I ask the 
minister to give serious consideration to House amendments which would bring the bill into a form that we 
could deal with. I would be glad to talk to the minister if he wants further clarification of my concern on item 
92(j). I think I have made my points clearly enough. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, to give very serious consideration to your move on section 232(4) as it affects the 
whole province of Saskatchewan. This particular section can have a very injurious effect on the education of 
children in the province of 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3319 

Saskatchewan. If you change that particular section, and you are opening up the bargaining scope, then you 
are going to find that many of the decisions normally made by a school board to protect the educational 
standard they look for in Saskatchewan . . . In rural Saskatchewan, as the population drops, it becomes an 
even greater need. Let me just use an example, where at the bargaining table, the decision is made that the 
largest class size one can have is 18, and in some school systems in Saskatchewan they have found it 
necessary to combine grades (perhaps grades 1 and 2, or 3 and 4) and they may have 21 children who need 
education in that grade. Because of negotiation, it is possible that they could not put that number of students 
in that grade. Then, indeed, it becomes incumbent on the board to hire an additional portion of a teacher, or a 
full teacher. Part-time teachers are not always available in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
It is going to mean an increase on the tax burden out in the province, and it’s going to affect the decision of 
whether or not the board can offer the subject material that should be offered at that grade level. Potentially, 
it could mean that the quality of education would suffer. 
 
The minister has said that they are only minor and shallow amendments, and that the boards, at the time of 
bargaining, can still make decisions. But I believe that what you’re doing is opening up the bargaining act to 
the point that items which should never go to arbitration or mediation will move out of the hands of the 
school boards and into the hands of judges or whoever you appoint to make the decision at the time of an 
arbitration award. Often judges will be the first to tell you that they have no particular expertise in the area of 
binding arbitration, or none as to decisions about spending of the public purse. They’re trained in law, not 
economics. Many of them do not have close contact with the school system at that point in their lives. 
They’re not fully aware of the concerns being registered by the parents of any particular school division. 
Often, decisions made under these terms are not decisions which will be beneficial to children or to the 
rights of parents. 
 
Mr. Minister, with those comments, I ask you to reply when you get up to close debate. I would like to have 
you make some positive responses in the form of House amendments. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to address some of my concerns regarding the proposed bill, 
Bill No. 70, an act to amend The Education Act. 
 
I think I’d like to first address my concern about the ward system, which will be introduced by this bill. The 
minister has indicated from his study, the de Vlieger report, that there was a great deal of concern. In 
newspapers, he has said that he has received many letters. The minister should table the correspondence he 
has received regarding proposals that the ward system should be introduced in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I would also be very interested in looking at the number of responses that Professor de Vlieger received. I’ve 
found out from questioning the minister that some of these were from individuals, some from groups and 
some from school boards. It is my reading that the majority of the school boards, especially the ones that 
were concerned, unanimously and flatly refused the implementation of a ward system in the cities of 
Saskatoon and Regina. I thought the words of one of the board chairmen, who compared the actions of the 
minister and the government opposite to those of the federal government vis-a-vis the new constitution, to be 
quite apropos. We are virtually having that rammed down our throats in Canada. The urban school boards in 
both Regina and Saskatoon feel somewhat the same way with the imposition of the ward 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3320 

system by the government opposite. Perhaps one of the most vocal opponents to the system was Trustee 
Mary Hicks, and I quote: 
 

Public School Trustee Mary Hicks says the provincial government is acting like the federal government 
by imposing wards on Saskatoon and Regina school boards against their will. 

 
From my reading and talking to school boards, virtually that’s what is happening. It is being proposed 
against their will. Now, if it is being proposed by the will of other people and groups, who have made 
representation to the minister, then, I think, it would only be correct that the minister would be kind enough 
to table those in the Legislative Assembly for all members, myself and the members on this side of the 
House, as well as members opposite, who have made representations in regard to the ward system. In fact, I 
remember some situations where individuals were cautioning members on both sides of the House that 
perhaps the ward system was not the correct way to be going to deliver the best education programs in the 
urban centres of Regina and Saskatoon. There is the crux of the problem — the delivery of the best 
educational programs in the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. That is the paramount objective of the school 
boards in those areas and that should be the paramount objective of the Department of Education in this 
province. 
 
If it can be shown to me that the ward system will definitely improve the delivery of education to the 
consumers, to the people in Regina and Saskatoon and to the students, that their education will somehow be 
improved by the institution of the ward system, then I would take a very serious look at it. But at this point in 
time, it hasn’t been shown to me. It hasn’t been shown to the elected members of the people in this province, 
the school boards in the urban centres. On that basis, we question the motive behind the introduction of the 
ward system in this province. 
 
Now the minister says . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I will take a break when I pound something in your 
head, so don’t worry. I have more energy and stamina and ideas; we can go a long time on this one. Just 
don’t anger me or we may be quite a while. The minister says, because the cities of Saskatoon and Regina, 
which once the existing system served well, have grown and have become larger urban centres of about 
150,000 (not large by any man’s scale in Canada or North America), that it necessitates a move to the ward 
system. Now, if that logic is correct, if that rationale is true, then are the people and in all the other cities in 
Canada, in the provinces of Alberta, Ontario, Manitoba, B.C. and Quebec, wrong? Those provinces do not 
have the ward system in education. The majority of the larger cities in this country have refuted the ward 
system. In fact, some of them have tried it and decided it wasn’t satisfactory and have discarded it. But no, 
not in our case; it is to be brought in. 
 
What must be the rationale behind it? It makes one wonder. Is it going to deliver better education, because 
that is the only criterion upon which it can be developed. Now, the government opposite says that you may 
get to know your school board members better and you will vote better, because the candidates will be close 
to the scene. 
 
Trustee Hicks answers this question, where she says in one of her articles that in one case two candidates ran 
from one neighborhood and voters in the neighborhood cast far more votes for outsiders. That defeats 
another argument presented by the de Vlieger report, Hicks said, (referring to some groups’ arguments) that 
wards would make it easier for neighborhood candidates to get elected because voters know them very well. 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3321 

I think the more important aspect of this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that with the existing system we have a 
global view of the educational needs within urban centres. These are changing needs and changing very 
quickly. If you have people from a cross section of the city who don’t represent their own little ward and 
fight for that because they see it as their way to stay in power, then I think you are going to get a more 
judicious expenditure of the educational dollar. I think that is what other cities in Canada see. I think that is 
why they rejecting the ward system. 
 
Now, what is the rationale or the reason that prompts the government opposite to go against elected officials 
and many people in education; what makes it bound and determined to institute the ward system? I maintain 
that the only reason the government opposite is bringing in the ward system is to develop a hierarchy, or a 
ladder, to expose potential candidates for this legislature so it can develop little teams to develop their 
shadow in these wards and then they can run for the legislature in this province. That is the only reason I can 
see for the government opposite to bring in the ward system. I think, when it comes down to delivering basic 
education, I have yet to be shown that the ward system is going to do a better job than the system which is in 
place today. 

 
I would like to quote some of the people who I think have some impact in education, since they are elected 
representatives. The SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association) at its annual convention on 
November 18-20 passed the following resolution by an overwhelming majority. 
 

Be it resolved that this convention go on record as being opposed to the implementation of the ward 
system in the urban centres of Saskatchewan. 

 
There was considerable support for the motion by the SSTA at their convention. 
 
Therefore, it is very obvious that the elected officials . . . Now, I know what will come from the other side. 
You will say, “Oh, they are just safeguarding their own positions.” That is the rationale you have over there. 
I dispute that. I believe the people who have been elected to school boards in the urban centres of Regina and 
Saskatoon are dedicated people. They are people who want to give their time to improve the education of 
their children and other children in this city. I believe these people deserve to be listened to as to how they 
would like to be elected to the boards of education in this province. I don’t know the opinion of the group 
opposite. It may be that they’re insincere; that could be. I’ve heard the statement, “Oh, they just want to 
maintain themselves.” If that’s your opinion of elected school trustees in this province, let it be known. But I 
don’t hold that opinion at all. I believe they are sincere, concerned individuals who are giving seriously of 
their time to improve education in this province. 
 
I would like to read summaries of some of the submissions in case the minister isn’t going to table them. I 
haven’t had any agreement from him that he would. This one is from a fair-sized board, the Regina Board of 
Education. They say this: 
 

The prime reason for having an elected school board is to ensure that local citizens have the opportunity to 
determine the type of education offered to all pupils. The elected members of the board represent all 
electors. They are ready and willing to listen to any individual or group wishing to present particular views 
on the subject. The members of the Regina Board of Education are of the opinion that the introduction of a 
ward system is not 
 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3322 

desired by the citizens of Regina. However, if the Minister of Education deems the ward system to have 
merit, the board would respectfully suggest that the change be referred to the electors in a referendum 
vote, and that a 60 per cent majority be required before implementation. 
 
The introduction of a ward system is, in the opinion of the members of the board, comparable to a 
significant constitutional change in a corporation or other organization, and such changes normally 
require more than a simple majority vote. 

 
That is a summation of the viewpoints of the Regina Board of Education. Another group of considerable size 
is the Saskatoon Board of Education. Their conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the following: 
 

Our analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of the introduction of the ward system for school 
board elections leads to the conclusion that there are no educational, financial, cultural or political 
advantages to be gained by its introduction. Indeed it would be our view that such a system would result 
in a reduction in the individual citizen’s power to influence the direction of education. The creation of 
artificial boundaries that are irrelevant to school attendance areas, partisan politics in local school 
government (let’s hope and forbid that doesn’t get in there), higher costs and ineffective use of 
resources. 

 
Pretty strong words, a pretty strong conclusion from perhaps the largest school board in the province of 
Saskatchewan, which the government opposite fails to heed. These are the two largest school boards in the 
province and they don’t pay any attention to their conclusions. 
 
In short, we can see nothing to be gained and much to be lost. Surely because no board has taken advantage 
of section 18(3) of The Education Act (1978) and there has been no enthusiasm for the establishment of 
wards in urban school systems, our board can only conclude that general satisfaction exists with the current 
method of electing school trustees. 
 
And they end with the following recommendation: 
 

The Saskatoon Board of Education recommends that the provisions of section 18(3) of The Education 
Act (1978) be retained and that no legislation be enacted to enforce the electors of school divisions in 
urban centres to elect their school trustees on a ward system basis. 

 
I don’t know what it takes to convince the government opposite that not every brainchild of theirs is by 
divine creation and best for the people of Saskatchewan. The two largest boards of education in this province 
speak out plainly and clearly against the implementation of the ward system, as do many other submissions. 
 
I ask the minister if he is going to introduce and force through this bill, the least he can do is to table in this 
House every letter he has had pertaining to requesting the introduction of a ward system, every letter he has 
had saying to forget this stupid plan and every submission that was made to Professor de Vlieger. Then we 
can see that it wasn’t the boards of education and it wasn’t the people who have been elected because of their 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3323 

interest and expertise in education who made this decision. It was some of the political hacks in the party 
opposite who, I know, put in a submission supporting the ward system. It seems that their submissions had a 
much greater ear than the submissions of the two boards in this province. Knowing the track record of the 
government opposite, I’m sure that regardless of my warnings you will not heed them or you will not heed 
the warnings of the boards of education in the province. You will go through with this legislation whether it 
is to the benefit of the children or not. Perhaps if you do, Mr. Minister, we could look at improving the 
situation in that we could elect at least the chairman of the board of education. I know it would mean new 
legislation, but maybe the chairman could be elected on a global basis, as is the mayor in our civic 
government. Then we would have one person in these large school divisions, in which there are tremendous 
expenditures, who would be looking at a global picture of education and not looking through the tunnel 
vision of the ward which he is representing or, worse than that, perhaps a tunnel vision colored by a political 
ideology. 
 
That is the fear which I see creeping into education through the implementation of this ward system. That is 
the reason which I think the government opposite, regardless of who opposes it, is going to try to ram this 
through in these two urban centres. I think, Mr. Minister, I have given my reasons in what I hope was a 
convincing manner on behalf of the people who oppose the ward system as being implemented or suggested 
under this piece of legislation, Bill No. 70. 
 
I have a couple of questions which I would like to ask. I hope legislation is to bring about clarity. Maybe the 
minister or some of his cohorts, who appear as though they will get into the act today, will answer these 
questions (and that is the recycled minister). What about the elections and the boundaries? I know the 
boundaries are going to be struck by the educational boundaries commission, but are they going to be 
coterminous with the civic wards? I can see such a conglomeration come out of this that the people in these 
two cities, when it comes to vote, will not know where they are going, who they are voting for, or what is 
going on. You are going to have a ward here that is a civic city ward; then superimposed over here, you are 
going to have a public ward of education and over top of that (I wish I had a chalk board or a diagram — I 
would put it to you pretty plain), you would then have a separate ward. If you have your school board 
elections on the civic election date, you are going to have people so confused they won’t know where they 
vote or what they are voting for. I would like to hear your answers to that. Are you going to stagger the vote 
and are you going to stagger the boundaries? 
 
I know you have to readjust the boundaries, because in the wisdom of de Vlieger who recommended this, if 
he were to follow the boundaries of the civic wards (and most people think a coterminous boundary is rather 
a good objective), in the city of Saskatoon some of the ward boundaries would run right through the school 
grounds. The Minister of Labor would call that convoluted reasoning. I think that is how he would package 
that term. 
 
Now I am sure, Mr. Minister, you are going to take action to straighten some of these things out, but I would 
like to hear how you are going to have these boundaries established and if everyone is going to vote on civic 
election day? If they are all going to vote on civic election day and have to go somewhere to vote for their 
alderman, they have to go somewhere else to vote for the mayor and they have to go somewhere else to vote 
for their school trustee, if I were you, I would go to the lake that day, because your door will be knocked on 
because of all these confused people. I have voted in many elections and I can tell you, I’ve always known 
which way to vote, that’s for sure. 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3324 

You are going to cause . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . What? Will you quit swearing! Shall we go on? . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Trust you to be prying into the Election Act to find out what everybody would 
vote, but you can mark my words I never voted for you and I never will. 
 
Now, let me see, are there any other things that you fellows need touching up on in this ward system because 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll give you more major speeches yet, don’t you worry about that. I think 
those are enough things. If you answer all those questions it will keep you quite busy for a while. 
 
Now my colleague here, the member for Rosetown (I appreciate his picking up on this as I had to be out for a 
minute) started to talk about the problems in section 92(j). But before I go into section 92(j), I just want to 
tell you, Mr. Minister, (I hope you have been listening to what I said about the concern that people have 
about the ward system) that I’m sorry to say that the accusations that I made about you and your department 
in your estimates the other week are absolutely correct. You are losing more trust among educators in 
Saskatchewan than any minister of education I have seen in my tenure in education. 
 
No, no, you can “aw” and “caw” all you want but I will give you some proof here to show that your actions 
to try to control, to try to manipulate, to try to force your ideology in education . . . Since you fellows want to 
know something, I will tell you exactly what’s going on because I know of situations of very highly-qualified 
people, who went for applications to be on the new curriculum steering committees. I am not talking about 
somebody who doesn’t know what he is doing. These people have Ph.D.s in education . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, no, you just pay attention because you have a little lesson to learn. I don’t think you 
really understand anything other than your co-op philosophy, and I don’t think you know what is going on in 
that department. 
 
These individuals went to find out if they could be on the steering committee for the kindergarten. I want 
some of the members over there who are good fellows to sit and listen tot his, because I am sure you won’t 
like this. They went to apply for a job and they were told foursquare right there that the philosophical basis 
of the new curriculum is based on humanism. One of the top educators in the city of Regina said that if that 
was the philosophical bent, then he was walking out of here and going to see some of the people who can 
perhaps bring about a change. 
 
Now I don’t know if you fellows understand and I would doubt if you would see it . . . It struck a nerve. I 
don’t think the rest of you really understand what that means, but I will certainly meet with you and explain 
it to you, because when that is explained to you, you are going to be a little bit disturbed. I think there is 
going to be pressure put on this Minister of Education, because I believe that is wrong and that it is not what 
you want to see in education. I think you can see by his reaction that we certainly touched a sword there. 
However . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There is enough of this cutting people out by the department 
opposite without giving their names. I’m not going to jeopardize a person like that. Oh, no, that is not fair. 
You just ask your department. You go and ask your recruiting team. Ask them who they are turning down — 
some of the top brains in education in this city. I tell you, I know the reason is that they don’t believe in the 
kind of philosophy that is the underlying and very dangerous philosophy for the new curriculum in this 
province, Mr. Minister. 
 
Today we will go on with this bill, because that is a whole new debate that you and I are 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3325 

going to have. We are going to make it known to the people of Saskatchewan what is taking place within the 
development of curriculum in this province. I was getting back to where you were losing some trust and 
unfortunately this is so. This has to do with section 92(j) which is being amended. Section 92(j) of the act 
(and some of you people who are interested in making money will probably pay attention to this) indicates 
that boards will lose the power under this new act to lease property. Now why should boards lose the power 
to lease property. I don’t know. Also, the subject of the sale of property will be under the minister sitting 
opposite. 
 
I want to read you some quotes from elected officials in education which will tell you very plainly what they 
feel about your kind of legislation under section 92(j). I quote the following from Art Hindmarsh, from the 
Saskatoon Star-Phoenix: 
 

“This is simply arrogance. It’s running roughshod over the elected boards in the province,” said trustee 
Art Hindmarsh of amendments which would give the minister the power to stipulate conditions under 
which school properties could be sold. “It’s almost as if there were no need for local school boards, 
because he, the minister, Mr. McArthur, has all the authority anyway.” 

 
Mr. Gren Smith-Windsor agreed: 
 

Boards would be completely hogtied with respect to dispersal of property. The minister now would 
determine whether we can dispose of a property, under what conditions and what we must do with the 
proceeds. 

 
Now if that isn’t total control, then what is? Mr. John Egnatoff is one of the more respected educators in the 
province of Saskatchewan. John Egnatoff is a man who has been in the field a long time. I am proud to say 
John Egnatoff was the principal of the same school I was, and so he comes from a good source. Chairman 
John Egnatoff said: 
 

The amendments would give McArthur more power than any minister of education has ever had in the 
history of this province. The amendment brings into the act the regulation adopted last fall requiring 
boards to earmark 90 per cent of the proceeds from the sale of a school property toward future capital 
projects of that school in that school division. 

 
Now, because of the demographic shift in the cities, schools that were once occupied are becoming vacant. 
What is wrong, Mr. Minister, with allowing them to lease these things? If they can lease or sell them, they 
will reduce the mill rate and the tax burden on the people of Saskatchewan. I can’t understand that. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Minister, what you are doing in the Department of Education is similar to what the 
Department of Agriculture is doing with its bill to take the $90,000 in the horned-cattle checkoff that was put 
in by producers (it isn’t government money at all; it is producer money). The Minister of Agriculture is 
trying to pass legislation this session so that money will come into the consolidated fund. In other words, it is 
thievery — that’s all it is. That’s what my colleague from Thunder Creek called it the other day. 
 
With regard to school property, I’ve checked with the board of education in Saskatoon and these are its facts. 
There were no capital grants before 1957 in this province. After 1957 it was based on the ability to pay. 
What that means, Mr. Deputy Chairman, is that school boards that have the ability to pay, the ones with the 
higher tax base, did not 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3326 

receive any kind of capital grant. They did it out of their own levies — the cities of Saskatoon and Regina. 
Some of the other areas after 1957 did get capital grants, but in the cities where they had the ability to pay 
they did not receive one cent in capital moneys from the provinces. And they went out and built schools. 
 
Now, some of these schools, as my colleague points out, have become obsolete and the student enrolment 
has decreased to the point where these schools are now closed. I want to give you statistics for the city of 
Saskatoon. Thirty-seven elementary schools and all of the collegiates were built before 1970 — before there 
were capital grants from the government for capital construction. 
 
The minister opposite is saying that the money is really the money of the Saskatoon and the Regina 
taxpayers. But is he going to allow them to have that money to do as they want in education? Not without his 
approval. If it were government money that was put in there I think that might be a different piece of cake. 
But when it’s their own money, when it came right out of the hip pockets of the people in those cities, then 
what right have you to tell them, “You cannot lease these buildings, and you cannot sell these buildings, and 
you cannot use these dollar bills from the sale of them as you would like”? that’s the concern. You are 
saying that my colleague didn’t understand the problem in 92(j). I now hope you see what the problem is in 
92(j) because it’s subject to your provisions in 352. 
 
Those are some of the concerns that I would have pertaining to this act. There are a few others that I would 
like to touch on, and then we would be interested in hearing the minister’s reply. I think it is section 1063 
that is being amended, where we have the appointment of a local director of education and previously a 
principal in a small jurisdiction (as I understand it) could be appointed director. That is being deleted now. 
My question is with that deletion, who then would be the director? Do they hire the services from an 
adjoining jurisdiction, Mr. Minister? Are you going to put a provincial man in there? What is going to be the 
situation if that is to be changed? 
 
The other thing is the representation of native people on school boards. I support this. I believe this is one 
way that we can overcome the problem of native children perhaps not feeling at home in integrated schools. I 
think the fact that some of their parents could be on the school board is probably a worth-while objective. 
The thing I don’t understand as spelled out in this act, is, if there are one or two or three native students in a 
school does that automatically allow one native person to be appointed to the school board? I don’t see any 
quota there. Is this going to be covered by a regulation or could it be that for one student there would be one 
person on the board? I ask that as a matter of clarification, Mr. Minister. 
 
The next area that I’m concerned about — I looked very carefully at the terminations of contracts — is 
sections 206 to 213. I believe, as the explanatory notes say, these are probably grammatical clean-ups and 
grammatical changes. In view of that, we would accept your statements on this concern. 
 
Section 232(4) is certainly a concern of people in Saskatchewan. I think my colleague, the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose spoke on that and expressed it very adequately. 
 
Mr. Minister, I congratulate you for the other things that are in the act — the accessibility of native 
education, the provision for education for the handicapped. I would like to have you respond to some of the 
concerns, ending on this: I would 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3327 

certainly appreciate (as I asked you at the beginning) the tabling of these documents which have so 
overwhelmingly convinced you to introduce the ward system in the urban jurisdictions of the province. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Initially I wasn’t intending to rise in 
this debate, but having heard some of the nonsense from abroad, I couldn’t let it go by. 
 
I take great pleasure in rising in support of the bill to amend The Education Act. The bill incorporates a 
number of improvements. The one I’m going to focus on particularly is the introduction of the ward system. 
I strongly support that reform. I may say as well that most of the public I have talked to in Regina do as well. 
 
I recall the wars we had over the introduction of the ward system in civic administration. I recall that battle 
and it was a very difficult battle. I think it’s fair to say that we very nearly lost that battle through public 
opinion. I was anticipating somewhat the same kind of struggle over the ward system being introduced to the 
school boards. 
 
When I spoke in the throne speech, I spoke in favor of the introduction of the ward system. Those comments 
were carried in the media, and I got a response which totally surprised me. I also sent out a newsletter to 
people in my constituency, and I got the same response. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Yeah, they threw them away. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, they don’t, not in Regina Centre. That only happens in Meadow Lake. In 
Regina Centre, they save them and put them all in books and keep them. It’s very valuable literature in 
Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I uncovered surprised me. I uncovered a lot of frustration with the way school 
boards operate in the city of Regina. A lot of people phoned up and said, “Great stuff, do it.” and “Just what 
we need.” And then a condemnation of the school board would follow — a condemnation of the school 
board for being undemocratic, unrepresentative and inaccessible. 
 
I was interested, as well, that the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley referred to a number of cities 
where he felt the ward system was not in place. I would just say that the ward system is in place in his 
constituency and has been for just under 40 years; that’s a very long period of time. It was introduced in his 
constituency because when they introduced the larger school units the territory was just too large to elect 
members at large. People simply could not find out anything about trustees who were running for election 
from one end to the other of a larger school unit. For better or for worse, we have reached that same point in 
the cities. 
 
I was interested that the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley referred to a number of cities where he felt 
the ward system had not been introduced. I took the trouble to take a trip past the library and I pulled out a 
research paper which was done by one Shirley Strutt, who is now a colleague in the legal profession. At that 
point in time, I believe she was a research officer with the Executive Council. She did some research on the 
matter. The hon. member might be interested to know that the ward system is in effect in all of Ontario; this 
is the law in all of that province by an edict of the provincial government. It’s in effect in Winnipeg and my 
information is that it’s in effect in Calgary and Edmonton as well. Indeed, if I hadn’t gone any further, I 
might darkly suspect that the 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3328 

ward system in Canada was a bit of a Tory plot, as it has been the Tory government in other provinces that 
have introduced it. 
 
Our present system of electing school trustees is an historical anachronism. It has long outlived its 
usefulness. City-wide elections are as appropriate in cities of 150,000 as a horse and buggy in rush hour 
traffic on Albert Street. City-wide elections had a place in the days of yore when Regina and Saskatoon were 
much smaller than they are now. Before the Second World War, both cities were small, relatively close knit 
prairie communities, Citizens knew their neighbors by reputation and generally knew them first-hand. But 
with the end of the depression and the end of the war, Saskatchewan underwent rapid demographic changes. 
Regina and Saskatoon grew from under 50,000 people and in a relatively short space of time they were 
transformed from small prairie communities to large, modern cities. 
 
These changes were accompanied by subtle but very important changes in the cultural life of the cities. 
Regina and Saskatoon were no longer small, tightly knit communities. People no longer knew their 
neighbors, no longer knew who lived on their block, and no longer could a citizen rely on a candidate’s 
reputation in the community. These changes created problems which went unaddressed. For many, many 
years they resulted in a situation where most of the trustees came from the same part of the city, the southern 
portion. This part of the city, Mr. Deputy Speaker, retained and still does retain, part of that culture of old — 
that concept of being part of a community. All of the trustees came from that part of the city. The rest of the 
city went unrepresented. What is more serious is that they couldn’t have cared less. 
 
School elections were distinguished only by the widespread apathy in which they took place. There were no 
real links between the electorate and the elected. The citizens in the northern part of the city had no 
representation and no contact with the trustees. What is worse is that they couldn’t have cared less. 
 
The people who telephoned me were saying, when you boil it down, that they had no one to whom they 
could call. They had no one to whom they could turn, when they were upset about school problems. 
 
The most serious indictment of the whole system came at the time of the last election. Voters in the city of 
Regina were presented with a ballot that was only slightly smaller than a newspaper page. It contained over 
40 names. It didn’t come as a surprise to me or anyone else who was familiar with that election to hear the 
next morning that of the 10 trustees elected, nine were among the first 10 on the ballot. 
 
The truth of the matter is that the ballot was so long and unwieldy that far from understanding it, they never 
read it. They simply voted for the first names on the ballot. 
 
If the machinery for elected school trustees has broken down (and it is utterly broken down) so has the 
political system. By that, I mean that the trustees under a city-wide system simply lose contact with the 
electorate. I guess that is what those who called me were saying. 
 
The political judgment of the trustees lacks that fine honing which is bred from constant contact with those 
who elect or defeat you. In many cases, I am sorry to say trustees have come to see their role as of second 
guessing the administration. That is not of course the function of any elected official. 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3329 

In a book published by the Canadian Federation of Mayors and Municipalities, entitled Organization in 
Canada, there is an excellent description of the role of an elected official. I may say, by way of background, 
that in the preceding paragraph of the quotation I am about to read, the author, Thomas J. Plunkett, was 
outlining the frustrations which many appointed officials feel in dealing with politicians. He granted to the 
appointed officials that they should be respected for their technical knowledge and efficiency. He then went 
on to say: 
 

In return for this respect, to which his technical efficiency entitles him, the appointed officer should 
recognize the qualities of the elected public servant. He must learn that in the variability and 
sentimentalism of the elected representatives is a reflection of the characteristics of the public he is 
serving. 

 
While the councillor has to recognize that the good officer is in many respects his superior, the officer 
does well to concede the superiority of the good trustee in another field. 

 
To spend one’s life beneath the eaves of the school is not the best contact one can have with the 
day-to-day hurly-burly of life. The prejudices, superstitions and intuitive punches which go to make up 
public opinions are not easily measurable. The basic idea of a democracy is the belief in the inherent 
soundness of the reactions of a common man — the good judge of men and horses. 

 
To provide these reactions is the main function of a councillor. He has to look at board decisions, not in 
terms of the calculating rationale of the expert, but as they will appear to the average citizen — what 
fears they will occasion, what passions they will arouse and what purpose this discomfort and unthinking 
enforcement will cause. 

 
The elected trustee is the expert in nothing more than being an ordinary man and seeing, with the 
essential shrewdness of the ordinary man, with the wide experience and deep human sympathy which 
can only come from service to the community. If he lacks these things, whatever his education and 
whatever his party, he lacks the only thing he needs to be an elected representative. 

 
The kind of judgment this quotation so aptly describes can only come about by regular contact with a 
community of people to whom the elected official must answer, and who see the elected official as both 
accessible and responsible. 
 
A trustee elected city-wide has no regular contact with a community of people beyond that which anyone 
ordinarily experiences. 
 
A trustee elected city-wide in a city of 150,000 is neither accessible nor responsible. The public who must 
weigh the merits of not one incumbent, but 10, find the task of dividing the responsibility by such a school 
board so well diffused that the task is one of nearly impossible complexity. The public simply cannot fix 
responsibility in trustees elected city-wide. 
 
It is often said (and it was said by the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley) that the 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3330 

ward system will introduce ward politics. I say, Mr. Speaker, those who really believe that have been 
watching too much American television. Ward politics is a peculiar feature of American municipal systems. 
It occurred, not because those city councils and those American cities were too powerful, but because they 
were too weak. In some larger cities, councils were ineffective. Their size would range up to 40, 50 to 60 
members. But their effectiveness was really emasculated because in the American cities, the American 
system introduced a unique feature of electing a lot of administrative officials. They elected water 
commissioners, treasurers, police chiefs, and a host of others. All of these officials, because they are elected, 
march to the beat of their own drum. It was in the absence of an effective municipal council that predatory, 
patronage-ridden municipal politics grew up. 
 
I think it is apparent to any thoughtful observer that none of these conditions exist in the school system in 
Canada. We have never elected administrative officials. School boards are relatively small. Hence, Mr. 
Speaker, the bogeyman of ward politics is just that — a bogeyman. 
 
It is further argued by those who oppose the ward system that trustees elected in wards will act only for the 
benefit of the wards and will be oblivious of the larger needs of the school system. I say, Mr. Speaker, that 
that argument ignores ordinary human experience. Is that what happens at the provincial level? Of course 
not. Is that what happens at the federal level? Of course not. All of us who hold an elected office seek a fair 
balance between our responsibility to our ridings and our responsibility to the province as a whole and, in 
doing so, we simply reflect the average voter who seeks the same balance. That argument, Mr. Speaker, 
insults the intelligence of the ordinary electorate. It suggests that voters are motivated only by their own 
narrow self-interests, wanting everything for themselves and are blind to the needs of the larger community. 
That does not describe the electorate. Hon. members of this Assembly, of all people, should know better than 
to so sorely underestimate the intelligence and the compassion of the public. 
 
A slight permutation of this argument suggests that the introduction of the ward system will lead to 
unco-ordinated administration in the school system. To this argument I would repeat what I have just said 
about the intelligence and dedication of the elected official and the people whom he reflects. 
 
I would also add just one other thought, and that is that much of the co-ordination of school administration is 
done at the managerial or official level. By and large, elected officials do not develop policy. Their role is 
largely to weight the merits of policies and programs brought forward by the administration. 
 
One body firmly resisting the introduction of the ward system is the trustees (those with whom I am 
familiar). I want to address myself to the comments and the allegations of the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley who said that we might suggest, uncharitably that they were seeking to protect their own 
office. I think that is true. I would say to the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley that the more candid 
among the trustees have admitted publicly that that is true. That has been said publicly in the Leader-Post. I 
am sure they would be less than human if they did not worry about their own offices. I am sorry in a sense, 
because they are dedicated officials and individuals. But in another sense, I welcome that development — 
the fact that some of them may lose their office. It is not because I have anything against them personally, 
but the flip side of the coin, for the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley, is that the way will be open for a 
new infusion of fresh blood. Surely, the essence of any democratic institution is that elected 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3331 

offices should be open to anyone who seeks them, regardless of their means. Campaigning in a city-wide 
election is a very expensive proposition, beyond the means of all but the most affluent of those who are 
already famous for some other reason and thus don’t need a campaign. Reducing the size of the electorate by 
one-tenth significantly reduces the cost and make it possible for the ordinary Joe to run for the school board. 
I may say that’s what happened when the ward system was introduced in city council in Regina; it did 
democratize the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just one more way in which the introduction of the ward system will return democracy to 
the administration of our school system and I urge all hon. members to support these amendments to The 
Education Act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to rise to close off this debate and to just react to a few of 
the comments and statements that have been made by the members opposite and in particular, some of the 
comments and suggestions that have been made which are obviously, if not misleading, certainly misguided, 
ill-founded and not based on fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should say, first of all, with respect to some quotes that were ready by the hon. members 
opposite (I think, particularly, the hon. member for Indian Head) about the powers that rest with the minister 
under The Education Act and about the fact that the Minister of Education (as I remember the quote now) 
has more power than any other minister of education in the history of this province, that our Education Act is 
recognized (I have said this before and the hon. member well knows the truth in this matter) for having 
provided to school boards in this province more autonomy and, with it, more responsibility and with that, 
more power than any other education legislation in Canada. 
 
You do not have to take my word for that, Mr. Speaker. You have only to talk to the president of the 
Canadian School Trustees’ Association, who, last year, spoke in this province and said those very words 
about this education act. He said that this act should stand as a model of education legislation in the 
provinces of Canada and that he wished and fervently hoped that this kind of legislation would be adopted 
by other provincial governments and particularly, I would suspect, Conservative governments in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member now wishes to say, ‘Look at this goody,’ and he holds up the bill that we are 
debating here. He says, ‘This changes all of that.’ Mr. Speaker, I met, one week ago, with the executive of 
the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association and that executive said, ‘We have some advice and we have 
some concerns with respect to certain aspects of the proposed amendments to this act.’ But they said, ‘We 
want to make one thing very clear. We do not want anyone to interpret what we are saying as being a 
condemnation of The Education Act, even with the amendments, or of it being any suggestion that the 
powers that the school boards have in this province do not continue to be strong and complete and the kind 
of powers which we want to see.’ That’s what they said. 
 
Now you can see from that, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member is certainly exaggerating. The school trustees 
said that they are concerned about some of the amendments (no question about that and I want to be very 
honest and clear about that), but they denied (as I understood the discussion) any of the suggestions that the 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3332 

amendments here drastically altered the powers and responsibilities that rest with school boards. Of course, 
anyone who cares to read this legislation can see that that is not the case. 
 
There are some relatively insubstantial amendments in certain ways; there are some other substantial 
amendments, but none of them, with the exception perhaps of one small section, affect the powers of school 
boards in any way that could even be noticed. The hon. members have been referring to section 92(j) and 
section 350. I should say to the hon. members first of all (there was obviously some confusion in the mind of 
at least one of the hon. members opposite) section 92(j) is consequential to a change that is being made with 
respect to section 350. Section 350 is being clarified, not seriously altered, in order to have it confirm with 
what was clearly the original intent. I want to point out to the hon. members that in section 350(2), which is 
this so-called objectionable section, it’s said the minister now is demanding that boards have his approval 
before they dispose of property. The members are saying that provision never existed before. I want to read 
to the hon. members (they obviously do not read the legislation) section 350(2), before amendments. 
 

A board of education may, with the prior approval of the minister, dispose of lands and buildings erected 
or otherwise acquired to be used by the instruction and accommodation of pupils. 

 
That is what the act said; that is what the act said for years. So the hon. members, when they bring forward 
the suggestion that the minister is now by means of these amendments bringing in a new requirement that 
they must have his prior approval before they can sell property, are simply stating an untruth and misleading 
this House. What this suggestion does is to clarify it, because it was legally believed that prior approval also 
meant, if it was to mean anything, with condition. The section is now being clarified so that the part which 
says, “with conditions” is added and made clearer. That’s all. It is just clearing up the wording of the 
legislation. Any suggestion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It is strictly consequential to section 350. 
 
With respect to the suggestion of the hon. members that the boards will no longer be able to lease property 
(as I understood it), I don’t understand what they are talking about there. Of course, boards will continue to 
be able to lease property. In fact, I was just reading in the paper the night before that the Regina Public 
School Board is considering tenders for the lease of the old Victoria School. That is certainly within their 
rights; there is no problem with that whatsoever. The suggestion does not make any sense at all. 
 
I want to say that the hon. members have been dealing with a point (and they seem not to understand the 
point) with regard to the equalization of capital revenues. A change in policy was made recently with respect 
to now requiring (given that we have large increases in the capital value of school properties in some of the 
city areas) that that revenue, when those schools are disposed of, is treated as capital revenue. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is being done because just as we have an equalization system on the operating grant side so we 
must have an equalization system on the capital side. The fact of the matter was that for many years there 
were no capital revenues of sufficient size or amounts to require that kind of thing to be explicitly provided 
for in our capital grants policy. We recently made a change so that now large sales of property which yield 
large amounts of revenue, will be counted as local capital revenue in the same way that local taxation 
revenue on the operating side is counted as revenue. 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3333 

I say to the hon. members that when they object to that they are simply being wrong-headed about the way 
school finance should be done. I would defend the principle of equalization, and I would say to the hon. 
members that they should also do that. I believe some of the hon. members opposite have defended that 
principle with respect to operating grants. What we are doing here simply applies the same principle to 
capital grants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make a brief reference to the objections raised by the hon. members opposite with 
respect to the amendments to the collective bargaining provisions of this act, and particularly with respect to 
section 232(4). The member for Rosetown-Elrose obviously made it clear that he does not accept the 
principle that teachers, like other employees, should be in a position to bargain collectively with respect to 
the terms and conditions under which they work. It is simply that, and he confirms that he does not believe 
that. He does not accept the process of collective bargaining. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that that is simply 
something that cannot prevail in a society such as ours. It is simply not possible to do what the hon. member 
obviously would like to see us do, which is pass legislation that would prevent teachers from bargaining as 
employees of school boards. 
 
The view he held is not held by the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association. I refer to a quote from the 
president of the Saskatchewan School Trustees’ Association. She said, in November 1980 (and repeated at 
the April council meeting of the new Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation): 
 

Whether we like it or not, collective bargaining is here to stay, and the responsibility of the 1980s is to 
learn to live with it, and to be effective. 

 
She goes on to explain: 
 

It is time to adapt to the process of collective bargaining, to enter into it sincerely, and to participate as 
full participants in it, because it is a fact of life today. 

 
When the hon. member for Rosetown stands up and says that the rights to bargain on the terms and 
conditions of work should be taken away from teachers, I say to him that I simply do not accept that point of 
view. I would say to him further that we cannot have a healthy environment in our school system unless we 
recognize that collective bargaining is an important aspect of life today, and that the teachers should have a 
right to do so. 
 
I want to say to the hon. member that with respect to the provisions that we have here, the change in 232(4) 
is simply an attempt to clarify the original intent of that section. There still is a restriction, granted, in that 
section of the act, on the rights with respect to collective bargaining. It is still the case that a collective 
bargaining agreement will not be able to contain provisions with respect to who teaches, what is taught (that 
is, the program of studies), and how it is taught, (that is, the professional methods and techniques employed 
by teachers). We are leaving those as prohibited areas of bargaining because we do believe that we have 
established in this province a co- 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3334 

operative process involving trustees, teachers, parents and the Department of Education in the development 
of the program, and in development of instructional methods and techniques used as guidance in the schools. 
 
That co-operative system has worked well, and in our view, does not need to be encompassed within the 
framework of collective bargaining agreements, because we have an alternative mechanism. 
 
That is all that is being done here. With respect to other terms and conditions of work, the amendments here 
will clarify that nothing else is excluded, except who teaches, what is taught, and how it is taught. I believe 
that that is perfectly consistent with the original intent of the legislation and, furthermore, that that is 
necessary in order to have an effective bargaining climate which recognizes the rights that teachers should 
have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Rosetown raised a question, as I understood it, about the constitutional 
validity of the amendment that is being made here. I would say to the hon. member that the amendment 
which is being made has been reviewed by constitutional lawyers. While I suppose all constitutional law is 
debatable, it is not the view of the constitutional lawyers whom I have consulted that this section would in 
any way infringe upon or derogate the rights of separate school boards, in terms of the rights to have separate 
school programs that are consistent with the original ordinances of the Northwest Territories. 
 
It is certainly true that separate schools are protected; they can be organized by the minority religious faith — 
in Saskatchewan, largely the Roman Catholic faith — and that those schools have the right to have religious 
programs, and to have aspects of religion taught in those schools. But beyond that, Mr. Speaker, I do not 
believe that any case can be made to suggest that this section 232(4), as amended, would not be one to want 
to interfere with those rights, and I don’t believe any case can be made that these amendments do that. 
 
I want to close by again making reference to the ward system. We’ve had the subdivisional system. We’ve 
had a great deal of debate in this legislature on the question. I want the hon. members to note what is being 
done here in terms of the amendments to this section. We are simply altering the section that requires the 
subdivisional system to apply in large geographic areas so that it will also apply in large areas of population. 
 
The hon. members say that the act is being used to impose upon school boards a type of electoral system that 
they do not accept. I would say, first of all, Mr. Speaker, that the act now sets out where the subdivisional 
system will apply (and I’ve never heard the hon. members say that that should not be there). The act now 
says that in the old, larger school units the subdivisional system will apply. The reason that’s in there is that 
those systems have large geographic areas, and it is recognized that in order to have the local democracy 
work well, you are going to need something different from the old system — so that you can have effective 
communication, so that the representatives can do an effective job of representing their electorate, and so 
that there can be an active participation in the whole process. That is recognized now in the act with respect 
to rural systems. I believe that it was always recognized that, as the urban areas become larger, that 
subdivisional system would also have to apply at some point to the urban areas. 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3335 

We say that we have now reached that time. The urban areas are now a relatively large conglomeration of 
population in this province, i.e., the areas of Saskatoon and Regina. But I point out to the hon. members what 
I said earlier, and that is that under the at-large system in Saskatoon and Regina (in the public school system) 
the trustee who represents the people in those systems must now be expected to represent upwards of 80,000 
electors. I say to the hon. members that that is impossible. It is not possible to expect a trustee to do an 
effective job. That is not a criticism of the trustees; it is simply true that when you reach that size in terms of 
population, it is not possible to do an effective job of representation. 
 
By going to the subdivisional system, you will open up the possibility of trustees and the electorate’s being 
able to reflect each other’s wishes and being able to communicate more effectively, and through that have a 
more effective system of presentation. That’s not saying it is going to be a total solution to the problems that 
exist in the school system. It simply says that it will be an improvement. 
 
The hon. members say that this is some radical plan that is coming into Saskatchewan and that everyone else 
has rejected it. I refer to the province of Ontario. Kingston has a ward system; Burlington has a ward system; 
Windsor has a ward system; London has a ward system; Mississauga has a ward system; Hamilton has a 
ward system; East York has a ward system; York has a ward system; Etobicoke has a ward system. In fact, 
all of those cities have ward systems because it is the policy of the Government of Ontario that in these 
urban centres there should be ward systems. 
 
The hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley said that this didn’t exist in Ontario. He has never checked this 
out. Every argument he has presented against the ward system indicates that there has been no research done 
whatsoever. I ask the hon. members to consider St. John’s, Newfoundland; Winnipeg, Manitoba; St. 
James-Assiniboia, Manitoba; and Brandon, Manitoba. They all have this system. I ask the hon. members to 
consider the cities in Quebec, all of which have the ward system. 
 
The hon. member says that governments have not brought this about in other provinces. You might be 
interested to know that in the city of Toronto, the Hon. John Robarts (whom you may recall as being the 
former Conservative premier of Ontario), when he recommended in his royal commission report on the 
structure of government in the city of metropolitan Toronto, said this: 
 

The electoral system is the essence of any form of local government. In this chapter the commission has 
proposed a number of modifications to enhance the qualities of clarity, accountability, representation, 
representativeness and effectiveness that it considers essential to enable the electoral system to meet the 
needs of the citizens in this city in the years to come. 

 
And do you know what kind of a system he was recommending and that was imposed upon the city? It was 
the subdivisional system, or the ward system. Obviously, the hon. members have not done their homework in 
this respect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no question that there is debate about this subject and there is no question that there are 
those who disagree. But I would say to the hon. members that the experience with this system in municipal 
elections has proved its worth in this province. I would say that the experience in rural school division has 
proved its worth in this province. I would say to the hon. members that its experience here, in the cities of 
 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3336 

Regina and Saskatoon, will also prove its worth. The members opposite, just as they were at the time the 
system was brought in for municipal elections, will be proved wrong on the point and it will be something 
which will be widely accepted by the people of our cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close off by making reference to one final point which the hon. member raised. It 
illustrates the typical kind of unfounded, unresearched, confused kind of criticism which these hon. members 
raise. The hon. member opposite makes the suggestion that a committee of the Department of Education, a 
committee which he refuses to name or identify, was refusing people for membership on that committee 
because their beliefs were not consistent with some sort of stated beliefs of the Department of Education. He 
has given no evidence whatsoever to support that charge. I can tell you right here that there is absolutely no 
truth to that charge. He can’t even name a curriculum steering committee for me — name it, what is the 
curriculum steering committee? What does it do? Does it exist? Does it have members on it? He can’t 
answer the questions because he has no idea what he is talking about. 
 
Secondly, he says somebody was asked if he had a humanistic belief, or something, before they could be 
named to the committee. I would ask the hon. member to give us the name of that person, the name of the 
committee and tell us the circumstances under which this existed, because I can tell you that the hon. 
member has absolutely no evidence to support that suggestion. I can tell you that it is absolutely untrue. It is 
just like the “dirty hospital charges” and all of the other kinds of attacks that these members opposite try to 
mount. There is simply no truth to it whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Education Act will, I am convinced, take what is already a good and 
effective bill and make it an even better form of legislation which will continue to be recognized throughout 
Canada as the most effective educational legislation in this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Speaker, would the minister permit a question before he sits down? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Would the minister permit a question? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Sure. 
 
MR. SWAN: — The Education Act has been in place now since 1978 — the bargaining section of it came 
in in 1973, I’m sorry. That particular section of the act has worked well from that point in time until now and 
each year we have had agreements reached between the two bargaining committees. I have served a number 
of years in that area. I’m wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would tell the House, before you take your seat, what 
circumstances prompt you to amend that particular section of the act, section 232(4) when the bargaining 
structure has indeed worked well, to the benefit, I think, of teachers and to the school system for a number of 
years? Will you tell us what prompts the change in that particular section? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member is referring to section 132(4). I would 
point out to him that it is true that there have been agreements reached both at the provincial and local level, 
between teachers and school boards, which have reflected a co-operative and constructive approach to 
collective bargaining. But I would also point out to the hon. member that there have been cases of 
individuals and 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3337 

groups having suggested that the interpretation of section 232(4), as it now is, can be read to suggest that 
there is nothing which needs to be bargained in addition to salaries. That construction is simply one that was 
not the original intent of this section and it is, I think, incumbent upon the legislature to clarify that section, 
if that kind of interpretation is being placed upon it. 
 
I would say to the hon. member that what we are doing is making clear that this section conforms to the 
original intent, which was that the scope of an agreement could not include the questions of who teaches, 
what’s taught (the program of studies, that is) and how it is taught. This clarifies that and gives it a good, 
tight framework and for that reason, I believe, will confirm the original structure of collective bargaining that 
was intended in 1973. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly 
referred to a committee of the whole later this day. 
 

YEAS — 27 
 
Pepper Banda Cody 
Allen Vickar Koskie 
Kaeding Kowalchuk Shillington 
Tchorzewski Dyck Prebble 
Baker MacAuley Johnson 
Skoberg Engel Long 
McArthur Feschuk Nelson 
Rolfes Byers Solomon 
Mostoway Cowley Chapman 
 

NAYS — 11 
 
Berntson Rousseau Katzman 
Birkbeck Swan Andrew 
Duncan Hardy McLeod 
Taylor Pickering  
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Cowley that Bill No. 
112 — An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act, 1978 be now read a second time. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few comments on this particular bill. Given the 
unnecessary, lengthy debates which we have just heard, I would be tempted to give the members a lesson in 
verbosity, but I will refrain from doing that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point which I think needs to be made very clearly with regard to the current amendment 
before us to The Crown Corporations Act is that it is a further broadening of powers within that total 
conglomerate of Crown corporations. The government opposite has persistently and consistently been 
opposed to multinationals; they have made that argument repeatedly. They seem to be able to tie that into 
almost anything. The fact of the matter is that this government has now created its own multiconglomerate, a 
multicorporation, if you like. 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3338 

I don’t really see the difference between multicorporations and multinationals. It would seem that the powers 
which are vested in The Crown Corporations Act and are now being broadened through this particular 
amendment, 112 (which I suppose would be more appropriately numbered 113 or 114, information or 
trouble) would indicate that they are continuing in that particular direction. They are continuing to make 
provisions for greater expansion, financially, of the Crown corporations. It doesn’t just refer to one 
corporation. 
 
Take a look at the bill, in particular section 5 with respect to 23(1) of the original bill — The Crown 
Corporations Act: 
 

(2) The Lieutenant-Governor in Council may designate one of the members of the board as chairman 
and one other member of the board as vice-chairman. 

 
(3) In the absence of the chairman, or when the position of chairman is vacant, the vice-chairman has 
authority to act in his place and stead. 

 
(4) The board of directors shall manage the affairs and business of the corporation. 
 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in those three subsections provisions are made by The Crown Corporations Act 
to be, quite frankly and in real terms, totally controlled by the minister — by the minister, by the cabinet, and 
I suppose subsequently by the Premier of the province. They have the power, through the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council, to appoint the chairman and the vice-chairman, and after all, those are the 
two top positions on any board. And they shall, along with the other directors, manage the affairs and the 
total business of the corporation. 
 
So, although that’s not the key argument against the bill, it is one of them. Again, we have, as we have said 
many times before from this side of the House, a breaking down of the parliamentary system, whereby 
government is moving out the business of the province of Saskatchewan from the legislature to the Crown 
corporations. They don’t consider employees of Crown corporations as employees of government per se; that 
is a means of reducing the number of government employees — if we use the government opposite’s 
interpretation of government employees. 
 
We on this side of the House believe strongly that employees of Crown corporations are, in reality, 
employees of the government. To say that these Crown corporations are in some way separate entities, and 
that they don’t have anything to do with the government of the day, is being naive, to say the least. Although 
the point I make with reference to the chairman and vice-chairman may seem insignificant (I suppose it is, in 
itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker), it is part and parcel of our particular opposition to the growing conglomerate of 
multicorporations that we see here in the province of Saskatchewan. I suppose, to use an extreme example, a 
Crown corporation was necessary for the Celebrate Saskatchewan program in the year 1980. Look at another 
recently formed Crown corporation, the grain car corporation. It seems that this government is unable to do 
the business of the province from this legislature through the normal channels of the parliamentary system. It 
seems that it can only do the business through Crown corporations and, in my view, there are many bad side 
effects of those Crown corporations. 
 
For example, $22,000 was spent by the Department of Agriculture to advertise the opening day of the grain 
car corporation at Melville not so long ago. It could be a argued 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3339 

that a similar provision for grain car allocation and expenditure of provincial government funds for those 
cars would have cost the same amount of money regardless of the Crown corporation. But it is not the 
particular view of this side of the House. 
 
We find, in terms of Crown corporations, that it is very difficult to get at their advertising costs on a 
corporation per corporation estimate, if you like. We have to wait until the financial holding company, CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation), comes up before we might be able to get at the kinds of expenditures that 
are being made in regard to advertising. So what I am saying is that it makes it very difficult for members 
opposite the government to get at the financial workings of the Crown corporations, as opposed to those 
kinds of businesses being performed and being passed through the legislature, giving all hon. members an 
opportunity to peruse those particular expenditures. 
 
Let’s take a further, more detailed look at the bill itself, An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Act. 
Look at clause 6, where it refers to the superannuation of employees. It reads as follows: 
 

It is to devise, establish, administer a scheme for the superannuation of the employees, or any group of 
employees, of any department, board, commission, agency, office, or Crown corporation to which this 
part applies, or of any other board, commission, agency, or Crown corporation that has applied to and 
been approved by the corporation for participation in such a scheme, and, for that purpose the 
corporation may make and receive contributions for the establishment and administration of any such 
scheme that may be agreed upon. 

 
So you can see very easily, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through the provisions in that particular clause of 
superannuation for all, or part of any board, commission or corporation, the sweeping powers of that 
amendment. That to me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not essential or necessary to the effective operations of 
government on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. It makes provisions farther down in that same clause, 
which reads: 
 

To provide loans and other assistance to, or guarantee any indebtedness of corporations in which the 
corporation or any subsidiary of the corporation holds shares, bonds, debentures, or other securities. 

 
So that ties in, Mr. Speaker, with the comments that I made earlier. It makes provisions for an expansion of 
the financial abilities of the Crown corporations to make loans to any corporation, board or commission. And 
there can be a juggling of funds there that we, as opposition members, won’t know of (quite frankly), until 
approximately 18 months after the fact. Then we may simply get a “no comment” in Crown corporation 
committee. So I find it very difficult to support an expansion of those spending abilities within the Crown 
corporation. It is a very significant point which I want to make, and I could very well be wrong. I am sure if I 
am the government members will be quick to jump to their feet to correct me. 
 
When I look at section 7 of the amendment, it says: 
 

Notwithstanding any other provision of this act, or any provision of any other act, the corporation may 
pay to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund . . . 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3340 

Now, I will just stop there. There was a substantial payment, I believe it was $50 million, from PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) to the heritage fund. Now, if we are making provisions in this amendment for 
that kind of payment to be made, then I would have to ask the question, how was it made originally? There 
was, apparently, no authority to make such a payment to the heritage fund. That is a key question and it is 
one which is unanswered. As I said, surely the government members opposite will be quick to advise us how 
they made that particular payment to the heritage fund. 
 
It goes on further with regard to the heritage fund. I am not certain, Mr. Speaker, what the extent of these 
payments will be. It says that it will be able to make as payments to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund: 
 

All, or any part, of the funds received from a department, board, commission, agency, office, or Crown 
corporation pursuant to clause 24(1)(c) where the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund has provided equity 
capital to that department, board, commission, agency, office, or Crown corporation. 

 
Now, simply speaking, if the heritage fund were to make a loan of, say, $10 to a department of the 
government or a commission, or a board, or one of its many Crown corporations, then under this act and 
under this amendment they could require that that particular Crown corporation, or board, or commission, or 
whichever one received the $10, pay all or part of its proceeds back to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. I 
suppose that could be considered drawing a long bow. Maybe it is. But it is not something which is clearly 
defined in the amendment, nor is it clearly spelled out. Again, I would ask the government members, or 
whoever would be replying on this particular bill, or the minister (in closing debate), to clarify that particular 
point along with how they achieved the authority to make payment from PCS to the heritage fund. 
 
I find in the amendment that clause 7 is the one which bothers me the most. It, again, provides for an 
expansion of that financial interchange, if you like, between corporations to include all these boards and 
commissions. It is hard to spell out, Mr. Chairman, just why it is wrong, because we won’t know until such 
time as there is wrongdoing under the authority of this act. Now, when you look at it you can take any clause 
you like and in itself it doesn’t look all that damning. I suppose it could be best compared to The Natural 
Products Marketing Act. There are provisions in there that heaven help us if they should ever be employed. 
But the powers are there, Mr. Speaker. So, of course, our question is: well, if you don’t need powers or 
authority under a particular act, or a clause under any given bill, then why should that authority and power be 
there? There is no reason to use it. 
 
That is what I find in this amendment, and in particular, in the new section 24(1), the many sweeping powers 
which are contained within that bill and particular clause. 
 
Now just before I conclude, Mr. Speaker, I know that the member for Kindersley would want to elaborate on 
some other aspects — in particular clauses 8 and 9 of Bill No. 112. 
 
I just want to reiterate again the concerns I have, which reflect the concerns of the opposition. We have 
seriously questioned (and I think sincerely questioned) the necessity of this government to have the many 
Crown corporations that it has. We question it in terms of their financial and managerial accountability to the 
legislature. 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3341 

I suppose, in being somewhat old style in terms of politics, one would like to think that this legislature was 
the place which acted on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, that all matters of government had to come 
through this particular channel (this path, if you like). We, and I know that other jurisdictions in the country, 
are looking at this aspect of Crown corporations undermining the parliamentary system to a point where it is 
very difficult, if not impossible at times, for opposition to effectively scrutinize, if you like, on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s be realistic again, Mr. Speaker. There is no scrutinizing of expenditures or legislation by the 
government opposite. They don’t care. Their cabinet drafts the legislation. Their backbenchers go along with 
it. Occasionally we hear the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland raise some concerns about a bill and speak 
very critically of a minister with respect to that bill, but then not have the courage of his convictions to stand 
up and vote with the opposition against the government. It is in that context, Mr. Speaker, that I express a 
great deal of concern as it relates to these Crown corporations. 
 
This amendment, it should be noted, is an amendment to The Crown Corporations Act. This is the big mama 
which breeds them all. This is where they are all coming from. We have to have some concern about that. I 
have made a point in Crown corporation committee meetings this year of asking almost in every Crown 
corporation meeting, “When was this Crown corporation formed? How was it formed?” A good majority, if 
not the majority, of those Crown corporations are formed under the authority of The Crown Corporation Act. 
 
Now we see the amendments to The Crown Corporation Act broadening, again, its powers and including the 
heritage fund. So, it is with those concerns, Mr. Speaker, that I would at this time, until given more detailed 
explanation by the government opposite (I suppose more convincing from the members opposite) have to 
oppose this particular bill. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make mention of one item. It is a matter I raised in this Chamber 
before about the government once again moving to pull the provincial auditor, this time out of CIC; earlier it 
was out of SaskOil. 
 
What we are going to see is a continuation until the point where the provincial auditor in this province has 
no jurisdiction whatsoever over any of the Crown corporations. I don’t know what I can say, other than what 
was said before. The provincial auditor is a significant function of the legislative process. When that audit 
function is taken away from the auditor (as on CIC) we’re into the area where the government is, in fact, 
controlling the other Crown corporations — where the money is being buried, where it’s going from one to 
another. 
 
It seems to me that that is a pretty fundamental Crown corporation for the provincial auditor to handle. What 
we are doing with the provincial auditor is . . . He is complaining himself about his independence. He is not 
being allowed to look at the question of value for money. 
 
Now, what we are seeing is the government taking another Crown corporation, another one and another one, 
to the point where there will be none left. Once you do that, of course, then you downgrade the office of the 
provincial auditor. There will be fewer people and fewer experts. Methodology cannot be developed for the 
smaller operation. It is pretty fundamental. Obviously, the government opposite is moving in that 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3342 

direction. Regardless of what we say, they are not going to change. They are the same arguments I advanced 
before, Mr. Speaker. I think it is wrong for the government to move in that direction. It is wrong for people 
who claim to be legislators to stand by and watch as now CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) goes by the boards because the provincial auditor no longer deals with that corporation. That 
is the wrong way to go. 
 
When all of the Crown corporations, I suppose, are out of his jurisdiction, we will get private auditors to do 
the rest of the government departments. This is a wrong system. It is the protection which is given to the 
people. It is the vehicle by which we are going to have to address the whole question of productivity in 
government through comprehensive audits in the future. We are moving against that. We are eliminating that 
office. I think that is wrong for the reasons I have advanced at other times in this Assembly. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I won’t take very long. I am sure in committee of the whole we 
will have a chance to address some of the issues raised. I have just some general comments with respect to 
the position taken by the members opposite respecting the auditor. I think it is interesting to note that one of 
the first acts of the Manitoba Conservative government, when it was first elected, was to take all of the 
Crown corporations in Manitoba and put them out to private audits — every single one of them. There is 
nothing to suggest, Mr. Speaker, that having private auditors provides any less of a check on the validity of 
financial statements presented by Crown corporations than using the provincial auditor. I think the fact is 
that the auditor accepts the work of other auditors. If he finds it is unsatisfactory, etc., he obviously has the 
right to go in and to check it out. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that at the federal level, private auditors are used. In other provinces, private 
auditors are used. I don’t think there is anything to suggest that the public is not served well by those private 
auditors. I think to suggest that indicates some lack of confidence n the private auditing firms, which do 
some of the largest corporations in Canada, whose shareholders obviously have as great an interest as our 
shareholders do here in the validity of those financial statements presented to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously I will be supporting the bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Vickar that Bill No. 
107 — An Act respecting the Economic Development Foundation of Saskatchewan be now read a 
second time. 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3343 

MR. MacAULEY: — Mr. Speaker, an act to establish the economic development foundation is good news 
for northern Saskatchewan. Under the terms of the act, the foundation will oversee the northern economic 
corporation which is for the development of the northern economy by and for northern people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this act is legally and significantly an extension of northern economic development initiatives 
taken by the original government in 1972. 
 
Let me briefly outline each year’s record of achievement in this important area of northern development. 
Simply stated, the government set out to end the colonized state where northern people had almost no 
involvement in the economic life of their communities. Of course, many communities had no economic life 
(or almost no economic life) at all. 
 
Where pockets of progress, which originated under the CCF government had managed to survive the 
progress years of the Liberal administration, Northerners were given an opportunity to participate in their 
own economy. Indeed, this initiative of the former government in economic development meant sell out, as 
far as the northern people were concerned. In contrast to the progress and policies now in place, the Prince 
Albert pulp mill and the uranium mine at Collins Bay were developed without any consultation with the 
northern people involved. It is no surprise that the Northerners received no benefits from these projects at all. 
 
By contrast, in 1972, Northerners had directly participated in their benefit from northern economic 
development, supported by the provincial government in four basic ways. First, major progress to develop 
community services, create jobs and job training for northern business opportunities was implemented. 
Secondly, educational and training programs were developed to help Northerners gain needed skills and 
participate in northern development. Thirdly, resource development project work was encouraged to benefit 
the northern people. The establishment of a sawmill at Weyakwin and uranium mines at Cluff Lake and Key 
Lake must ensure that northern people will fully participate in these areas. 
 
We are about to begin an exciting new era of economic development in the North. Northern Saskatchewan 
will come alive if northern people will accept the challenge and opportunities facilitated by the government. 
Through the co-operation of communities and corporations, individual enterprises and joint ventures, and 
development of their own economy, they will benefit. 
 
This will provide an agency to continue to expand and support northern economic development. The new 
agency is timely for several reasons. First, northern people are taking more direct control of their own affairs 
on all fronts — education, local government and economic development. Just as Northerners have succeeded 
in establishing their own school boards, civic councils and business opportunities, they are now ready to 
more directly participate in their own financing and development of operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new northern corporation will include Northerners as directors on its board. Its head office 
will be located in the North. It will facilitate venture in economic development initiative, not just for 
achievement of economic benefits, but for ensured social benefits by helping establish the economic base for 
the future well-being for northern communities. Another reason for this new agency is to simply modernize 
the northern development. 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3344 

The Department of Northern Saskatchewan economic development branch will be hard-pressed to keep pace 
with the needs of an association with the growing economy. Instead, the branch will be able to focus more 
closely on the development of training and management support. It will assist Northerners to identify their 
development ideas and will leave the more direct financing responsibilities to the new corporation. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, may I express my satisfaction with what this act provides. The development 
foundation will have impact not only in the North, but across the province. The foundation can be an 
important step in assisting native people to more fully participate in Saskatchewan’s economic life. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I have reviewed the introduction of this act. I have discussed it with 
some of my colleagues and with other people. The first question that comes to my mind after having 
reviewed it and studied it a little is: why a foundation? First of all, we already have an economic 
development corporation in Saskatchewan, known as Sedco (Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation). Qualified people operating the Crown corporation are quite capable of handling this kind of 
economic development. Why a foundation? Answerable to whom? 
 
I have serious concerns about this bill, Mr. Speaker. The reason I have serious concerns is that the member 
for Cumberland indicated that it’s to assist the Northerners. I don’t read the bill as such. I read it as assisting 
Northerners and native persons within the province. 
 
A foundation, rather than a Crown corporation, answerable to whom? I’m told that it would be answerable to 
public accounts and to the estimates in this House, which is different than the scrutiny of a Crown 
corporation. I fail to understand why we need a second development corporation in Saskatchewan. We 
already have one. Why can it not be handled through, perhaps, a branch of Sedco, which already exists, if 
necessary? 
 
The other day, we discussed at great length in the Crown corporations committee the benefits of the housing 
program under SHC (Saskatchewan Housing Corporation) with the Minister of Urban Affairs. I recall the 
minister at that time suggesting that all governments in Canada and Saskatchewan have had a great concern 
for the natives of this country, and that all governments have attempted to deal and cope with the problems 
which exist with the natives of Canada. These are the words of the Minister of Urban Affairs: 
 

All governments have, to a degree, failed in really dealing with the problems of the natives. 
 
It seems to me when I read a bill like this one, that what we’re looking at is exactly the same kind of problem 
which we’ve had for so many years. What will it accomplish? The foundation is supposedly set up in order 
to assist Northerners and natives in economic development. Will it, first of all, provide necessary 
management skills to operate their businesses? I see nothing in there for that. Will it just be money which 
will be poured out again, as has been done by all government and all parties for many years? You put a lot of 
money out from which you really get no results. Are we going to see a foundation which will assist the 
natives to develop and set up a business through grants and loans 
 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3345 

and so on, only to see it fail because proper guidance is not established along with it? That is, I think, doing a 
disservice to the native communities of Saskatchewan, rather than providing assistance, as this bill is 
probably intended to do. 
 
Will it be a tool with which the NDP government can provide grants in order to get votes? I say yes. That’s 
what this bill will be. That’s what this foundation will accomplish . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, very 
much so. If that isn’t the reason, why not operate this foundation under the umbrella of Sedco, as a branch of 
it, and take away the politics in it? Why, in this province, are we so insistent on keeping the native people 
segregated from the rest of the people? That’s what this bill does. The intent of the government in 
introducing this bill — not by words — is to make them a different class of citizen than other peoples in this 
province. 
 
When you introduce this kind of a bill or establish this kind of a foundation, that is exactly what you are 
saying: they can’t participate in what is already there, that they must be a separate entity. You are saying that 
they must deal with different people and that they’re not allowed to deal, like everyone else, with the proper 
organization which is already there — Sedco. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I fail to understand the reason for, or the logic of, this bill. I have not yet heard from the 
government opposite any suggestions to establish a proper training in technical skills for the natives of this 
province. That’s a fact, as admitted by the Minister of Urban Affairs in Crown corporations just this week. 
What percentage of native people have taken advantage of the technical school in Moose Jaw? It’s very 
small. We have poured millions of dollars, for example, into Sask Housing to teach natives how to build 
houses. Yet, when we review the estimates of that Crown corporation, we find out in many, many cases that 
less than 50 per cent of the work was actually done by natives. Is that providing a service to them? No, I say 
it’s providing a disservice to them. There was no follow-up to find out how many learning skills they 
received from the involvement in the building of these homes. When asked in Crown corporations, the 
minister had no idea of what those very same people who had worked on these homes to learn certain skills 
were doing today. He didn’t know and he had not bothered to follow up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you that I, as a member, do not support this bill because it discriminates, it segregates, 
it does a disservice to the natives of this province. The natives of Saskatchewan could deal just as well with 
Sedco, which is by its very nature, the same kind of a corporation — Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation. We can expect by the establishing of this foundation, to see certain abuses. I don’t believe that 
there is any provision made or any thought been given by the minister or by the government opposite to 
provide not just money through grants and loans, but to provide what they need far more and that’s 
management skills, technical skills and all of the requirements needed first. You know, it’s the old story: you 
learn to crawl before you walk. And that is not what the government has done in this case. 
 
I would like the minister, in his closing remarks, to explain to me why we’ve had to go this route, how we 
intend to supervise it, who will accept responsibility, whom will they be answerable to, and all of the other 
questions that I posed during my short remarks. Mr. Speaker, I will close with saying that there are other 
members on this side of the Assembly who wish to say a few words on this bill. They would like to do that 
tomorrow. As such, I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3346 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Long that Bill No. 100 
— An Act to amend The Vehicles Act (No. 3) be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Smishek that Bill No. 
109 — An Act respecting The Assessment of Real Property, Businesses and Special Franchises be now 
read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy that Bill 
No. 113 — An Act to amend The Agricultural Implements Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, this bill certainly has some implications for the agriculture implement 
dealers in this province. My colleague has some of the bill out with the dealers. We should be able to get a 
reply tomorrow. So I would like to beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 117 — An Act to amend The Statute Law 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
1981. Many of the amendments proposed in this bill are consequential to changes made to other legislation. 
The amendments contained in section 3, 5, 12, 13, 15, 18 19, 33, 40, 41, 50, and 56 are of this kind. 
Corrections of internal reference errors and spelling and editing errors are proposed in sections 2, 4, 6 to 11, 
14, 16, 17, 20 to 32, sections 34 to 39, 42 to 45, 47 to 49, 51 to 55, and sections 57 and 58. 
 
The amendments to The Automobile Accident Insurance Act in section 3 of the bill also change citations of 
the federal legislation to conform with The Interpretation Act of Saskatchewan. Section 46 of this bill 
repeals subsection 12(1) of The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act and re-enacts the new subsection 12(1). 
The existing subsection has not accomplished what was intended. The Department of the Attorney General 
and the Department of Agriculture have been anxious to clarify the section in order to enforce it properly. It 
will now be clear that the non-agricultural corporations may not hold more than 10 acres of agricultural land 
after May 5, 1980, and must dispose of the excess before 1994. The change is not substantive but merely a 
clarification. 
 
The amendments to the Wakamow Valley Authority Act, contained in section 59, 



 
May 13, 1981 

 

 
3347 

involve for the most part changes to all references to coming into force of this section. This is necessary 
because only portions of the act have been proclaimed into force. There are also spelling and editing 
corrections to the act. 
 
The provisions in this bill, which are changes to an act which come into force on a specific date, are by 
section 6(a) declared to be in force retroactive to that date. All other provisions come into force on the date 
of assent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Statute Amendment Act, 1981. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — We would just like to have a chance to look over this. I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 118 — An Act to amend The Executions Act 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment comes forward as a result of the ongoing discussion 
between officials in the department and members of the bar. The amendment effects a change in a policy 
choice which has been requested by the private bar. The amendment gives grandfather status to writs of 
execution issued before May 1, 1981. 

 
In addition to the priority over chattel mortgages unregistered prior to delivery of a writ of execution by the 
sheriff, these writs will be granted priority by the amendment over security investments taken after May 1, 
1981. There are some exceptions but I need not enlarge on those, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second amendment allows the personal property registry staff to work in concert with the sheriff’s office 
to ensure that the registry for writs issued prior to May 1, 1981, is as complete as possible. 
 
The third amendment ensures that the execution creditor will be able to discharge a writ of execution in that 
other provisions of The Personal Property Security Act will apply to allow the execution creditor to amend 
his registration and also to ensure that he will discharge. These amendments will be welcomed by the legal 
profession and the financial community. 
 
Accordingly, I am pleased to move second reading of The Executions Amendment Act, 1981. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 116 — An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 
1979 

 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, It is my pleasure to speak on second reading of An Act to amend 
The Members of the Legislative Assembly Superannuation Act, 1979. 
 
Provision is made to increase the annual payment the Minister of Finance makes to the 



 
May 13, 1981 
 

 
3348 

superannuation fund from $350,000 to $500,000. A new formula for supplementary allowances is proposed 
this year. In past years the formula was specifically designed to provide large increases for those who had 
been in receipt of pensions for longer periods of time. 
 
From 1974 to the present there has been a significant improvement in the pensions of those who retired some 
time ago, when the indemnities and allowances paid to members were very low. The new formula gives 
more weight to years of service. It will still provide adequate supplementary allowances for those who have 
been in receipt of pensions for long periods of time. 
 
The bill before the House also contains an amendment providing that in every year that supplementary 
allowances are paid to members of the public service under The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 
Act, a supplementary allowance will be paid under this act calculated in accordance with that new formula. 
 
For persons who cease to be members prior to April 1, 1979, we propose to extend the period during which 
they can elect to transfer the money to the new money purchase plan to April 1, 1982. The amendments also 
change the time for an election for members who cease to be a member after April 1, 1979. They will have 
until 30 days after the return of the last writ of the general election at which they ceased to be a member. If 
they resign between elections, they will have until 30 days after the return of the last general election after 
they ceased to be a member. 
 
Changes are also proposed in the section respecting discontinuance of allowance. These rules will apply to 
allowances paid both under the money purchase and formula plans. The period during which a person may 
be employed in the public service or render services to the government has been changed from six months to 
100 days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly 
Superannuation Act, 1979. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, we have some concerns about the provision allowing the chairmen of 
corporations, boards or commissions to still receive their pensions while they are serving in that capacity. I 
note that that is not limited to the 100 days. With that concern, Mr. Speaker, we want to give more thought to 
the bill and beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


