






















































Hansard: March 24, 1981


(1390) 1391 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 24, 1981 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Resolution No. 11 - Optics Technology (continued) 

 
MR. JOHNSON: — Mr. Speaker, at 5 o'clock I said that I would compare what has taken place in Alberta with 
what is taking place in Saskatchewan, in regard to the fibre optics network. I'd like to go back a little, to what I 
previously said. In Alberta, the public utilities review board said, when the Alberta telephone company applied to 
move into fibre optics, that it did not think the corporation should do that. 
 
Now, I find this to be a little out of line with what should have taken place, because fibre optics in essence is an 
integrated system which is able to carry many things other than telephone calls. It can carry cable TV and radio 
signals; it can be used for the transfer of information between corporations. One of the advantages of this 
particular system is that it has better security than ordinary telephone lines. 
 
The move in that direction by the review board set up something which has been done a number of times before. 
It divided an industry into two segments: a profitable area, and an area which provides the service. It moved the 
profitable area into the private sector where large profits can be made, and tied the other company, which in this 
case is a public utility, to the high cost service end of it, which does not provide as much revenue. 
 
Take a look at what, as the mover of the motion previously stated, has taken place with Bell Canada, since it is 
now asking for rate increases in the neighbourhood of 30 per cent. 
 
This means that in Saskatchewan, the system by being integrated and complete, will be a least-cost system and the 
funding back and forth through it will allow the service to go into the large rural area. 
 
That is a very good area in which to use fibre optics because in long distance, high volume areas, this cable will be 
cost-effective. The province of Saskatchewan, and I believe also the province of Alberta, would have been the two 
areas where this would have come about. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to second this particular resolution, and I will be supporting it. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I think maybe we'll read the motion out to start it. 
 

That this Assembly commend the Government of Saskatchewan for its initiative and foresight in enabling 
Saskatchewan to assume a position of world leadership in the development of fibre optics technology, thereby 
resulting in the creation of jobs for Saskatchewan residents in an innovative, high technology and 
environmentally clean manufacturing industry, and in 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1392 

the opportunity for both rural and urban residents of the province to enjoy the full benefits of modern 
communications systems and services. 

 
I think if we just go back (and I don't want to dwell on this for very long), it's quite evident that the two members 
who brought this motion in will never have a chance to be the minister responsible for Sask Tel, and I say, thank 
God for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don't have much of a minister for Sask Tel right now, but you can take two zeros and you will 
have zero. It doesn't matter if you multiply it, add it, or subtract it. For one thing, and I'll be checking the record, 
they don't know the facts about Sask Tel; they don't know the facts about fibre optics. They talk about earth 
receiving dishes — I don't think they have even seen one, but they talk about them. The member for Yorkton 
couldn't even read his prepared text properly, Mr. Speaker. There isn't much point in dwelling on this kind of 
motion with input from two nothings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they could table their speeches so we could get them printed and put into Hansard — save wasting 
the time of this Assembly listening to them talk about something that they haven't the first clue about. They talk 
about fibre optics going to service all of rural Saskatchewan — garbage! That's what it is. It is not going to service 
all of rural Saskatchewan. You tell me one farm in Saskatchewan where they are going to lay fibre optics cable to. 
Maybe the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resource’s farm might get it. He has a road, so maybe he'll get 
fibre optics. But with fibre optics there is not one farmer in rural Saskatchewan who is going to get the benefit of 
television through cable or any other media. Not one. That is fact, not fiction. 
 
They talked about the cost, $22 million, and I am sure that is what they said but I will check the record — it was 
$56 million. Mr. Speaker, as I have stated, they are talking about spending $56 million, when for less than $10 
million, there could be earth receiving stations set up to service not only the towns in rural Saskatchewan, but the 
farmers and everyone else in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there is no point in getting wound up and 
continuing on. 
 
They are backbenchers, and they always will be backbenchers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would sooner be in 
the back row over here, having some input into what's going on in Saskatchewan. Even if we don't get leave from 
this Assembly to debate important issues in this Chamber, it's a lot better than sitting on the other side, Mr. 
Speaker, and getting up and making those two big speeches a year, getting the big thrill of making one motion a 
year, and talking about something they don't know anything about. 
 
They want to talk about comparing it with Alberta. Alberta is so far ahead of them. They want to talk a little 
further about Sask Tel's profits. What about the double taxing system? You were in Crown corporation this 
morning, were you asleep? You don't even know what's going on. Mr. Speaker, without any further ado, we'll 
have an amendment to bring into this Mickey Mouse motion from the Mickey Mouse men in the back row. I beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I want to take this opportunity to make a general observation about the debate in the 
House. I notice that some members are slipping into a habit which is not good parliamentary practice, and I take 
this opportunity to bring it to your attention. Beauchesne's Parliamentary Procedure Fifth Edition, citation 316: 
 

A Member, while speaking, must not make personal charges against a 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1393 

Member. 
 
I wonder if I could just have order on all sides of the House. Then maybe we could get this over with, and get on 
to the next order of business. 
 
I think that members should not make personal charges against other members. Now, I've heard some of that 
going on recently. It's not good parliamentary practice. It does not deal with the item which is before us, which is 
discussing in principle the motion that's on the floor. That's what the members are supposed to discuss, and I 
would ask the members to try to adhere to that rule in the future. I think it will make for better debate and for 
more quickly dealing with subjects that are before the House. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 16 - Federal Natural Gas Tax 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Mr. Chairman, at the risk of raising the ire of the hon. member for Thunder Creek, I'll try to 
keep my remarks as brief and to the point as possible tonight. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You're not good enough to raise my ire. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I wonder if the members can just try to conduct themselves in a parliamentary 
fashion, and allow the member who is on his feet to give his remarks to the particular resolution before us, and 
maybe cease and desist from calling across the House in the manner which I hear at this time. 
 
MR. ALLEN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the motion that I move today condemns the federal 
government for its decision to levy the natural gas tax. The tax was announced, as everyone knows, in the federal 
budget last November or December by Finance Minister Allan MacEachen. It's just the most recent example of 
the ill-conceived and short-sighted patchwork the federal government refers to as their national energy policy. 
While recent moves by Ottawa have aimed primarily at the energy producing provinces, I think it's fair to say that 
the federal government, over the last half-century, has managed to mismanage the energy future of all Canadians 
in all parts of Canada. 
 
You've only to look at the question of long-term secure supply of oil and natural gas, and the related question of 
oil and gas pricing. From 1960, Mr. Speaker, to 1973, in what was by today's standards certainly a time of cheap 
energy. Canada exported well over two billion barrels of petroleum. At that time oil cost less than $2 a barrel. The 
federal government was in a hurry to give it away. 
 
And the Conservatives, during the Diefenbaker years in power, had a similar record of resource giveaways. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, the exporting of Canadian oil over the last two decades has cost our nation literally hundreds 
and hundreds of millions of dollars. If we still owned that oil today, it would be worth 12 or 15 times what it was 
when we shipped it south of the border. 
 
The Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) has now raised the price of a barrel of crude oil on 
the international market to well over $30 a barrel. Much of the oil that we buy today from Mexico is being bought 
at $42 a barrel or more. Some of the oil is costing premium prices higher than that figure. 
 
When you go back and consider that in 1970 that same barrel of crude oil was selling 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1394 

for $1.80 a barrel, you get some idea of the tremendous economic impact OPEC has had on many parts of the 
world (and Canada is one of them) that must import oil. Canada relies on imported oil to meet the needs of the 
Maritimes and parts of Quebec. And for all of the empty talk by Peter Lougheed or Joe Clark about 
self-sufficiency, it seems more and more likely, Mr. Speaker, if you look at those figures realistically, that we are 
going to become not less dependent, but more dependent on foreign sources of oil. 
 
I believe, and I have some facts that substantiate what I am going to say, that this increasing reliance on foreign 
sources of energy points to one of the most tragic failings of successive Liberal and Conservative governments in 
Ottawa. We, as a nation, have been exporting oil and natural gas far too quickly. Even during 1973, the year that 
has become famous because the energy crisis began then, the Canadian government was through long-term 
contracts permitting private energy companies to export 60 per cent of our domestic oil production and 40 per 
cent of our natural gas production. And why was that? Why are we selling our irreplaceable energy stock at these 
low prices? We're doing it because the oil companies said we had lots of oil and gas, and the government of the 
day believed them. 
 
Then came 1973 and OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) began to boost energy prices in the 
international market, and the big oil companies, operating from their bases here in North America, wanted to get 
in on some of those windfall profits. So they changed their story, Mr. Speaker, and developed the idea of an 
energy crisis, an energy shortage, and suggested that they would require huge profits in order to ensure that we 
would have a supply of oil and natural gas for our future generations. The major international oil companies 
misinformed and misinterpreted the facts repeatedly to the Canadian people in order to enlarge their own bank 
accounts. And the Progressive Conservative Party and the Liberal Party have only been too willing to act as the 
willing dupes of oil companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said at the beginning of my remarks that I was going to keep my remarks brief tonight, and I want 
to get strictly to the point of this resolution. Mr. Speaker, the federal government, in applying and designing new 
taxes, has made some very, very aggressive moves in the territory of the provinces in recent years. We now have a 
federal excise tax at the gas pump, which the provincial governments view quite rightly as an invasion of their 
jurisdiction. We have now a federal surcharge imposed on oil that is exported. And as light and medium crude 
export declined in recent years, the surcharge fell very heavily on Saskatchewan because there was no immediate 
market for our heavy oil in Canada, and as a result it was exported to the larger market in the United States. The 
situation became very inequitable, as an example from a year ago will demonstrate. 
 
Near the end of 1979, Canada was exporting about 135 barrels a day of oil, of which 45,000 barrels were 
Lloydminster heavy crude and 30,000 barrels were medium-gravity oil from Saskatchewan. The Lloydminster oil 
was worth about $12.75 a barrel at the wellhead, from which comes the provincial royalty, provincial income tax, 
federal income tax, the cost of production, and if there's anything left, the producer's profit. But when it was 
exported, and virtually all of it was, the federal government imposed a surcharge of $16 a barrel, all of which went 
to Ottawa. So, Mr. Speaker, the federal government was earning $450 million a year on Saskatchewan oil, while 
the provincial coffers were only being increased to the tune of about $300 million. So, in other words, the federal 
government gets $450 million a year from our oil; Saskatchewan, $300 million a year. 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1395 

A similar situation existed for natural gas. There was no surcharge on exports. Instead, the difference between the 
Canadian domestic price and the export price is allowed to accrue proportionally to all gas producers in the 
exporting provinces even if the individual producers are not exporting gas themselves. What that involves, Mr. 
Speaker, is Saskatchewan natural gas producers being denied a share of the export revenues even though they 
serve a Canadian domestic market — just as some Alberta producers do, but who do share in the revenue pool. At 
the end of the last year the difference amounted to 60 cents per mcf and totalled about $20 million a year that 
Saskatchewan producers were losing under that system. Mr. Speaker, this new natural gas tax is in keeping with 
all the other taxes that I have mentioned. This new 30 cents per mcf tax is yet another invasion by Ottawa into 
provincial jurisdiction. 
 
Now, since I put this item on the order paper in December there have been some interesting events, to which the 
hon. member for Kindersley alluded this afternoon, as well as the member for Estevan and the member for Regina 
Wascana. I refer, of course, to the recent Alberta court decision. I say it's interesting in this sense — I think we 
have to realize that the Alberta case was a very narrow case and was specifically designed by the province of 
Alberta to be narrow. They took, Mr. Speaker, Crown land where they knew there was gas; they developed that 
gas themselves and exported it; then they took the federal government to court. The Alberta Court of Appeal held 
unanimously that: 
 

The tax on exported natural gas under the proposed federal legislation would, to the extent that it purports to 
tax the natural gas described in this reference and exported from Canada for use outside Canada, be ultra 
vires the Parliament of Canada. 

 
Why did they say that? They said that because one government can't tax another. The Crown cannot tax the 
Crown. Well, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that our government, looking at that precedent, might want to widen 
the scope of that narrow decision. In the case of Alberta gas, all that gas was owned by the province of Alberta. I 
suppose the question becomes in the case of Saskatchewan where the Saskatchewan Power Corporation owns the 
gas. Some of it is owned by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation on Crown land here in Saskatchewan. Much of 
the other gas is bought from the province of Alberta, but when it is bought surely it becomes then the property of 
the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, Mr. Speaker. And in that sense, I don't believe that if the case were held in 
Alberta to be that one Crown corporation cannot tax another, the federal government is acting in a constitutional 
way in imposing the tax on our natural gas. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLEN: — So, Mr. Speaker, with those very brief remarks I would move, seconded by the member for The 
Battlefords: 
 

That this Assembly deplore the federal government's decision to levy a natural gas tax which imposes higher 
prices for natural gas upon customers of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and which intrudes upon 
traditional sources of revenue for the provinces. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1396 

MR. MINER: — Thank you for giving me this rather unexpected privilege . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm 
quite delighted to have the opportunity to second this resolution. Simply stated, Mr. Speaker, I do not believe that 
there is any precedent (prior to the activities of the federal government in this particular activity) that suggests that 
it is proper either constitutionally, or proper in any other way, for one government to tax another government. 
Quite frankly, I think that part of the entire issue associated around the dispute between the federal and provincial 
governments at this time is around just such an issue and that is the authority of one government vis-a-vis the 
authority of another government. Indeed, I believe that the entire constitutional question is something more than 
just a simple exchange of words between two governments that are, at the present time, trying to establish once 
and for all a precedent through which governments can, for a long term, follow a practice on which they believe 
they can rely, both in terms of their expenditures and their receipts. This question becomes a part of that overall 
issue. 
 
It would be surprising to me if members of the opposition would find themselves in opposition to this particular 
resolution. I believe that if they take a position contrary to this, they would have to search long and hard to find 
some shred upon which they could hang their arguments to suggest that the Crown corporation of the Government 
of Saskatchewan should be taxed, in any way, shape or form, on property that it owns, by another level of 
government. 
 
Indeed, I believe, Mr. Speaker, you found yourself in such a discussion as it applies to the city of Regina and the 
province of Saskatchewan when you were a minister of the Crown, and I believe that at that time the position 
taken by the opposition was not one that was consistent with supporting one level of government taxing another. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, without any further words on this particular issue, I would like to urge the members opposite to 
support this resolution because I believe it is in the interests of Saskatchewan people in a manner that is much 
broader than even this resolution itself implies. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I think without too much searching, one can find a shred to look at and I'd like 
to point out that I thought the mover of the motion put forth some very valid points. I would like to say at the 
beginning that I certainly oppose the actions of the federal government in taxing our gas. However, when one 
looks at this motion, one sees the hypocrisy of the government opposite. You know, I heard the mover get up and 
say that the federal government was guilty of an "ill-conceived and short-sighted patchwork." He went on to talk 
about the "empty talk" of Peter Lougheed. I don't think it is supported anywhere in western Canada, that the talk 
of Peter Lougheed is in any way, shape or form, empty talk. I think that was rather a wild and sweeping statement. 
But then, to show the hypocrisy of the government opposite (and that's what I intend to do in this motion) I would 
just like to read it again, where it says: 
 

That this Assembly deplore the federal government's decision to levy a natural gas tax, which imposes higher 
prices for natural gas upon customers of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 

 
Now, my gosh! All of a sudden the government opposite is worrying about the cost to the subscribers of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. We, on this side of the House, have stood up repeatedly, time after time, and 
asked, "Will you freeze the rates of the 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1397 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation?" No, you gave it no consideration at all. Then the member gets up because the 
federal government has put on a tax. All of a sudden he's worried about the consumers of the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. Well, if you're concerned, government opposite, about these consumers, as we are on this 
side, why then will you not freeze the rates? 
 
We have asked time after time in this House for a public utilities review commission, and it falls on deaf ears on 
the other side of the House every time. Then the government opposite has the sheer hypocrisy to put up the 
member for Regina Rosemont to say that he is concerned about the price of natural gas to the customers of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I say those are idle words; that's a bunch of hogwash! 
 
If you're really concerned about the customers of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, then it's fine to blame the 
feds. I don't agree with what they're doing either, but put your money where your mouth is, my friends, and freeze 
the rates, or at least institute a public utilities review commission. You can't have it both ways. In one situation, 
you can't be willing to see the rates of power continue to skyrocket and then get up in here with this motion and 
say you're concerned about the customers. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Perhaps I could make a few comments with regard to this motion, and I can advise the 
member for The Battlefords that I will be voting for this motion. We can dispose of this matter tonight, if you like. 
 
I would commend the member for Regina Rosemont, I think he made a good speech with regard to the issue. 
Obviously he is going to make some political shots, but that's the name of the game. I would, however, ask him to 
square this particular issue. He spends a lot of time being critical of the Liberal and the Conservative parties in 
Ottawa as national governments, and their policy of exporting oil to the United States in past times. I suppose it's 
easy enough to be critical of that. 
 
I suppose the question that logically follows from that is this: is the government opposite equally opposed to the 
present policy of the federal government to export natural gas to the United States? The reason I ask that is that 
the national NDP are very strongly on record as opposing the export of natural gas. However, last year in this 
Assembly when that matter came up, the then minister of mineral resources was four-square behind the Trudeau 
government's policy of exporting natural gas, and was four-square behind the policy of the national government 
for the Alaska gas pre-built. I assume that policy still stands in place today, so how can you criticize the 
government for exporting, yet turn around and favour it now because you might see a dollar return? How can you 
criticize the federal government for exporting oil to the United States in the past (you said from 1973-74 on), and 
still advocate the increased export of our heavy oil into the United States market? How can you stand by and 
criticize them on one hand, and yet, when it comes to dollars in your pocket, you're not prepared to say, "Well, we 
better leave that oil in the ground and develop it later, because we shouldn't be using it now?" It's the same 
argument, and it seems to me you're talking out of both sides of your mouth. 
 
The only other comment I have is: I think the member for Regina Rosemont is taken a little too much with the 
narrowness of the decision of the Alberta Court of Appeal. The Alberta Court of Appeal was a milestone case in 
the whole question of the interpretation of section 125 of the constitution. The big dilemma, which we face now, 
is that it is one thing to win a case in the Albert Court of Appeal, and quite another to win a case in the Supreme 
Court of Canada. I think the question boils down to reserving 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1398 

judgment about just where the case is going to go. I was glad to hear the Attorney General announce the other day 
that Saskatchewan is going to intervene with Alberta in the pending challenge in the Supreme Court of Canada. I 
commend the government for taking that step. 
 
I also commend the government for actively considering joining with the group of six (if you like), to challenge 
the constitutional resolution in the supreme court, as well. We, on this side of the House, have called for that for 
some period of time, and frankly, I am glad to see action by this government on both of these court actions, which 
are fundamental crucial decisions that must be addressed by the supreme court. 
 
Without further comment, I advise the members of this Assembly that, although we are not particularly pleased 
with the way this resolution is written, the basic concept and principle is there. I think all members of this 
Assembly can accept the motion, and should support the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 
 

CULTURE AND YOUTH 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 7 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, in the past the culture and youth estimates have taken 
very little time in this Assembly. I was asked by the Attorney General yesterday if we were going to be finished in 
May. I said that if they were to bring in a bill to investigate the cultural policy secretariat, we would still be here in 
July. 
 
I notice, under the recommendations in the report, that they suggest that the Department of Culture and Youth be 
changed to the department of culture. I wonder what has happened to the 'youth' in our province. Is it true that 
they all go to Alberta as soon as they get out of school and that's why we don't pay any more attention to them? 
 
I notice, also, that there is a tremendous cutback, where I would suggest there should be a substantial increase. 
That's in sports and recreation. 
 
We've had another mild winter and the demand meters are still jammed into the recreation centres depriving the 
people of winter recreation. They also have them now in the schools and churches. Imagine, you have to pay as 
you pray. 
 
You also announced, in your reply to the budget, the following: an increase for cultural activities around the 
province, an increase in support for Saskatchewan's 180 community-based museums, resources for the 
conservation activities of the new heritage property legislation, increased grants for provincial library systems, 
improvements to services at all provincial parks, and a new Saskatchewan archives 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1399 

building. I am not in disagreement with this. I certainly do disagree, however, in that we are not putting enough 
emphasis on sports and recreation throughout the province. 
 
I noticed in this beautiful report that under the special projects, R46, tourist material (posters, a calendar of harvest 
time events and other material) is to be produced with a view to encouraging a regular harvest festival in 
Saskatchewan. It would appear to me, Mr. Minister, that you are taking Christ out of harvest time. What happened 
to Thanksgiving? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, that's a winner! That's like the trappers with their portable colour television sets. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — I'm certainly more interested in exactly why the cutbacks are taking place in sports and 
recreation in the province and more money is being put into these other areas. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to the question as to what's happening to the youth in our 
province, I think the hon. member will find that our youth numbers in the labour force continue to grow. The 
youth in this province are certainly not, from anything I can see . . . If you look at the statistics in terms of the 
changing age structure of farmers, we see there are more young farmers in Saskatchewan than any other province 
today, certainly quite a contrast with the province of Alberta. We see our young people moving into the labour 
force in very substantial numbers. I can attest to the interest of the young people in staying in Saskatchewan by the 
demand of the 16-to 24-year-old group on our post-secondary education system. I would say to the hon. member 
that no time in the past compares to the present, in terms of the way the young people are making a commitment 
to this province and are drawing upon the services available in this province and those that the government can 
provide. 
 
Certainly, in terms of the Department of Culture and Youth, I have made no proposal at this time to eliminate any 
youth programs. The youth programs continue with the same emphasis they've had, and I do not intend to reduce 
youth programs in the Department of Culture and Youth. I might say with respect to the hon. member's reference 
to the change in spending, that, in fact, the spending in sport and recreation is up very, very substantially. With 
respect to the overall spending in the department, the spending is up, if one takes into account the fact that last 
year was the year of Celebrate Saskatchewan. There is a very substantial grant to the Saskatchewan Diamond 
Jubilee Corporation. You take into account the fact we are on the final phase of the cultural and recreational grant 
program, therefore, the draw-down from the cultural and recreation grant program will be lower this coming year 
than it was in the past year. Those two factors give the appearance of spending being down, but taking those 
factors out, you will find that spending in the department has increased very substantially. 
 
With regard to the suggestion in the cultural policy secretariat report that there be something done to encourage a 
regular harvest festival in the province, I am not like the hon. members opposite when I receive suggestions about 
possible activities that can be undertaken in the province. I recall that the members opposite made very light and 
frivolous of the idea of Celebrate Saskatchewan. We know quite well in retrospect how successful that Celebrate 
Saskatchewan activity was. I think it shows, that with a little imagination and a little effort, there are a variety of 
activities that could take place in the province. 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1400 

The cultural policy secretariat report was an attempt to put forward (not as government policy) suggestions and 
thoughts based on discussion with interested groups and parties around the province. Many suggestions came 
forward, including suggestions from trappers who are very, very interested in the question of communication, hon. 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley. If the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley would spend even, perhaps, one 
day in the North he might come away much better acquainted with some of the aspirations northern people have 
with respect to cultural development, communications development and that sort of thing. 
 
So I would suggest to the hon. members that they might, perhaps, want to sit back and take an objective view of 
the question of developing some consideration of some options and ideas — not all the ideas would be good ones. 
Not all the ideas that came forward from groups and organizations which made suggestions to the cultural policy 
secretariat necessarily were good ones in my view. And there are, obviously, not necessarily good ones in the 
view of the hon. members opposite. But I say to the hon. members, let's take all people's ideas and give them a 
little thought and consideration, and not make jokes of them. Let's make some reasoned decisions about which 
ones we should accept and which ones we should throw out. Certainly not all of the recommendations of the 
cultural policy secretariat report will be adopted. But I suggest to you that it's important for you, as responsible 
elected people, to give some consideration to these suggestions and not make light of them, simply for pure 
political advantage in the hope of getting a few headlines. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Minister, I'm glad at the start of your remarks you mentioned that we have more 
farmers in Saskatchewan under the age of 25 — indeed, we should. We do have 40 per cent of the farmland in the 
whole of the Dominion of Canada. So as a result, I'm still going to say we're not spending enough on recreation 
facilities out in rural Saskatchewan. The towns and villages are dying. There are not enough people to support 
these facilities and you have these demand meters in them. They're cutting back because this year being a warm 
winter they can't afford the power bills. They're cutting back, some of them, to three months or three and one-half 
months because of artificial ice and the demand meters in there. Have you given any thought to taking these 
demand meters out in the immediate future so that these facilities can go on for a six month period at a lot less 
cost? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, this question has been dealt with previously in this Assembly 
during question period. I have indicated to the hon. members that I am not considering removing demand meters. I 
have indicated to the hon. members the reasons for demand meters. And I've indicated to them that I am currently 
considering ways and means through which one could make adjustments in the rate structure, in particular, to try 
to alleviate the impact of demand meters upon those who cannot make adjustments in their power consumption 
patterns. 
 
As you know, the demand meters are there as a measurement of the peak demands that are placed on the system 
by the variety of users we have. And the peak demands on the system are a very important feature of the 
decision-making we must go into in terms of new investment in capacity. So the demand meters themselves, I 
believe, in the interest of conservation and in terms of trying to conserve as much as possible the capital 
expenditures that must be made in the system, are important in general. 
 
I certainly am looking at options through which we might recognize those users who cannot make adjustments in 
their peak demands for very good reasons, or who are severely impacted by the results of demand meters being in 
there. But I am not 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1401 

intending to eliminate demand meters, because I think they are an important way of encouraging people to take 
conservation measures that will decrease the peak demands placed on the system which are such an important part 
of the heavy capital investment that we are required to make in the system. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know that you mentioned in question period that you did understand 
demand meters — and I understand them also. And I know that the peak demand only has to stay for . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! I hesitate to interrupt the hon. member but I don't think we should get into a 
discussion in culture and youth estimates of demand meters and the power corporation. That would be more 
properly asked in Crown corporations committee or during the ordinary question period. I'd ask the member to 
stick to the culture and youth estimates, item 1. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Chairman, I would have to challenge your ruling because of the fact that these things 
are directly involved and are depriving the people of rural Saskatchewan of winter activities. And if he's the 
Minister of Culture and Youth, he certainly should have to answer to it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. The Chair has been challenged. Those in favour of sustaining the Chair say aye. 
Those opposed say no. The Chair is sustained. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Nice, friendly discussion here tonight. The member made a very valid point and I say 
respectfully, Mr. Chairman — and I emphasize respectfully — that I don't think you really understand the concept 
of demand meters, and neither do I, other than to say that they are involved with the winter activities out in the 
curling rinks, and other recreation facilities, and I would suggest to you that directly those . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I've made my ruling. He made a passing comment on demand meters. The 
minister answered the question. I simply say that I don't believe it's under this item. If the committee has 
unanimously agreed to deal with something which is clearly out of order, I suppose that I, as Chairman, have to do 
that, but I don't believe it's in order. So I had to make that ruling. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Surely the cost of operating recreational facilities must be discussed within the context of 
youth and recreation in this province. All my colleague was trying to get at was the cost of operation. This was not 
diverting at all; that subject is part and parcel of it, so I think it has to be discussed within this forum. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Well, I simply made the ruling. I didn't think a detailed discussion of demand meters was 
in order in culture and youth estimates. That was my ruling. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Where do you want us to deal with these demand meters, since they are in recreation 
centres throughout the province? I'm asking him when he'll take them out and explain exactly what a burden it's 
putting on the people of rural Saskatchewan, where they don't have the population to support such a cost. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Does the committee want to deal with demand meters? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could make a restricted comment about demand meters as 
they apply to recreational facilities, and try to deal with . . . 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1402 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Not unless everybody agrees to do that. Is it agreed that we do that. Did I hear a no? I 
don't think I heard one. All right. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I agree with you that I erred in discussing in general the question of 
demand meters. With respect to the restricted application to recreational facilities, I am prepared, as I've indicated 
in this House before, to look at the impact of demand meters (not the removal of them) on the recreational 
facilities, in order to assess whether or not they do place a burden which could be altered through a consideration 
of the circumstances of those recreational facilities. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Minister, would you give me an indication of exactly when you are going to do this? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, I said to the hon. member that I'm giving consideration to the subject. I can't 
give you an exact date when the minister responsible for SPC will be making a decision, but a decision will be 
made in relatively short order. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Minister, I'm familiar with how these meters work (and the Chairman disagrees with 
me) but I still want to get this on record. I say demand meters because the fact remains that if the peak is reached 
for 15 minutes during one month, you pay on that basis. The rest of the month it could be at a minimum, yet you 
pay based on that one 15-minute period. That is true, Mr. Minister. Explain that to me differently. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the charges for electricity in recreational facilities, it 
is not necessarily true that a recreational facility will have the demand charge placed on it for its whole use during 
the month. The rate schedule sets the number of hours during that month during which the demand charges will 
apply. That is not necessarily the total hours of operation of the facility. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Yes, Mr. Minister, it only takes 15 minutes to get the demand meter up there. That's what 
I'm saying. Is that not true? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — What you say is true. It is done on a 15-minute basis, but it is applied for a certain 
number of hours only, which is a best-guess estimate of the number of hours that likely pattern of demand will 
cover during that month. Now it won't, because it's an estimate in a block, cover necessarily the exact hours for 
every facility. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — I know it does vary, but are you aware, Mr. Minister, that it increases in a lot of cases? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Back to culture and youth estimates; I think we're carrying this a little far. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, last night we were discussing two employees, one who was fired and the 
other . . . Well, they were both suspended — one was dismissed, the other was rehired. I asked you if you would 
obtain some information about the activities of Giant Enterprises for the three years prior to June 6, 1980, since 
your predecessor said in this Assembly on that date that that sort of information had been made available to the 
RCMP in its investigation. I'd like to hear the answer to that question before we go any further, Mr. Minister, if I 
may. 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1403 

HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as the hon. member has indicated, the RCMP did come to the 
Department of Culture and Youth and took documents with respect to the cultural and recreational facilities grant 
program; the application forms and other forms associated with it. 
 
I would point out to the hon. member that I indicated last night that I would check those records. I have been able 
to determine, Mr. Chairman, that the applications and reports filed with the Department of Culture and Youth as 
part of the cultural and recreational facilities grant program do not contain full and complete information with 
respect to contractors undertaking work on projects. I should point out to the hon. member that the application 
forms are based on regulations which determine the criteria, based on per capita criteria, whereby municipalities 
are eligible for funds. The municipalities can apply for those funds, and if the projects are eligible for coverage, 
and if the application is put forward in such as a way as to draw upon the funds, then that is all the information 
that is required. And the municipalities, as independent governing bodies, undertake to contract with contractors. 
 
I would point out to the hon. member, also, that there is, incidentally, mention on some of the forms, in certain 
cases, of contractors, although it is not required. I am informed that the information available from the documents 
we have does not show Giant Enterprises to be the contractor on any project funded by cultural and recreational 
facilities grants from the Department of Culture and Youth. As I indicated to the hon. member, I am also informed 
that the RCMP did take those documents and used them as a basis for some of the information they would be 
gathering in the course of their investigations. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, then you are presently using identical procedures — the same application 
forms, and the same procedures? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Yes, we do not ask the local governments whom they intend to contract with when 
they apply, because obviously they tender the projects. In most cases — I would assume probably in all cases, 
though I don't know — it's standard practice for local municipalities to tender projects. So they're not required, 
and they could not possibly give an indication to whom they intend to give a contract at the time of making 
application. It wouldn't be possible to ask for that kind of information in the application forms, which are some of 
the forms filed on the projects. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I'm not sure where your offices are. Are they in the C.M. Fines Building, by any chance? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — No, my office is downstairs; the Department of Culture and Youth is on Victoria 
Avenue. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I was just wondering. It just seemed appropriate that something like this should be centred 
in the C.M. Fines Building. It just seemed so appropriate. 
 
Mr. Minister, I find it pretty hard to imagine that we can have a scam, which we went through last night. Two 
employees were involved in the processing, distribution and approving of the grants, and the minister can stand in 
this Assembly with a straight face and say, "But look, all they did was approve the money to go out to local 
government. It's none of our business whom they hired." It would appear that these employees had the opportunity 
to, and I suggest to you, did approve grants and process them. One of 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1404 

the preconditions in a game they ran was that they were going to do some work; they were going to do some 
construction work and they were going to sell you some product. But, what I find even more incredible is the 
minister standing up today and saying, "We haven't done anything about it. We had an investigation. We 
suspended them both. We rehired one, put the other one back. For what reason, I don't know." 
 
But after going through all that, did the minister order a change in procedure in his department? Heavens, no! I 
can't believe that, and that is the biggest indictment. The rest of it, you may be able to pin on your predecessor for 
being slack. The fact you haven't changed your procedure is right around your neck and the necks of your 
top-level people in that department. You have to take the bell for allowing this procedure to go on. You've had 
this drawn to your attention months ago and you can still stand in this Assembly and say, "Oh, it's none of our 
business what local government does with that money." Hogwash! Two employees processed and approved that 
money and part of the precondition for that approval was their involvement in a roundabout, backdoor approach 
which, obviously, in the opinion of the people conducting that investigation, was deceitful and dishonest. 
Otherwise both the employees would be there. Mr. Minister, this one is right on your neck. I just can't believe it. I 
thought you had too much ability to leave such a tangled-up mess. 
 
Would the minister tell me, in light of the fact that this was brought to his attention many months ago, how he can 
justify in this Assembly today having known about this corrupt practice for many months, but having taken no 
steps to put in the proper controls? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I would suggest to the hon. member, first of all, that if his 
allegation with respect to the alleged wrongdoing, as he sees it, on the part of these employees were true, then I 
would very strongly suspect that the RCMP should have recommended to the criminal prosecutions branch of the 
Department of the Attorney General that there be prosecutions and that the prosecutions branch of the Department 
of the Attorney General would have proceeded with prosecutions — not being a lawyer and that being their 
subject to investigate, I can't really comment. But, I would suggest to the hon. member that I would suspect that 
would be true, and as the hon. member is well aware, this matter was referred to the RCMP and the RCMP did 
undertake a full and exhaustive investigation, according to my information. But I am not the minister responsible 
for criminal prosecutions and not the minister responsible for the RCMP and the Attorney General could 
appropriately answer that question further, but I would suggest that that would be the case with respect to that 
matter. 
 
I would say with respect to the suggestion that we should somehow have in our applications an indication from 
local governments whom they are going to give the projects to on the basis of tender, that that is virtually an 
impossibility. Mr. Chairman, I agree we have a responsibility as a department to identify whether or not there are 
any cases of employees becoming involved in any kind of possible or actual conflict in their jobs in terms of 
making recommendations to the municipalities or in terms of approving grants, and that if those employees are 
engaged in that kind of thing, it is our responsibility as a department to take action with respect to those 
employees. It is our responsibility to take all the steps we can to ensure that employees are not in that position, but 
if they are, to take the appropriate steps. That is the appropriate kind of control with respect to administering these 
kinds of programs. 
 
I would say further to the hon. member that where there is a suggestion of wrongdoing, it is appropriate (as was 
done in this case) that immediately the RCMP should be called 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1405 

in to undertake an investigation to determine whether or not (beyond the conflict of interest question, which is our 
responsibility in terms of the master-servant relationship one has in law with an employee) there has been 
wrongdoing. That is a fundamental aspect of the way our society functions. We depend on a competent police 
force to undertake those investigations and we depend on prosecutors proceeding where evidence justifies such 
prosecutions. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Thank you very much for the lecture on police procedures. I would feel much better about 
that lecture if the minister were tabling the report of the RCMP. But the minister knows where that report went — 
it went to the Attorney General's office. It went off to the Attorney General's office, where the Attorney General's 
people decided whether or not there was going to be any criminal prosecution. It was all neatly tied away in 
another department. Yes, I would love to see the RCMP report. I would love to see what the officers, as they dug 
through those files, came up with. I'd be intrigued to see what their recommendations were, and I would be even 
more intrigued to see the recommendations forthcoming from some members of the Attorney General's 
department who acted on them, as well as the criteria they used to act on them. 
 
The minister says that it is impossible to put controls on it, yet the minister had two employees investigated — the 
department had two of them investigated. They both are in the same business, Giant Enterprises. They own the 
same proportion of the company; they are involved in the same process of processing and approving grants, yet 
one gets fired and the other one is rehired. Mr. Minister, if Tuck is guilty of wrongdoing and you fired him, are 
you trying to tell me that Nobes isn't equally guilty? Your only defence last night was that Nobes wasn't in as 
senior a position. 
 
I suggest to you that if that RCMP report were available, and if the recommendations of the Attorney General's 
department were here, we could view them both together. I think we'd have just a real dandy here. I wonder what 
Nobes has on your department because if Tuck goes, Nobes had to go with him. You know it and everybody in 
this Assembly knows it. If you are going to hang one, they both should have hung. 
 
What has Nobes on that department? If there was wrongdoing on Tuck's part, I don't think there is a person in this 
Assembly who doesn't believe that Nobes was right in there with him. But Nobes is back in his same old job — 
processing applications — and you, as a minister, don't know if he is still up to the same activity he was up to last 
year and the year prior to that and the year prior to that. You have acknowledged in this House that you have 
made no change in procedures. How do you know what Nobes is doing? We thought we'd seen the epitome of a 
horribly run department in DNS, and I guess you've had input into DNS, but culture and youth I find equally 
shocking and even more surprising. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, you can hang a lot of this on your predecessor, but the fact is that you have put Mr. Nobes 
back there. For all you know, Mr. Nobes is still on his little gauntlet which he was on in conjunction with Mr. 
Tuck. The fact that you can stand in this Assembly and say, "I really don't know. It's not my business to find out," 
is an abrogation of your responsibility and, I suggest, a real indictment of one of the supposedly new 
heavyweights in the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to know what you're going to do with Mr. Nobes. I suggest to you that he can no longer stay 
in the capacity he is presently in. I don't have access to the documents to know whether your decision on Mr. Tuck 
was valid. Assuming that it was, 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1406 

frankly, there is no place for Mr. Nobes in the Department of Culture and Youth. There is no place for Mr. Nobes 
in the public service, if your decision on Mr. Tuck was valid. 
 
There is only one way to determine that. Give us the RCMP report and let's see the dirt they brought out. 
Conversely, the minister could clear the air. Very quickly, the minister could stuff all this down our throats. The 
minister could spring to his feet and say, "I'm going to stuff this down your throats; I'm ordering a public inquiry 
into the Department of Culture and Youth." Does anyone want to bet me a nickel that he's not going to do that? I 
don't think he's going to do it. No, he's not going to do anything. What intrigues me, Mr. Minister, is this: what 
does Mr. Nobes have on your department? That's the part I find most intriguing of all, because there's no place for 
him any more, if what you said about Mr. Tuck is correct. Now, tell me what your plans are for Mr. Nobes. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, first of all I should indicate to the hon. member that it simply is not within 
my power to table an RCMP report. The RCMP is not reporting to me. The RCMP, as I understand the system, 
deals with the public prosecutions branch of the Department of the Attorney General. It reports to that branch, and 
the Attorney General is the minister responsible, in this House, with respect to matters pertaining to the RCMP. It 
simply would not be possible for me to table the RCMP report. I think the hon. member knows that and is simply 
using a little eloquent language to try to make a point. 
 
I would say to the hon. member, with respect to Mr. Nobes, the considered view was that in the position he 
occupied, he did, indeed (and no one has denied this), through his involvement as a shareholder and director in 
Giant Enterprises, contravene The Public Service Act. There's no question about that. 
 
However, given the fact that he did not derive any financial gain from Giant Enterprises, did not, as far as we can 
determine, participate on a management level within the department and therefore was not in the same position to 
exercise such influence over decisions or to play a role in the decision-making process in the same way as Mr. 
Tuck, it would not be necessarily true that Mr. Nobes should be subject to the same kind of disciplinary action. 
 
I would point out to the hon. member that Mr. Tuck was Mr. Nobes's supervisor. Mr. Tuck sat on the 
interdepartmental committee which is involved in reviewing the applications for these grants in order to ensure 
that they are consistent with the regulations. Mr. Tuck also sat on the management committee of the department. 
He was a very senior official in the department. He was in a position such that I cannot see how one could draw 
any other conclusion than that he should be dismissed under these circumstances. With respect to Mr. Nobes, he 
simply was not in a parallel position, in terms of decision making, management responsibilities, and in terms of 
ability to bring any kind of potential influence (as a result of the potential conflict of interest) to bear on those who 
would be making purchases of these kinds of equipment and supplies. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I would just like to draw to your attention that in approximately 1977-78, I was 
directly involved with the construction of a $500,000 arena. The two people who I met with, along with the 
members of our committee, were none other than Glenn Tuck and Cec Nobes. It seemed shocking to me that soon 
after this meeting I was approached and it was indicated there was a certain Giant Enterprises that did some of this 
contracting. That is what happened. When you say that they didn't know who the contractors were, that is not 
correct. We had one meeting 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1407 

with Glenn Tuck and Cec Nobes, and then our contact with your department was none other than Cec Nobes, who 
was down at least three or four times. He knew who we were contracting with. You know that in your department 
specifications have to be correct and an engineering firm must okay the specifications before a grant is received. 
So don't you stand in this Assembly and try to tell me that the Department of Culture and Youth doesn't know 
who is contracting on these specific things. 
 
I heard you say to my colleague a minute ago that Mr. Cec Nobes did not receive any financial gain. How do you 
know he didn't receive any financial gain? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the question whereby the hon. member suggests the 
department does not maintain records of those who undertake contracts, I am informed that, while certain 
information occasionally is recorded from these visits, there is not a systematic requirement that these contracts be 
recorded. What the consultants do is maintain some follow-up in these projects to ensure the specifications are 
being followed and that the basic program that has been adopted when it was proposed is being followed, and that 
sort of thing. But there is not a follow-up with respect to the question of who the contractor is. I don't doubt that, 
as a result of the consultants periodically visiting communities, they, on many occasions, would know who the 
contractor was. However, it is not a matter which is recorded on the files, because it is not required in terms of 
regulations and the act. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — If you have ever been involved in dealing with the Department of Culture and Youth in trying 
to build a rink or a swimming pool or whatever, I tell you, Mr. Minister, there is so much red tape that they know 
every move you're making. And, if the department doesn't know, then you're fighting with a fire commissioner to 
find out the regulations you must meet, and then with the Department of Health. The government opposite knows 
every move which these organizations in the small towns are making, and they know every contractor who they 
are dealing with. Perhaps the information isn't asked for on the form, but I say to you that after the track record of 
Mr. Nobes and Mr. Tuck, I can't understand why it isn't on the form. 
 
I would like you to stand up in this House and give us the assurance that this same thing isn't still going on in your 
department. If you are hiring back one of the fellows who was guilty, goodness gracious, what is to say that it still 
isn't continuing? Can you give me assurance that there are no employees within your department, which hands out 
numerous grants throughout Saskatchewan, who don't have some type of businesses operating which is similar to 
Giant? Doesn't it seem strange to you that one would meet with these two men who deal with the grants and then 
after be approached to the effect that one of the group who could put this artificial ice plant in for you is called 
Giant Enterprises? I just say, thank God we didn't go with them. It seems very suspicious to me. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I don't know anything about your particular case. I can certainly check, when I 
have time, to see what the situation was with respect to that case. 
 
I think it is true that the consultants do maintain follow-up visits to see that progress is taking place, that work is 
completed, and so on. In the course of accumulating that information, we do not necessarily accumulate the names 
of the contractors because the contracts are let by the municipalities in accordance with their standard provisions. 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1408 

What we record are the expenditures and that sort of thing as follow-up, on the understanding that the contract 
meets the basic requirements. We do not have a systematic record of who the contractors are. I would point out to 
the hon. member that this is a very difficult matter. There is no question that we must be vigilant with respect to 
whether or not public servants (it would be small in number under any circumstances, but that makes it no less 
important), under some circumstances, in a variety of ways, take advantage of their position. 
 
We must be vigilant and provide adequate supervision and certainly Mr. Nobes is under different supervision. I 
would say it is clearly one of the problems which arose here. One of the reasons there is a difference is that the 
supervisor in this case, over Mr. Nobes, was Mr. Tuck. Therefore, the whole process of supervision broke down, 
regrettably but necessarily, because of the nature of the case. 
 
We certainly maintain, through our supervisors and management staff, as close a monitoring of the activities of 
staff in the department as is possible, in order to ensure that no one is contravening the basic requirements of the 
act and the regulations, and that no one is putting himself into a conflict of interest situation. 
 
We also try to maintain (and the methods, you will know as well as I do, are not that easy) and ensure that there is 
no other way that employees are gaining. Obviously, there would be ways other than having a construction firm. 
That would be only one way. So we try to maintain a close watch over that. One of the ways we do that is that we 
have a very stringent public service act, and a very stringent set of regulations. We remind employees of that act 
and those regulations. 
 
We also have another check, the Criminal Code, which prevents people from undertaking gain in association with 
their work through illegal means. When evidence appears, the RCMP undertake investigations. The one way we 
try to maintain as much control over this as possible is, when evidence of any kind appears, to take it immediately 
to the RCMP, so there can be complete and full investigation of all of the facts relating to the case. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — You know, Mr. Minister, regrettably the two employees we have been talking about, for 
as long as we have, are not worth such a long debate. 
 
Very clearly, the provisions you have in the public service are not sufficient. They have to be discussed at another 
meeting, perhaps when the Premier's estimates come up. Obviously, we need stronger conflict of interest 
provisions for the public service at the department head and deputy minister level. In light of this case, I think 
that's very clear. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you know, I sort of like you and your family. Regrettably, as you've been squirming the last 
couple of nights, most of your colleagues over there have been enjoying it. These two people are not worth your 
squirming. The only reason they're not operating and this scam isn't going on is that we received an anonymous tip 
and started checking down at the companies. The director of companies tipped off your office, and you moved 
before we could bring it up in the next question period. Without that anonymous tip which we received, these 
people would still be going. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think you know the comments of the member for Indian Head-Wolseley are valid — that that 
sequence of events very well did happen. You made the comment as we started out tonight . . . Then you did a 
total flip-flop, because first, you said that 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1409 

you really didn't have any record of what the local municipalities had done with your grants — you really didn't 
know. But then a little bit further on, well, yes, you did know. You didn't keep precise records but, yes, your 
officials knew everything. 
 
Mr. Minister, you've been let down by your departmental people. I don't know why you're standing here defending 
two people who aren't worth defending. They ran a scam; you caught them. I don't know why you didn't deal with 
the other one. Maybe we'll never know, and I don't hang that part on you. I hang that on your departmental people 
who, respectfully, were our positions, reversed, would have some severe answering to do to me. I don't know why 
you don't do that. Maybe you're doing it internally; I hope you are. These two people aren't worth the time that 
we've spent on them, and I don't understand why you don't hang them out to dry. They're not worth one squirm on 
your part. That's a tough thing to defend. I don't know why you're doing it. If your predecessor fouled up, all right, 
but your departmental people have let you down. These people have been operating at least as far back as 1976. 
You made the comment — and I suggest you made it off the cuff — that they had reached no financial gain. Mr. 
Minister, I suggest you really don't know that. In fact, you probably know that they have. Otherwise, I think Mr. 
Tuck would still be there. I think you know that that isn't accurate, and I think it was an off-the-cuff remark on 
your part. 
 
Mr. Minister, we're going to leave this because we want to move on, but I sincerely hope that there is a heavy 
shake-up coming in your department, because they deserve it. Your people have let you down, and were our 
positions reversed, had I been let down the way you've been let down, there'd be hell to pay all day today. I 
sincerely hope that you're going to be moving in this regard tomorrow, particularly in the area where nothing has 
been done. That's the biggest indictment; you've got to wear the belt on that one. I think we're going to move on to 
another area. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I'd like to go back to the Vichert report that we were discussing last night, and 
the rather sweeping statement that he makes in this report about the need to protect the government's interests in 
film making, books and records and the necessity for the Crown corporation for culture. I think, last night as we 
were wrapping up, in my remarks I said that we in Saskatchewan are proud of the culture that we have had, and 
do have — not through any government guidance or anything of this nature — but just because of the interest and 
the sheer hard work of Saskatchewan people. This culture spills into Manitoba and Alberta and there's a western 
flavour to it. I suppose it spills somewhat into North Dakota, and so on. We're pointing this out. We're all proud 
that this has happened and that it has come to this stage without any type of Crown corporation and without any 
great degree of government guidance. 
 
I am of the opinion that perhaps this spontaneous growth, coming from concerned individuals, is really what 
culture is. I don't think you can really mould, shape, direct and guide a culture that is really a true culture. You can 
do that if you want to indoctrinate. That's possible. And there are states in the world where this happens. But I 
don't think you or I — and I know I for sure — want to see that happen in this province of Saskatchewan. I think 
you must be proud of this broken-funded approach that has brought together what Saskatchewan means to me, 
and the Attorney General. I think we have done quite well. As I said last night, I take great insult at this report 
when the author says that somehow we are not in the mainstream. I don't feel that at all. I don't feel isolated from 
the rest of Canada, or from other parts of the North American continent. I think that we here, with our sports 
teams, our Saskatchewan Roughriders, and things of this nature, are part and parcel of this whole mosaic. I think 
everybody in this country and in this province is very proud of that, and want to see that type of thing 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1410 

continue. 
 
So, therefore, I wonder at some of the recommendations in this report. I have the suspicion, Mr. Minister, that 
there is more than just guidance in some of the recommendations that Vichert has come forth with in his report. 
When he starts talking about safeguarding the government's interests. I wonder what interests you are trying to 
safeguard. He talks about the Department of Education producing textbooks with Saskatchewan content through 
contracting with local writers and publishers. Now, I want to see Saskatchewan writers and publishers have their 
chance to develop in this whole Saskatchewan picture, but I think you must agree that when the Department of 
Education would be selecting certain writers and publishers a definite slant could be quite possible. I don't think 
that is the kind of culture I want to see. I want to see a fellow out in North Battleford, or down in Carievale, or 
wherever, write a play or write a book which attracts the interest of people. And because of that, it becomes part 
and parcel of things. I don't think it should be the Department of Education that picks certain writers and certain 
producers. I think that could be a danger. That isn't development of spontaneous culture. That could lead to 
indoctrination. 
 
The same thing with films, Mr. Minister. On page 27, he suggests this: 
 

There should be specified a certain level of Saskatchewan content in theatres. We suggest that this regulation 
require a Saskatchewan-produced short feature to be shown, at a minimum, with every third feature film 

 
Now, I don't know what he has in mind there. But as I pointed out last night, there are some short feature films in 
the theatres of Saskatchewan right now which are just advertisements of the Crown corporations of this province. 
They are Saskatchewan features. I don't know if they are produced here. I would doubt that they are. But they are 
supposed to be Saskatchewan features. If that is what he is talking about as Saskatchewan content, pushing an 
ideology through films and records, then I don't think that is in any way, shape, or form the development of 
culture. That is what I see in this report, Mr. Minister. We could go on. 
 
I will finish up because some of my colleagues want to get in on this discussion of the report. I have had 
considerable say. I would sum up with this, Mr. Minister. I know you said it is out there for discussion. You are 
having meetings. I think you have to agree with some of the things we have raised; this really is a poor assessment 
of what Saskatchewan culture is, or what Saskatchewan culture could be. I would urge you, Mr. Minister, not to 
pay too much attention to some of the recommendations which Vichert has come forward with in this report, 
because I think he hasn't really tested the waters. I think he hasn't really assessed, grasped or felt the 
Saskatchewan situation. 
 
I will just say in closing that I think there are a lot of things in here, that if implemented, would not be conducive 
to building a true Saskatchewan culture. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, first of all, I would like to comment on the initial remarks of 
the hon. member with respect to the role that individual artists, groups and organizations within our cultural 
milieu play in the cultural, artistic development of the province. I couldn't agree more with the hon. member that it 
is critically important to recognize that creativity starts with the individual and the community. You can't box that 
into any particular philosophical direction or any philosophy, whether it be of art, politics or society. That would 
be (I agree with the hon. member) out of step and inconsistent completely with the pluralistic kind of society that 
we have, and the broadly pluralistic kind of creativity in our society. 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1411 

But the emphasis, both in this report (I would suggest to the hon. member) and certainly of the Government of 
Saskatchewan, has been and will continue to be supportive. There is no question about that if one attended the 
Culture Talks and one listened to the representations and submissions made by individual artists, cultural 
organizations and art groups. There is no question that they are of the view that it is possible, desirable and 
necessary for the government to provide some support if we are to have the fullest possible development of the 
potential we have in culture and art in this province, the fullest possible access to the very best that Saskatchewan, 
Canada and the world has to offer. There's no doubt that that cannot happen without some support from 
government. 
 
What this report is addressing and what we, as a government, have been addressing and intend to address is: what 
is the best way, not to control that development, but to support that development, to give it support so that the full 
creative potential of all individuals and groups in the cultural and artistic fields can be realized? That's what it's all 
about. 
 
We do not in any way suggest what the hon. member is implying (I think) with respect to the objective. I might 
say that he attempts to use a specific suggestion, which I neither accept nor reject, that the Department of 
Education might, for purposes of developing curriculum materials, textbooks and support materials, undertake to 
develop through contracts, materials made, written and created in Saskatchewan. I suggest to the hon. member 
that it is perfectly possible to have good Saskatchewan history material and studies material developed here in 
Saskatchewan through a route whereby the Department of Education makes provision for the development of 
those materials. I don't know really what alternative the hon. member has to offer in that regard. I know that it is a 
widely held view (and it's held by members of his party and my party and members of neither party) that we do 
need more Saskatchewan-oriented material in our school system. There's no question that it is needed. And the 
suggestion is we should provide support in order to get that done, tying it not to some sort of government aim, but 
toward the needs of the curriculum. 
 
With respect to film, I think we do have a clear indication with the pattern of SaskMedia here and the National 
Film Board in Ottawa, that it's possible to have these kinds of supportive structures. I challenge the hon. member 
to look at the productions of SaskMedia and tell me that the fears he is talking about are justified, looking at the 
past, at least as an indicator of the future. I don't believe that the fears you express are in any way justified in 
relation to the kind of productions SaskMedia has been able to do here in Saskatchewan. And I think they have 
done a darn good job, in a little province with limited resources, to get into that kind of production, and I don't 
think we'd have production without that approach. 
 
I would close by saying that I think the hon. member's comments reflect a certain misunderstanding also about the 
process. The process here was to set up this cultural policy secretariat to go out to talk to individuals, groups and 
organizations, and through its research and creative thought, develop some ideas and possibilities and 
recommendations that we could consider. We have made this report publicly available and we have given the 
opportunity through the Culture Talks for free and open dialogue, criticism and discussion on the basis of this 
report and of other thoughts and ideas that individuals and groups have. That process is clearly not one of control. 
That is one of participation, openness and dialogue. Out of that, we hope to come up with what is our ultimate 
responsibility as a government — a statement of some policies and 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1412 

programs that will provide the kind of support we have identified as being needed through that participatory 
process. I would defend that process just as strongly as I would defend any process going. Whether or not you like 
some recommendations in there, the purpose is to engage in debate and discussion on the basis of some of the 
ideas being advanced and to develop additional creative ideas or to shoot down some of these ideas, in order to 
know what people think. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, if it's really participatory, nobody on this side of the House will argue against it, 
but your track record indicates that that is just a sham. Those are idle words, and I will give, as an example, the de 
Vlieger report on the ward system for the schools in urban Saskatchewan. You went out and talked to the trustees 
and they said to a man, "We don't want it," and here you're going to bring in legislation to ram it down their 
throats . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I just get a little worked up when I hear this talk about participation which is just idle words 
— and we won't get into another department. I wonder how much the participation really counts when the 
blueprint is set, when the die is cast and when the government is hell-bent on introducing that program. I think 
sometimes these reports are written as a justification. This is something to go out and talk to the folks about, but 
you don't pay a heck of a lot of attention to what they say. You go ahead and do what you want to do in the first 
place. That's what I fear. That's why I object to some of the recommendations because I honestly think, regardless 
of what the people out there say, some of these things are going to be implemented. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the lesson the hon. member seems to be giving me — and I 
believe it is a lesson — is that in the future I should simply decide what I am going to do and do it and not provide 
an opportunity for discussion. I don't agree with the hon. member and I do not intend to do business that way, 
regardless of what position these Tories adopt about that kind of process. I believe that even though people will 
disagree with what is found in reports, they are a very important way to find out what people want, think and 
believe should happen. There will always be divisions of opinion on what should be done; I agree with that. I 
think that one way you find out the differences of opinion and of wishes and the strength of these is to be open 
and to provide some thoughts and ideas. These need not be ones you're absolutely committed to, but you put them 
forward in advance to provide people with an opportunity to have input into that process and to express their 
views. You don't try to muzzle them. Then at some stage, after full dialogue, you make decisions, and I am 
prepared to make decisions. 
 
I would challenge the hon. member to show me any Tory government in Canada, whether it relates to cultural 
policy or to education, which is prepared to put forward studies as opportunities for people to make submissions 
and to discuss and debate the propositions as much as we are doing in these areas. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I know you have just come to the education scene, but if you would look into 
Ontario's education and the report that was done on "Living and Learning," it is the most exhaustive report into 
the future of public education that has been done in this country. Now I know you were at DNS (Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan) when this took place, but I was in the educational field and if you haven't seen the report 
I'd be only too glad to provide you with a copy of it. So don't 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1413 

stand up and say that Tory governments don't look into situations pertaining to education, because Ontario put 
forth a study which would make anything we have done to date look like kindergarten work. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Mr. Chairman, I am just going to get into this debate briefly. It has been a disappointing 
debate so far because it really hasn't been a debate on cultural policy. We haven't had a single proposal from the 
members opposite on what cultural policy in this province should be. There has been a few references made to 
recreation. There have been no references at all from members opposite on what the framework for a new cultural 
policy in Saskatchewan ought to be. 
 
The critic for cultural policy opposite, and the members for cultural policy opposite, obviously haven't attended a 
single one of the cultural policy hearings which have been taking place around the province. If they have, they 
haven't shown any evidence of it in the debate this evening. I have had the privilege and the pleasure of listening 
to some 40 briefs at the cultural policy hearings in Saskatoon. I want to tell members opposite, and members of 
the House, that the opportunity for input into cultural policy was appreciated, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan was praised on numerous occasions for holding these hearings. I just want to tell members of the 
House, the members opposite, and the minister, some of the important things which I think came out of those 
hearings, and raise with him a few things which I hope the Department of Culture and Youth will look at seriously 
in the next year. 
 
One of the things which came out of the hearings, and which is also referred to briefly in the Vichert report, is the 
fact that we need, in each one of the recreational districts, cultural animators if you like, or consultants, who can 
work in conjunction with local groups in providing support to expand and develop cultural activities. 
 
One of the things I heard my constituents saying at those cultural policy hearings was that there is a need for the 
government to look seriously at developing and promoting arts councils in conjunction with each one of the 
recreation boards now operating around the province. At those hearings, a desire for an increased emphasis by the 
Government of Saskatchewan on multicultural activities and multiculturalism in our province was expressed. 
 
I also heard expressions of concern indicating that our government ought to give a good deal of attention, not just 
to the professional arts groups which are operating now in the province, but also to a lot of the voluntary bodies 
which are operating around Saskatchewan. Whether it be museum boards or volunteer theatre groups, we should 
see these as being just as important as the professional groups which are operating within our province. 
 
I heard requests for financing which I thought were very worth-while suggestions, such as suggestions for tax 
incentives for patrons of culture in Saskatchewan, and tax shelters for artists who are living and working in 
Saskatchewan. The Crown corporations of this province ought to be giving more attention to making donations to 
the arts, and we should in fact establish a preferential purchase policy with respect to buying crafts and art for 
donations, for protocol through the Government of Saskatchewan, or gifts that the Government of Saskatchewan 
might make to those visiting the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member for Rosthern makes the point that 
this is already done to some extent. Of course, it is. But a 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1414 

great deal more could be done, not just through the protocol office but through the Crown corporations that are 
successfully operating in the province of Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I don't want to go into a lot of detail on the many excellent suggestions that came out at the 
Saskatoon cultural policy hearings. But I do, Mr. Chairman, want to touch on a couple of areas that are of 
particular concern to me. One is in the area of museums policy. And one of the things that I want to urge the 
minister to look seriously at in the coming year is providing funds to the museums that we have around the 
province of Saskatchewan for operating and expanding their museum programs. Most of the museums in the 
province at the present time don't receive operating grants. And I think, Mr. Chairman, that we need to look 
seriously at providing such operating grants to local museums. 
 
We should provide those grants, Mr. Chairman, on the understanding that a number of conditions are met. The 
first condition should be that the local museums be required to ensure that their entire collection is 
publicly-owned, and they should be required to undertake a program of upgrading the quality of their museum 
collections. In addition, Mr. Chairman, I think that the province of Saskatchewan needs to provide professional 
expertise to the local museums to make sure that quality standards with respect to the collections are maintained 
and adhered to — in many cases the collections need to be upgraded in quality very significantly. 
 
We also need a laboratory in Saskatchewan, I believe, for the preservation of books and documents, many of 
which are now rotting away or are in very, very poor condition. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The archives building. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — No, the hon. member opposite says that this will come with the archives building, and he's 
incorrect. It will not necessarily come with the archives building. I want to tell the member opposite that he is 
right, though, in the sense that it would be very worth-while if it did come in conjunction with the archives 
building. I tell the members opposite that if they look seriously at the waiting lists for binding of books and 
preservation of books across this country, they'll see that the waiting lists are very long. And we need to look 
seriously, in conjunction with the federal government, at providing facilities that would reduce those waiting lists 
significantly. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think that's a priority for the Government of Saskatchewan and a priority for any new cultural 
policy that we would establish. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Chairman, that I think that the Government of Saskatchewan needs to do more to 
encourage independent book stores to operate and locate within the province. Right now, I know that within the 
city of Saskatoon we really have only two independent book stores left. All the rest are operated by chains, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Multinationals. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — No, they're not necessarily multinationals as the member opposite suggests. But they're 
nevertheless chains. The independent book store is rapidly fading and that's a concern I have, a concern expressed 
very articulately at the cultural policy hearings in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I also want to comment on some concerns I have with respect to 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1415 

government policy in the area of heritage preservation of architectural quality in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
want to urge the minister to provide more assistance in the future to ensure that heritage buildings in the province 
of Saskatchewan are preserved. 
 
In the past year we have seen heritage legislation, and I am delighted it has now been implemented. In addition to 
that legislation, we need the funding to make it operative. We have seen some positions allocated with that in 
mind in this year's budget. But what I believe is required, Mr. Chairman, is direct funding to assist owners of 
buildings who wish to preserve their buildings. Right now, I believe, financial assistance is limited to about 
$50,000, which is very low. In addition to that, financial assistance is needed to assist in integrating new 
developments and buildings into existing heritage buildings, so that the most important aspects of those heritage 
sites can be preserved. 
 
I am also concerned about the many unattractive buildings that I see being constructed in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I want to urge the minister to establish awards for architectural excellence in our province. I also 
urge him to establish awards for the restoration of buildings in the province and to try to set up some incentives 
for people in the construction industry and owners of buildings to achieve a higher level of architectural quality 
than is presently the case. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think we also need to look more critically at whether we should always be building new office 
spaces or new buildings instead of creatively using the old buildings we have. I think a concrete example of that is 
the sanatorium in Saskatchewan. There has been some talk that that building may well be torn down when the 
new 238 bed chronic care facility (which I am pleased the Minister of Health recently announced) is built. I would 
hope that we could look at preserving a building of that nature and using it for some other purpose. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I also want to raise some concerns about the library system in the province. I think that members 
opposite will have to acknowledge that we in Saskatchewan have the best regional library system in Canada. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. I hesitate to interrupt the hon. member as I have others, but there is an item 
titled Provincial Library in the estimates, and you will have an opportunity to go into that in more detail at that 
time. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm sorry. I thought it did come under culture and youth estimates 
and I appreciate your drawing that to my attention. 
 
I just want to close then, Mr. Chairman, by making a couple of comments directly with respect to policies for 
promoting the work of artists in the province of Saskatchewan. I want to urge the Government of Saskatchewan to 
look at the arts, and the work of artists and musicians, as a very central part of our society here in the province. I 
am pleased with the recommendations that art, literature, music and dance consultants should be established in the 
local regions. I think that is a worth-while recommendation in the Vichert report and I hope it is implemented. 
 
I hope the Government of Saskatchewan will give increasing support to travelling art exhibits and travelling music 
concerts in the province. These are key opportunities, Mr. Chairman, for providing employment to local artists 
and musicians, and they are also a key vehicle for enhancing our cultural life in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
hope that we will also look seriously at the proposal in the Vichert report for establishing artists- 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1416 

in-residence for our elementary and secondary schools because that would be a very worth-while 
recommendation. 
 
A lot of the art galleries, Mr. Chairman, at the cultural policy hearings I attended, emphasized to the Government 
of Saskatchewan the need for more operating funds if they are to work successfully. I hope that we might look 
seriously at that. 
 
And finally, I want to particularly draw the attention of the minister to the problem that's arising in Saskatoon 
right now with respect to the cancellation of the folklorist position at the University of Saskatchewan. This is 
something a good number of people in Saskatoon are concerned about. This is the only folklorist position in the 
province right now and I believe that it's important that we have a provincial folklorist to act as a consultant to our 
museums, to act as a consultant to the Government of Saskatchewan, and to teach at the university and carry out 
work in collecting Saskatchewan traditions that would otherwise go unrecorded. Clearly, this position could either 
continue to be attached to the University of Saskatchewan or it could be attached to the archives. But it is an 
important position to maintain in the province of Saskatchewan and I would hope that the minister, in the coming 
year, could look seriously at working to ensure that that position is retained within our province. 
 
I think that these are just a few examples of the concerns that people, at least in urban centres in Saskatchewan, 
are expressing with respect to cultural policy. They are the kind of suggestions we haven't heard from members 
opposite, Mr. Chairman, and that's why I felt I should step into the debate. Thank you. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I want to indicate to the hon. member that I appreciate the very, 
very extensive and quite exhaustive set of suggestions he has made with respect to areas that we might look at as 
we review and develop new policies with respect to culture and the arts in the province. I am not going to respond 
to all comments the hon. member made. I will try to take an opportunity on another occasion to talk in more detail 
about some of them, but I do want to mention a few of them. 
 
I might say with respect to the question of museums policy, that I am pleased to tell the hon. member that I agree 
that our small museums around the province, in particular, are in need of a great deal of additional assistance and 
help. The hon. member will note (perhaps it is not clearly illustrated in the subvote structure) that in the estimates 
this year we have increased very substantially the financial assistance that will be available to museums in the 
province. The small museums previously had a total of roughly $60,000 in grants; this year the grant money 
available for that program will be over $300,000, which is a very, very substantial increase and will go quite a 
considerable way toward meeting the needs of the small museums. In addition to that, we will be providing for a 
museum advisory service so that those museums can have professional advice with respect to the managing of 
their collections, and the developing of their collections, and the management and operation of their museums. 
 
We are currently involved in discussions with the Saskatchewan Museums Association to work out the exact 
application of this very extensive new program of funding and of assistance in terms of museum services. I agree 
with the hon. member that in the course of developing that funding, it will be necessary to have a good program 
behind it that does establish certain guidelines with respect to the operations and collections of those museums. 
We are providing an opportunity for a full consultation by the museums association, thus for the operators of the 
museums, in order to establish the standards and conditions that should apply, including the whole question of 
collection 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1417 

policy. 
 
I also agree with the hon. member with respect to his comments about the necessity for services that can help and 
assist with the maintenance and protection and preservation of books and documents. I think your suggestion is a 
good one, and it is one that I must confess I had not looked at as a possible extension service to the new archives 
building, but it is something we could look at. This is to say, perhaps the preservations services of the new 
archives facility could be extended and I will investigate that — in order to serve the smaller museums and smaller 
collections around the province. 
 
I was listening to CBC radio this morning. I heard a gentleman, who's concerned with archaeological sites, 
indicate that the Saskatchewan legislation is the most progressive in Canada, and I thought that was an interesting 
comment. 
 
With respect to the heritage site presentation question, we have this year, as a follow-up to our legislation last 
year, doubled our funds in terms of assistance for the preservation and maintenance of the municipally and 
provincially designed heritage buildings and sites, and we will be utilizing those funds to try to assist in the 
direction that you mentioned. 
 
In addition to that, we are bringing in to play the various sections of The Heritage Properties Act, which will not 
only be making a major contribution in terms of preserving important heritage sites such as buildings, but also in 
terms of archaeological and other sites. I note that rural areas are taking advantage of this legislation in a very 
extensive way. 
 
Well, I won't comment on the other items. You did raise a number of important points, and I will try to discuss 
them with you later. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Chairman, now that the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland has let us know where 
John Richards is, we can get on with culture and youth estimates, I guess. I listened very carefully to the member 
for Saskatoon-Sutherland, and he mentioned that all the artifacts in the museums throughout the province should 
be publicly owned. Is it not true, Mr. Minister, that many of the articles in the museums through the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, I am asking you. Are you not the Minister of Culture and Youth? Is it not true, Mr. Minister, 
that many of the artifacts in the museums throughout the province are indeed on loan to the museums at this time, 
and not publicly owned? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I'm not sure what the hon. member is referring to. I think it is true that there 
certainly are collections which are on loan to museums around the province, and I don't disagree with this point. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Do you agree that they should be all publicly owned, as the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland suggested? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I'm not sure exactly what the hon. member for Saskatoon-Sutherland was 
suggesting. I think, from my own experience, it will likely be necessary for certain items to be on loan. I certainly 
believe that it is important to try to place as many important historical and heritage artifacts as possible into the 
public domain, and that is an emphasis of our heritage property legislation. I would expect that the largest part of 
our heritage properties, and the largest part of our important provincial historical items and artifacts will be in the 
public domain, and I think that that is important. I don't disagree with the hon. member that museums can provide 
an 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1418 

opportunity for certain loan materials to be placed in the museums. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Well, I don't think you totally answered my question, Mr. Minister. The member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland did say that all the artifacts in the museums, if they are going to be funded with government 
money, which is the taxpayer's dollar, should be publicly owned. Do you agree or disagree with that? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I again can only answer the question by saying that I don't believe that it is 
necessary that all contents of all museums be publicly owned, but I certainly believe that the vast majority of what 
is held in museums should consist of items that are of significant historical or heritage importance. Probably the 
most effective way of maintaining those, and preserving them in the long-term future, is to attempt to get as much 
of that into the public domain as possible. Therefore, I certainly agree with the hon. member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland that that is a worthy objective to pursue with respect to the maintenance and preservation of 
our historical artifacts and documents, and our important heritage items. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Chairman, I want very briefly to reply to the Minister of Education and his comments. 
I want to allude very briefly, as well, to the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland. His comments were very directly 
and pointedly aimed at the opposition in saying that we haven't proposed any constructive alternatives. 
 
The Minister of Education has alluded to the same thing — that we, on this side of the House, have not proposed 
anything constructive. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, what we are discussing right now, in these estimates for culture and youth, is, of course, this 
report — the cultural secretariat report. It was put together by Mr. Gordon Vichert, director of the cultural policy 
secretariat. 
 
I have a suggestion which I feel is very constructive, and I would appreciate, Mr. Chairman, if the minister would 
pay attention to this, because I'm not going to be on my feet for any more than three minutes. My constructive 
suggestion to you is that you disregard, at this time, this report. This man from Ontario doesn't know any more 
about the culture of Saskatchewan than to indicate that it's not unusual to find trappers in northern Saskatchewan 
carrying portable colour televisions — that is just one line in many. We have marked this book full of yellow to 
indicate the things we adamantly disagree with. The book is almost all yellow now! The points that are marked 
yellow are about as absurd as northern trappers carrying colour televisions around. 
 
Now, my suggestion is a very constructive suggestion to you, Mr. Minister of Education. I challenge you, as the 
Minister of Education, to introduce from that side of the House, (I don't really care who introduces it) a motion to 
be debated on private members' day, seconded by a member of the opposition, to discuss in this Assembly the 
merits (pros and cons, if you like) of this report. When that debate is concluded, Mr. Minister, we might have a 
report that is reasonable. And, let that report be the one that the people of Saskatchewan discuss at the various 
hearings that are already slated throughout the province. 
 
Now, there is the challenge. There are two constructive suggestions. First of all, either you scrap the thing right 
now, given the fact that it's almost all yellow, or, secondly, you introduce a motion from that side of the House. 
We'll second it, gladly. We'll have a full debate on it, if you like, on private members' day, and let the outcome of 
that be the property of discussion of the people of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1419 

HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in principle I don't adopt the kind of approach the hon. 
member puts forth. When you get a lot of recommendations (not all of which I agree with, and not all of which 
any individual is going to agree with), for example, that local museums receive more support (I don't have to go 
on and list them all), he says, "Scrap them all; throw them away." Well, I say to the hon. member that I simply 
don't think that's the way to work. 
 
I think it is quite legitimate to take the important suggestions and ideas that are contained in this report and debate 
and discuss them rationally and intelligently. I don't think there is anything the matter with that at all. So, I stand 
behind the process of putting forward a report with suggestions and proposals. 
 
I would say that, based on the kind of comments I have heard in a quite prolonged debate on this discussion now, 
I would fear for the hon. member's participation in the debate on a resolution of the sort that he suggests, but I 
certainly would be more than happy to spend some time on private members' day debating a resolution related to 
cultural policy. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, I presume the Department of Culture and Youth is responsible for the 
lotteries that take place in this province, is that correct? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, as Minister of Culture and Youth, I am responsible for The 
Interprovincial Lotteries Act, which relates only to the Interprovincial Lottery Corporation and the Western 
Canada Lottery Foundation. The Department of Consumer Affairs (I believe I'm correct) is responsible for 
licensing individual lotteries in the province. But with respect to the major interprovincial lotteries, that is correct, 
I am the minister responsible. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I assume we're talking about Winsday, the Provincial, and Super Lotto as it's now called. 
Mr. Minister, that particular group of lotteries is run by a group which is better known as SaskSport. And my 
understanding is that SaskSport decides who gets the funds with a basic principle such as 40 per cent to the 
culture, 50 per cent to sport and 10 per cent to recreation. Are those figures correct? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — If you gave the figures of 50 per cent to sport, 40 per cent to culture and 10 per 
cent to recreation, those are correct. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I believe that it was the sporting people who originally got involved with this 
Interprovincial Lottery Corporation in order to get the revenue to assist them in their endeavours through grants 
within the provinces. The culture people then became involved and of course the recreation people. Am I correct 
in those assumptions? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the management of the lotteries, SaskSport was 
designated by the Minister of Culture and Youth to be the agency responsible for the management and sale of the 
lotteries in Saskatchewan, and for the distribution of the revenue generated by the lotteries. And the designation of 
the split was made at the time of establishing SaskSport as the responsible body, and that division of the revenues 
continues with my agreement to the present time. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you make reference to your agreement; that's my concern. Page 50 of this 
report indicates that the authority for this money be taken 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1420 

away from SaskSport and placed under the Department of Culture and Youth. Let's make sure we're on the same 
wave length before I go further. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure exactly what the hon. member was driving at as a 
question. Certainly the report makes reference to the possibility of a certain part of the lotteries revenue being 
transferred to another agency in terms of allocation to individuals — a certain part of the lotteries money. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, if you check this carefully enough, I think it indicates the whole 100 per cent, 
not just the 40 per cent that goes to culture now. It suggests that be transferred to the arts board, and so forth, and 
to the Department of Culture and Youth, rather than leaving it in SaskSport, which is a group appointed by the 
organizations and composed of volunteer people who are very capable and look out for the interests of all the 
associations in the province of Saskatchewan — some professional and some not. This gentleman says in his 
study that they are not competent people. I totally disagree with that portion of the report. And I want to know if 
you agree with that report, when he suggests that it should be taken out of their hands? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, first of all, I should say to the hon. member that if he will read page 49, the 
reference there under SaskSport Trust is, as I indicated, part of the lottery funds, and particularly, the culture and 
arts division of SaskSport, which is not the whole 100 per cent, as the hon. member was indicating. I have neither 
adopted nor rejected this suggestion. I have met with the executive committee of SaskSport. We have discussed 
this item thoroughly. They have not, from my recollection of the discussions, judged it to mean what the hon. 
member apparently attempts to suggest it means, that is, that their division is not competent to allocate these 
moneys. They have judged it to mean what I think it does mean, and that is that there is perhaps something to be 
gained (I don't necessarily say I agree with this at the moment) by integrating these funds into a single allocating 
body. That is not a judgment with respect to competence. It is only suggesting that there might be something 
gained in terms of an allocations policy if they're integrated into one particular body. 
 
I don't necessarily agree that that is true. And there certainly are alternatives within that that could be looked at in 
terms of bringing about the most effective co-ordination of decision making with respect to allocations of funds. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you referred to the meeting you had in the last month — it was actually not 
that long ago — with the board of SaskSport. Mr. Minister, I'm going to ask if you will guarantee, as you did at 
that meeting the executive of SaskSport that in no way will you take away the rights SaskSport presently has in 
respect to funding and how it is distributed? That guarantee was given by you at that meeting. Will you now put it 
on the record of this House? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I don't know if the hon. member was behind the wall or something. 
He seems to indicate that he was a participant in that meeting and heard guarantees made. I didn't, to my 
recollection, make a guarantee. I gave SaskSport an assurance that I would listen carefully to the case they made. I 
certainly indicated to them that certain important parts of their case were very convincing, but I have not adopted a 
position on this item and I did not indicate to the members of SaskSport, that I can recall, that I had adopted a 
position. 
 
The hon. member attempts to bring forward some suggestion of what was decided at that meeting or what the 
discussion related to at that meeting. I think it was a very good 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1421 

meeting. I'm sorry that the hon. member feels that it is in any way productive to take what he has apparently heard, 
either through listening at the keyhole or through talking to someone who attended the meeting, and to try to 
manipulate it and warp it in such a way as to cause some misinterpretation. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Minister, you can make all the fancy statements you want and twist words all you 
want. Let's get down to the basic fact. SaskSport people are volunteers in most cases, other than the people they 
hire. They represent every organization that goes out and raises money. They get the funds back on the joint 
agreement between Manitoba and those that are participating in the lotteries. They, without political interference, 
decide where that money will go — to those most deserving and those who bring the best program. The criteria of 
40, 50 and 10 is there and they live within it. They do a very capable job within it. Those people are there 
representing their organizations and up until now a minister has not interfered. Right here and now, will you give 
this House a guarantee that you will continue to leave that as it is? It has functioned so well, and done so well for 
the people of Saskatchewan. Will you keep your fingers off? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I am the first one to support SaskSport and to believe that 
SaskSport has done an excellent job. I would suggest to the hon. member that for that, SaskSport deserves the 
major part of the credit. For that, also, goes some credit to the Government of Saskatchewan for recognizing that 
SaskSport can and does play this kind of role, and for providing recognition of SaskSport as the responsible 
administrative body. So, I don't think the hon. member need suggest that, in any way, this government or this 
minister has any kind of axe to grind with respect to SaskSport. I think they do an excellent job and I support 
them fully. 
 
The process is not at a stage where I am prepared to give, as I have indicated to all groups with whom I've been 
discussing this cultural policy report, any guarantees that I will reject any particular aspect of this report. I have 
my personal opinions and thoughts on certain aspects, and I've reflected some of those thoughts in some of my 
discussions. But I am not, at this point, going to stand up and say, "I have made up my mind, so there's no point in 
you talking any further." I think it is important that all groups which are interested in each and every one of these 
recommendations have an opportunity to make their cases. I suspect there will be additional groups which will 
wish to make a case with respect to this item, and I'm prepared to listen to them. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I am looking for an assurance from you that something which has worked very successfully 
and done an excellent job in the past, that has a proven track record, will not be interfered with by this idiotic 
report. They are scared of having it politicized. 
 
Mr. Minister, I watch with some interest as occasionally I go to a function and I see a member of the government 
giving out a cheque on behalf of SaskSport. The first time I saw that, I was a little concerned that SaskSport was 
now being taken over by the political arm of the NDP. But fortunately I was able to find out after that SaskSport 
and youth and culture were giving matching grants. They were both giving a grant and that's why the member was 
there giving it, saving two people coming to the meeting — he did it for both. I have no argument with that. My 
concern is that your department should not be using that as a political tool; it should be left in the hands of the 
volunteers who have done an excellent job. I want you to state that as you did in a meeting that you had with the 
executive of SaskSport. But you don't seem to want to put on the public record what you seem to say behind 
closed doors. 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1422 

HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member makes an allegation, which, I think, has no 
support. The only case that I can possibly think of (I know of no case personally), where any member of the 
government or any member of the legislature would be involved in presenting a SaskSport cheque, would be 
where SaskSport extend an invitation. We would certainly be most pleased to accept an invitation from SaskSport 
because we appreciate the kind of relationship we have. I say to the hon. member that the implication of his 
allegation is false. The track record shows that there is no intention to politically interfere in SaskSport's 
operations. I can assure the hon. member that we have no intention of politically interfering in any operations of 
SaskSport. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, I have a few words I want to say to the minister. I'm going to say them in 
words as short as I possibly can. In this whole set-up here, I smell a rat. I don't know whether the rat's the minister 
or not, but I smell it and I think what you've got in hand . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Sit there and laugh, you 
turkeys, you're not going to laugh when I get through with you. 
 
You have one thing in mind, Mr. Minister, and that is to form a Crown corporation in youth and culture. You're 
going to put an end to SaskSport. I want to get it from you tonight, instead of the political posturing you gave to 
this gentleman beside me here. You got up to give all the answers but you just politically postured and gave none. 
I want it on the record, tonight, that you are going to promise to this House that if you form a Crown corporation, 
you will leave out SaskSport, the lotteries, bingo, and all games of chance. You won't do it. You're not man 
enough to stand up there and give this promise. 
 
You're not getting up yet, because I'm not through. Just sit down there for a minute. I read Hansard where they 
asked you why you're forming Crown corporations out of this youth and culture department. You're sending your 
hacks out to talk about forming a Crown corporation which the people in my area don't want. What you, Mr. 
Minister, have never got into that head of yours is what the critic for education tried to get you to answer (and he's 
been trying in this House for a long time): you never thought of listening to people. All you have to do is listen to 
the majority. 
 
You people go out in the country and you think that you're representing 48 per cent of the people in this province. 
Well, I'll tell you, you are representing 48 per cent of the popular vote, but two-thirds of them are in the urban 
centres. The other 52 per cent are represented by us, the opposition. Two-thirds of them are out in the country. 
You are going out there and trying to sell your Crown corporations to them, and they are not going to sell. 
 
Tell me why, Mr. Minister, I'm getting letters now saying that when they ask your people, "Are you going to put a 
Crown corporation in or not?" you will not answer yes or no? Will you stand up here tonight and say that youth 
and culture is going to be made into a Crown corporation? Will you stand up here and answer these questions 
exactly the way I'm going to put them to you once again? Are you going to stand up here and say that there is 
going to be a Crown corporation formed, and when? 
 
You're going to keep your hands out of SaskSport. Don't interfere with the horse racing which is already in 
agriculture. That will soon be in your department, too. You'll take that over. I wouldn't even be surprised if the 
lotteries which you're involved in are hooked up in the underworld now. I don't trust the underground. I don't trust 
you guys at all. It's coming. With the things you've pulled off, you could be hooked up with a 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1423 

secret line right through to Vegas now, for all I know. 
 
Give me your promise now, I repeat, that there will be no lotteries, Saskatchewan lottery, SaskSport, games of 
chance, horse racing, bingo, and any of these things, in your Crown corporation, where there will be closed books 
and secrecy from the people of Saskatchewan. Answer those questions and no fiddling around. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, SaskSport will not be changed into a Crown corporation. SaskSport 
will continue to exist. I continue to support SaskSport and will always continue to support SaskSport, in answer to 
that question. 
 
In answer to the question of transferring culture and youth into a Crown corporation, the Department of Culture 
and Youth will not be transferred into a Crown corporation. 
 
Thirdly, with respect to lotteries, I have no intention of taking over all of those games of chance and horse racing 
and all those things which the hon. member is so interested in. They are not something I am going to put into a 
single Crown corporation. I would suggest to the hon. member that when he makes the allegation that the 
underworld are running the lotteries we now have, then he must be making the suggestion that the underworld is 
running SaskSport. I would suggest to the hon. member that there is no evidence of that. I don't believe that he can 
support that suggestion and if he has any evidence to support that suggestion, he should table that evidence. I just 
do not believe that there is any better operator of lotteries than SaskSport anywhere in Canada and I believe their 
record is 100 per cent clean. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, I say to the minister I guess I should have come in here last night; we must 
have wasted a lot of time because we finally have something on the record from you. I want to ask you one more 
question. I am satisfied now we have the promises on the record and I thank you for those promises. You said that 
you are not going to make a Crown corporation out of culture and youth. Does that mean that you are just going to 
set culture and youth aside? Like the Provincial Secretary's department, it'll just sit there and then you will put 
culture and youth into another organization and it will still be under a Crown corporation. Let's have one more 
straight answer that there will be no Crown corporation with all the working facilities of youth and culture under 
it. 
 
MR. HARDY: — I have a question to the minister, Mr. Chairman. I think one of the most important issues that 
the Department of Culture and Youth has or one of the most important aspects of the whole thing is sports. I grant 
you I may be a bit sports-minded, but sports touch every one of us, every family and everybody in different 
aspects, whether it be through curling, skating, baseball or whatever. I would like to ask a few questions regarding 
sports. What do you have in your program for 1981-82 for upgrading existing facilities which are run down and in 
need of repairs? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I certainly want to agree with the hon. member that sports and recreation plays, and 
has played, historically, a very important role in all of our communities in Saskatchewan, both for our young 
people and for our adults. We support very strongly the fine work being done by organizations, volunteers and 
groups, as well as through some of the work that the Department of Culture and Youth does. I agree with the hon. 
member that recreation and sport (he makes particular reference to sport) is extremely worthy of support and we 
support it wholeheartedly. I 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1424 

want to say to the hon. member that the culture and recreational facilities grant program continues this year and 
applications will continue to come in and funding will still be provided under that program. At the same time, we 
will be reviewing the possibility of introducing a new program (recognizing that program had a definite period of 
time to it) to recognize the continuing need for both upgrading facilities and for developing new facilities. 
 
MR. HARDY: — In regard to that youth and culture grant, a lot of the communities have used up their grants. I 
was just wondering what the minister had for the communities that have used up existing grants? I believe the 
grant was supposed to run out in March of this year; I think it has been extended. A lot of the communities, I 
know in my area, have used up all their grants and I wonder if the minister has anything planned for the summer 
of 1981 (when most of the rebuilding or whatever is done with the facilities grants is done) for the communities 
which have used up their existing grants and have nothing more to work with? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, I'll point out first of all that as I indicated (and I know that doesn't deal 
exactly with this point) for the remainder of this calendar year the communities that have not used their culture 
and recreational facilities grant will be able to draw upon that. That will bring that program to a conclusion. At the 
present time, the community capital fund is in operation, and communities are in a position to draw upon that. As 
I indicated to the hon. member, we are currently assessing the possibilities for a new program to replace it at some 
point; I can't make a commitment on that because we're waiting for the existing program to complete its term. 
We're looking at the possibilities of new programs that might come in to replace the existing program, but that is 
premature at the present time. We'll be looking at that now that the current program is drawing to a close. 
 
MR. HARDY: — In other words you're telling me, Mr. Minister, that as far as you know, there will be no new 
grants for this year. Is that what you're saying? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — That's correct. There is no new grant program this year. 
 
MR. HARDY: — With regard to these small museums, I believe you partially answered the question, but there 
are a lot of small museums in my area and their concern is the grant structure — what's available for them. Is there 
any new grant system or are there grants that are going to be available in small communities to better their 
standing, or better the artifacts they have? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Yes, I would point out to the hon. member that the estimates this year create a new 
$.25 million program for support for small museums that will provide financial support to those small museums 
all across the province, which I agree with the member are important to support. In addition to that, we will be 
providing a museums advisory program, so that the museums will have access to professional advisory services to 
help them with their planning and management administration. 
 
MR. HARDY: — What financial assistance will be given to each of these museums? Will it be a general funding 
per museum, or will it be per capita, or what? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — The exact formula for administration of the funds has not been finally concluded. 
We are holding discussions with the Saskatchewan Museums 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1425 

Association, which includes representations from the small museums, in order to determine what would be 
acceptable to them as a program for the distribution of these funds. Until we've completed those discussions, I 
would not be able to indicate to the hon. member the exact criteria that will be used for the distribution of those 
funds. 
 
MR. HARDY: — There is just one more question, and that has to do with safeguards within the sporting activity. 
I know that it's probably a tough thing to control, but I was just wondering if you have any training programs 
within your department toward safeguards — say, swimming, or whatever, that would be necessary, that would 
help especially in minor sports, where a lot of injuries have occurred. I know there have been some safeguards put 
in, but I was thinking mainly of swimming. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, I should indicate that we do place considerable importance on this 
subject, as part of our sports programs. We do provide funding to sports medicine organizations, such as St. John's 
Ambulance, which put on courses with respect to sports medicine and sports safety and that type of thing. The 
sports medicine association is funded by the Department of Continuing Education, as well as by the Department 
of Culture and Youth, which provides programs in this area. We certainly encourage the organizations involved in 
organizing sport activity to make this an important part of their undertakings and programs. A lost of sport activity 
is not organized directly out of the department, as you will recognize, but through sports organizations and at the 
local level through recreational boards and associations, and so on. 
 
In addition, I might point out to the hon. member that the physical movement program — the physical education 
program, if you like — in the Department of Education puts very strong emphasis on safety and prevention of 
injuries, and that sort of thing, in the whole area of sport and recreation. 
 
MR. HARDY: — I just have one more question for the minister, and that is in regard to sports facilities for the 
handicapped. Has there been anything done specifically or extra in this year's estimates for the sports for the 
handicapped in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — We have a grant program in the recreation for the disabled program, and out of that 
we provide grant support to non-profit organizations in terms of improvement of facilities and support for 
ongoing programs. And we are currently extending the level of support, through a change in the regulations, to 
increase the support that has been provided to organizations under that program. They are just in the final stages. 
 
MR. HARDY: — I have just one more question, not really to do with sports, but to do with these cultural history 
books that were in our centennial last year. Many of the communities prepared cultural history books, and now 
there are still quite a few left who haven't done it. Is your department prepared to assist these groups that missed 
out on last year's centennial year grant system to finish up these history books? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — We had a one-year grant program which was part of the special Celebrate 
Saskatchewan program which was the funding we provided for those. We are currently examining the 
recommendations of the cultural policy secretariat that this be made into a more permanent kind of program, but 
there has been no decision in that respect to the present time. 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1426 

MR. HARDY: — Do you expect there to be a decision this year on that? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I couldn't tell the hon. member whether there will be an announcement this 
calendar year on that. I think I would be misleading the hon. member if I thought I could reach a conclusion on 
that matter during this calendar year. I would like to but may not be able to. 
 
MR. HARDY: — Could you tell us how extensive it would be? Would there be a considerable grant available or 
training available? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I really couldn't indicate. As I indicated to the hon. member, it is a matter that is 
being considered in the review of the cultural policy secretariat report, and I don't have any specific suggestions to 
make, if we did adopt such a proposition, as to what it would contain at this time. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Just a couple of quick questions, Mr. Minister, about the cultural talks that have taken place 
and are taking place. When do you expect them to be finished? Is there a date when you will be receiving a report 
from the cultural negotiations and talks that are taking place? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — The culture talks were completed last Tuesday. The last one was held at Estevan, 
and the panel that participated is now assembling the presentations they had. There is no fixed schedule when 
their work will be completed, but I hope to move it along relatively quickly. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Could you give me a list of the people on that panel? And as soon as the report hits your desk 
and after however long you want to review it, can you see to it that I receive a copy of that report? I have had 
some concerns from some of my constituents regarding obtaining a copy of this report. They had asked for it at 
some of these cultural talks, and they were told they couldn't get it. They said they would try to get it from the 
minister. I would like to know if we can have a copy of the report you received from that panel. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Chairman, the panel is essentially the group of advisors who advise me with 
respect to cultural policy and they will be reviewing and providing recommendations on various aspects. I don't 
propose that we have another report on cultural policy. The purpose was to hear responses to the report we have. 
And so I don't propose another report but rather, as minister, I will be developing a framework for policy in 
various areas, and announcements will be made on those as they're developed. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Well, are these all government employees on this panel? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Yes, that's correct. 
 
MR. GARNER: — And you will send me a list of the panel members? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I will. 
 
MR. GARNER: — My concern was that some of my constituents had gone to these cultural talks and had input 
into them. They are concerned as to what impact the briefs that they presented will have on the direction you will 
be going. That's why we're suggesting a report or something along that line, Mr. Minister, because I think the 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1427 

people of Saskatchewan, the grass-roots people, would like to know if they've been listened to in these 
discussions. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, certainly I will be reporting on the conclusions that we draw with respect to 
the various aspects of the Vichert report and people will, through that process, be able to determine whether or 
not, and to what extent, we've been able to adopt the suggestions they've made. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — No, we're not going to agree tonight, gentlemen. And I might as well tell you that every 
time you pull that kooky stunt of turning the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland loose on a 20 to 25 minute tirade, 
we aren't going to finish those estimates at night. So, we're not finishing tonight. And we had every intention of 
finishing and we should finish. Nobody wants out of here more than we do, or is more prepared to move things 
through the House speedily than we are — which I think we have to at this point in time. But we're not putting up 
with that sort of nonsense. So, every time you turn him loose . . . He has his own medium; he has caucus; he has 
private members' day; he has a variety of options open to him to make his views know. But estimates is 
traditionally opposition time. Fine, we don't mind the odd few minutes, but if you're going to make these 
long-winded speeches, we're just not going to finish that day. 
 
I notice your report, in the area of film distribution, suggests that in the theatre a regulation be established which 
would require a Saskatchewan produced short feature to be shown with every third film feature. Mr. Minister, do 
you concur with a recommendation like that, and do you really believe that it's realistic? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Certainly, that is one suggestion in the report that I have yet not drawn a 
conclusion upon. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Let me ask you about the next one a little further down, that the corporation would 
manage the government's equity in Teletheatre. I'm sure you've had that one posed to you. And you might as well 
answer concerning the recommendation which would ensure Saskatchewan control of software, thus guaranteeing 
substantial Saskatchewan content in the new channels made possible by the impending fibre optics network. Now, 
you know what software is, and you know what the implications of that are. Would you tell us whether you agree 
with that? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Again, I'm not able to say I've developed a particular view on exactly how to 
approach this question. I think there is no question that with respect to what is generally referred to as educational 
broadcasting, there is a greater and greater interest in that area within Saskatchewan. And it's something we'll have 
to give careful consideration to. I don't know what would be the appropriate mechanism. I have some sympathy 
for the view that perhaps educational broadcasting can be best handled at the community level. I know that there 
are difficulties in developing effective products and viable operations at the community level. So, the possibility 
of being able to integrate SaskMedia, which essentially now produces software (films and productions) which are 
utilized by the schools and by a couple of community-based educational broadcasters, and Teletheatre into some 
common corporate body is not entirely ruled out in my mind. 



 
March 24, 1981 
 

 
1428 

MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Minister, I would just like to speak for a few minutes. I see it's getting close to 10 
o'clock, so I know I won't be finished tonight. Yesterday in response to some of the queries I raised, you used the 
famous NDP excuse for criticism: the Tories are going to destroy this; the Tories are going to destroy medicare; 
the Tories don't believe in home care. That's your favourite response to inquiries. You said we were against 
museums and community crafts and things like that, but I can tell you that this particular report is a very glossy, 
slick publication. In the tradition of socialists, you have typically . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well okay, the 
Minister of the Environment said "Communist." Maybe that's a closer word. I don't know; he should know for 
sure. But you've taken a few good things, and those which I'm sure a lot of people presented to you in their briefs 
or the committee, and mixed them with a bunch of bad things in hope of getting something by. The member for 
Arm River stated that he feels that he has smelled a rat, and so do I. 
 
We believe in cultural grants to establish centres. When you hear the other members state the difficulties that rural 
Saskatchewan villages and towns are having keeping their recreation facilities open because of rising costs, I 
would suggest that rather than making an out-and-out grant to build yet another facility, perhaps we could look at 
a way of utilizing the facilities we already have in our rural communities. 
 
One I would like to point out would be the senior citizens recreation centres, which (I know in my constituency 
and I'm sure it's evident all over Saskatchewan) most smaller communities do have. Perhaps a cultural centre 
could be integrated with those particular centres. I'm sure that the artifacts and things which would be in there . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Who belong to those centres would have a wealth of information for people going 
through these particular centres. Certainly, the recommendation of a full-time director for these centres is 
admirable. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — If you can afford it. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Can we afford it? It's easy to say. I could go back to the Minister of Health. We made a lot 
of recommendations and he said they re all admirable suggestions and that he agrees with them, but that we all 
have budget constraints and priorities. I think low-interest loans to crafts people — certified crafts people — is 
also a good suggestion. I do think that the Saskatchewan Arts Council needs a full-time executive director whose 
salary is paid by the government but who isn't appointed by the government. 
 
The museum advisory service which is suggested is essential, but I do not agree with the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland, who said that, if these provincial grants are made to these museums, certain conditions 
have to be attached, such as that the artifacts or displays within that museum must be owned by the public. I can 
tell you that in my constituency we have three museums: one at Fox Valley, one at Maple Creek and one close to 
Cypress Park. These rival any museum in Saskatchewan history in the province. But these are all private 
collectors who open their doors. The one in Maple Creek doesn't own a thing. Everything is on loan. In fact the 
fellow from the archives board was down not too long ago and he was just overwhelmed at the things we have in 
that particular museum. Certainly, if we want to keep these artifacts within the province, the government must 
make some type of a grant available — but I would say an unconditional grant. They must provide small, private 
museums, so to speak, with expert advice. I know that you can send things to the archives and they will do a lot of 
restoration for you. 



 
March 24, 1981 

 

 
1429 

A permanent headquarters for multicultural research, libraries, things like that, I think, should be established. But 
perhaps we should have two, one in each of the two major cities — Regina and Saskatoon. Things could be 
interchanged between the two. 
 
The provincial library system certainly should be expanded into the North with special emphasis on native 
languages and art crafts. 
 
Another recommendation, R. 15 says traditional Indian names of northern geographical features be respected and 
maintained. I think that should be a top priority. There are definitely areas that we sure do not agree with. As I 
said, this is a typical document put out by your government where you have some good things mixed up with a lot 
of bad things. 
 
I think the choice of forming a Crown corporation on culture has to be the dumbest thing I have ever heard. The 
reasons for recommending a Crown corporation by the author is that it would put, at arm's length from the 
government, the cultural policies to be set. That is just absolutely ludicrous because you and I both know that 
Crown corporations are no more at arm's length from the government than the Department of Culture and Youth. 
 
Mr. Chairman I have more to say on this and I call it 10 o'clock. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Just before adjourning, I want to refer hon. members in connection with the remarks 
regarding the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland and other remarks that have been made towards members of the 
House. I refer members to a ruling made on March 28, 1941 by a Mr. Speaker Agar in which he said: 
 

Certain hon. members seem to have developed a practice of late of referring in somewhat sarcastic terms to 
the debates which take place in the House. Too frequently hon. members are prefacing their remarks by 
allusions to the amount of time taken by other members and making use of such statements as "too much 
talk," "waste of time," and "useless debate," "getting down to business," and so on with reference to the 
House itself and nothing is done. It is my considered opinion that such comments are subversive to the dignity 
of parliament and the prestige of this Assembly. They are also calculated to restrict privileges of individual 
members which are his by right, by precedent and by tradition in a British Parliament. Nor is it given to any 
member on the floor of the House to characterize any debate as useless, any speech as a waste of time. It is the 
duty of the Speaker so to conduct debate that the irrelevant is excluded, the dilatory quashed, the obstructive 
prevented, the tediously repetitive curbed. 

 
Surely, too, the few weeks we spend here are not too many when we consider the magnitude and importance of 
the problems confronting us, the legislation upon our desk and the amount of public money we are asked to 
appropriate for the conduct of the people's business. I would ask all hon. members to keep that ruling in mind in 
future. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:05 p.m. 
 


