






















































Hansard: December 08, 1981


283 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 8, 1981 

 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 

Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
 
DEPUTY CLERK: — Mr. Skoberg, from the standing committee on private members’ bills, presents 
the first report of the said committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee met for organization and appointed Mr. Skoberg as its chairman and Mr. Katzman 
as vice-chairman. Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned petitions for private bills 
and finds that the provisions of rules 55, 57 and 60 have been fully complied with in each case: 
 
Of Theodore Baran, Edward Werbicki and Gerald Muzyka praying for an act to incorporate the 
Bishop Andrew Roborecki Foundation; 
 
Of Western Christian College of the city of Weyburn praying for an exemption from taxation of its 
property situated in the RM of Weyburn; 
 
Of the Briercrest Bible Institute of Caronport praying for an act to change the name of the 
corporation to Briercrest Bible College. 
 
Your committee has also examined the petition for a private Bill of Nelson Lake Lutheran Bible 
Camp Association Inc. praying for an exemption from taxation of its property located near 
Preeceville. Your committee finds that rule 60 has not been fully complied with in this case. 
However, your committee recommends that rule 60 be waived and that this petition for a private Bill 
be accepted. 

 
MR. SKOBERG: — I would like to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the hon. member for Maple 
Creek: 
 

That the first report of the standing committee on private members’ bills be now concurred in. 
 
Motion agreed to. 

 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
HON. MR. GROSS: — On behalf of me, Mr. Speaker, and the member for Shaunavon, Dwain 
Lingenfelter, who is not here today, I would like to introduce to the members of this Assembly 17 grade 
12 students from the Kincaid, Meyronne, Hazenmore and Glen Bain areas. They are accompanied here 
today by their teacher, Mrs. Karen Windsor; parents and bus drivers, Mr. Duane Senecar, Bob Loverin 
and Otto Wornath. I am sure members on this side of the House as well as that side of the House will 
want to wish  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
284 

them an entertaining and educational stay at the legislature. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 
QUESTIONS 

 
Closure of Eldorado Nuclear Ltd. Mine 

 
MR. ANDREW: — My question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, it has now been several days since the 
announced closure of the Eldorado mine at Uranium City. I would assume that the officials of your 
government have been in touch with Eldorado, the federal government and the townspeople of Uranium 
City. From the news reports it would appear that Eldorado Nuclear will be providing service or 
compensation to employees who have been or are now without jobs because of the closures. However, 
there are also a large number of business people in the town of Uranium City who are probably looking 
at bankruptcies over the next six months if nothing is done. 
 
Can you give any assurance to those business people of Uranium City that your government will be 
providing some funding in the event of a failure to do so by Eldorado or the federal government, to 
ensure that they don’t see their life savings go down the tube and that they don’t face bankruptcies in the 
next six months? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member’s supposition is accurate in that we believe 
that Eldorado Nuclear will make provision for all of its employees. Certainly that was the assurance it 
gave to us. The assurance was that there would be generous severance pay arrangements, relocation 
allowances and the like. We recognize that there are other persons who live in Uranium City who are not 
employees of Eldorado or of the Government of Saskatchewan or of some other agency which would be 
able to shelter them from the full impact of the likely economic consequences of the closure of the 
Beaverlodge mine. We have not reached any conclusions as to our responsibilities in that regard and are 
at this time unable to give business people any assurance that they will not suffer an economic loss. I 
think it is simply too early to say whether or not action should appropriately be taken by our government 
and I am not in a position to give assurance. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary question, Mr. Premier. The town of Uranium City is like any other 
town in the province of Saskatchewan. I think there is an obligation of the part of the provincial 
government to ensure it will fight to have the federal government provide some assistance, but if that 
fails you must give the commitment. Will you give the commitment to some of those business people 
that if the federal government is not going to (in the words of the Attorney General), “pony up with some 
money,” the Government of Saskatchewan will, with its resources, provide some assistance to those 
businesses facing certain bankruptcy? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the question asked by the hon. member. I am 
simply not able to give the assurances which he asks for. Certainly I think he would not be suggesting 
that the Government of Saskatchewan should compensate the Hudson’s Bay Company, which is the 
chief business operation in Uranium City for its loss, because the Hudson’s Bay Company takes those 
things into consideration. Clearly it is not as simple as the hon. member suggests and accordingly I am 
unable to give him the assurance which he suggests. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could you give them at least this  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
285 

assurance, Mr. Premier: that they can expect something more from the Government of Saskatchewan 
than simply the Premier or some other minister going around and blaming everything on the federal 
government and that they can receive some money from this province instead of just empty words that 
too often in the past have come out of this government for people facing financial troubles? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the town of Uranium City is peculiarly a town of Eldorado 
Nuclear. I would think 75 per cent of the residences, and probably 75 or 80 per cent of the business and 
the total assessment in that town is Eldorado Nuclear’s. It is 87 per cent, I am advised — so it is their 
town in all effective respects. There are certainly other agencies there, as will be known . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The postal code of the House of Commons in Ottawa is certainly in the province of 
Ontario but if there were problems in the House of Commons I would not expect the Government of 
Ontario to settle them. I would expect the Government of Canada, which is the government of all 
Canada, to deal with that matter. 
 
Its operation is at Uranium City. It is the Government of Canada’s operation. I am sure it will act 
appropriately. To the extent that there are steps which ought to be taken by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, we will certainly be giving them close consideration. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Nursing Care at University Hospital 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. A letter was sent to you on November 
27 from the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, University Hospital. Just to refresh your memory, they say: 
 

We are aware of the large deficit, $1.4 million, but do not agree that measures that will decrease the 
standard of care should be implemented. Our patients deserve safe quality nursing care, and budget 
problems should not cause any compromise to this level of care. 

 
Mr. Premier, my question is simply: what is your government going to do to ensure that the nursing care 
in the University Hospital in Saskatoon does not diminish? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think my colleague, the Minister of Health, would be in a 
better position to respond to that than I. 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the member’s question, I can inform her that about 
three weeks ago officials of the Department of Health and I met with the administrator of the hospital, 
the chairman of the board, and two or three other members of the board concerning their anticipated 
deficit. They indicated to us at that time some of the particular measures that they were taking. We 
indicated to them that in some regard they had an obligation to live within their budget, but that we 
would be prepared to look at how we could alleviate some of the hardships that they are incurring at this 
time. My understanding is that my officials have met and are continuing to meet with the administrator 
and the chairman of the board and other officials of the University Hospital to see if we can come to 
some agreement on their deficit. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary to the minister. You say, “three weeks ago.” This letter was dated 
November 27. Obviously the cost-reduction measures are already  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
286 

being implemented. How soon will it be before you have a firm answer for the University Hospital 
Board so that it does not have to cut back on staff or stop replacing nursing staff? When can it expect an 
answer? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, it is not up to me as the Minister of Health to determine what 
staff the University Hospital hires in any particular segment of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, until the members on the opposite side are willing to listen, I will wait and then answer the 
member’s question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the member that it’s not up to me to determine in what particular departments 
the University Hospital hires its staff. It is my understanding that it has a particular problem in one 
department. It is trying to come to grips with that problem. I want to give full credit to the board and to 
the administrator of the University Hospital in coming to grips with the particular problem. My officials 
will continue to work with them to try to resolve the problem. I think there will be a resolution in the 
near future, but I think we need to take into consideration the funding we have made available to the 
University Hospital vis-à-vis other hospitals — not only in Saskatchewan, but funding made available to 
other hospitals of similar size in other provinces. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary question to the Premier. Your minister ably answered the question 
with a bunch of words which sound rather hollow. At one time the University Hospital was considered 
the jewel of the health care system, not only in Saskatchewan but throughout Canada and North 
America. Be that as it may, we now have a Minister of Health who equates quality of service with the 
length of waiting lists. We have a Minister of Health who says we have enough doctors and yet we’re 
well below the national average. We rank eighth in health spending in . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The member is on her feet for the purpose of asking a supplementary. 
The member is not permitted to give any more information than is necessary to give background to the 
supplementary. If the member has a supplementary, I’d be quite pleased to hear it. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — My question is to the Premier. Is this your commitment to medicare after 35 years, 
that hospitals (not only the University Hospital but also other hospitals, large and small) in this province 
have to cut back on staff, on nursing services and care of patients, because your government will not put 
enough funding into hospitals in this province? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — It was not many months ago that I had an opportunity to participate at the 
official opening of the extension to the University Hospital, which all but doubled its capacity so far as 
square footage is concerned. It did not increase its bed capacity, but provided additional room for the 
great deal of extra equipment, the new equipment, the CAT scanners, and the rest, which are now 
installed in that hospital. I am of the view that that hospital gives a standard of care second to none in 
Canada and, while members opposite may feel that they wish to run down the quality of  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
287 

care rendered at that hospital, I will not be among those who do so. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — A question to the Premier. Are you then saying, Mr. Premier, that the nurses, who 
are professionals in their field, do not know what they are talking about? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am not here to comment on whether or not the hon. 
member opposite knows what she’s talking about, or other people know what they’re talking about. I am 
here to answer the questions by the hon. member. It is no part of the function of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to issue opinions on whether members of the public know or don’t know what they’re 
talking about. 
 
Health Care in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I would direct my question to the Premier-Minister of Health tag team, whichever 
prefers to answer. I would refer the member to a lead story in the Moosomin World Spectator, “Steps 
Taken to Ease Hospital Overcrowding,” a result of a news release by that hospital administrator. Mr. 
Speaker, with your permission and indulgence, I would like to read at least one paragraph into the record 
for the minister’s information, to assist him in answering the question: 
 

The administrator stated that 20 per cent of the hospital’s 50 beds are tied up with patients who 
don’t require active care, and we’re more or less stuck with them. He said he hopes his 
announcement will encourage families of patients not requiring active care to seek space in a 
nursing home. But that in itself poses a problem, Bjornson said, because the Eastern 
Saskatchewan Pioneer Lodge nursing home, which has 42 beds, is jam-packed, and the only 
alternative is to place elderly patients in nursing homes away from their families and friends. 

 
Now them, I wonder if the Minister of Health or the Premier would agree that your irresponsibility and 
negligence and that of your health department has left local governments and local hospital boards and 
nursing home boards with their only recourse, which is to resolve their own problems? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, whether the information that the member gives is correct or not, 
I don’t know, but the other day we were accused of having long waiting lists in our hospitals. I read from 
the December 2 issue of the Prince Albert Herald which says: 
 

While patients in Ontario may have to wait between two and four years for elective surgery, and it 
has been claimed that those in Regina have to wait up to 14 months, the delay in Prince Albert is 
seldom more than one month. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we approve more beds than any other province in Canada . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . approve and fund. In Saskatchewan we have approximately 8,000 hospital beds, and we 
have approximately an equal number of nursing home beds, amounting to about 16,000 beds. Again, this 
is the highest per capita, I believe, in Canada. 
 
A few years ago the former minister of health implemented a policy whereby we allowed rural hospitals 
to pick up level 4 beds in their hospitals. Some did so; others did not.  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
288 

That was their prerogative. That was in order that we cold accommodate the senior citizens in their own 
communities. We will, in the future, hopefully, extend that policy further to hospitals so they can take 
care of their citizens in their own communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t apologize for the number of beds that we have in this province because it is the 
largest number anywhere in Canada, I believe. But having said that, I do think that in certain areas of the 
province, as I told the member last year in my estimates, we need to look at increasing the number of 
beds. My understanding is that the Minister of Social Services has done that for the southeastern part of 
the province in his recent announcement. 
 
I think we will look at the pockets where we have difficulties and we will try to accommodate the 
citizens of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to just direct one supplementary to the Minister of 
Health. In fact, Mr. Minister, the argument that was raised by the member for Maple Creek that hospitals 
in this province are underfunded, and that the whole program of health care is underfunded, is accurate. 
The proof, Mr. Minister, is in the fact that there are long waiting lists, overcrowding in the hospitals and 
shortages of nursing home beds. Those are the facts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the argument that we make in this House (and I wonder if the minister would agree) is that 
intensive personal or nursing care is inappropriate to an acute-care hospital and should be provided by 
nursing or special-care homes. Would the minister agree with that, and secondly, would he agree to meet 
personally, along with the Minister of Social Services, with the in-home care, nursing home and hospital 
board directors of our area? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I think I have already indicated to the member by 
reading into the record the short waiting lists in Prince Albert and the short waiting lists in many other 
areas of this province. We have one of the shortest waiting lists, I believe, in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, secondly, I think those of us who have read the paper recently have learned that the deficits 
in Ontario hospitals are well over $100 million this year. The waiting lists in Calgary and Edmonton are 
much, much longer than they are here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regard to the member’s contention that people who need nursing care should not be 
accommodated as such in the hospitals. I don’t necessarily agree. I don’t necessarily agree that they 
cannot be accommodated in a hospital. I have talked to many professionals who would prefer to have a 
special home just for nursing care; others say no, you should combine it with an acute care hospital. 
 
One of the best hospitals I have visited is Baycrest in Toronto, where they have levels 1, 2, and 3. It is 
run by a Jewish organization. The point I want to make, Mr. Speaker, is that you can have separate care 
for a nursing home and separate acute care, or you can combine them. We have taken care of separate 
facilities and combined facilities. I think you can handle them either way. 
 
So, yes, to your last question, I would certainly be willing to meet with any officials from your area. I 
can’t speak for the Minister of Social Services, but I am sure he would  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
289 

accommodate us and meet with them at a time which may be convenient to them and to us. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — A question to the Minister of Health. The other day, Mr. Minister, you indicated that 
a priority of your department would be preventive health. Well, Mr. Minister, marvellous as that concept 
may be, would you not agree that adequate funding of active programs so as to avoid your mark of an 
efficient operation (waiting lists) should be the priority before we embark on this venture of preventive 
health? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Chairman, the member who just spoke has often told me, in this House 
and outside the House, that he fully endorsed my concept of preventive health and that he would not be 
critical of any ventures in that particular direction. Mr. Speaker, he was not in the House the other day 
when I spoke to the throne speech. I indicated very, very clearly that if we were to move into the area of 
preventive health, I could not be at the cost of treatment of curative health. Monies have to be put up 
front so that we can continue to give the best medical care in Canada. We have done that, and we will 
continue to do that. 
 
I agree with the Premier when he says that the University Hospital is still the jewel. We have many other 
hospitals in this province which far exceed, as far as quality care is concerned, many of the other 
hospitals in some of the other provinces. So I make no apologies for the way we run our hospitals and 
for the way we fund them, because it far exceeds what is given to some of the other provinces in this 
country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Just one question before he starts patting himself on the back too much. I would like 
to discuss psychiatric services, Mr. Minister, which I believe have been in disarray in this province for 
the past 10 years. I will quote Dr. Jack McLurg, a psychiatrist in the province of Saskatchewan for 33 
years, who retired from the Regina Mental Health Association. With your indulgence, I would like to 
bring this into the question, Mr. Speaker. This is what Dr. McLurg says concerning the plan to treat 
patients in their own communities: 
 

However, lack of money, psychiatrists and mental health personnel in general stunted the plan’s 
growth. He said that there has been a digression in psychiatric services offered in the province since 
the Saskatchewan plan started in 1960. 

 
Now, that’s a practitioner in the field with 33 years experience, Mr. Minister. I say to you: when are you 
going to accept your responsibilities and institute adequate psychiatric services for the people of this 
province? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, certainly Saskatchewan led the other provinces in dealing with 
deinstitutionalization of those people who are experiencing a mental problem. Saskatchewan led the way 
and, at many of the meetings that I have had with other provincial ministers, they have asked me about 
how we accomplished deinstitutionalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly deinstitutionalizing brings with it an additional responsibility to  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
290 

provide the services in the community. We have attempted to do that. It is not very easy, Mr. Speaker, to 
try to get professional people into smaller towns and cities in Saskatchewan. We would have sufficient 
psychiatrists if we were to centralize again like the other provinces are doing. We would have sufficient 
psychiatrists to deal with all of our problems if they were mainly in Saskatoon and Regina. I would 
oppose that, Mr. Speaker, because I think we are going in the right direction in regionalizing our 
services, in bringing these services and the people out into rural Saskatchewan. That is what we have 
attempted to do. 
 
I will admit we have had some difficulties in getting these psychiatrists to move into those smaller areas 
and in recruiting them. I think my record has improved as far as the number of vacancies is concerned. 
There is still room for improvement. We’re working on that. Hopefully, in the next budget, we can make 
further assistance available in this regard. But again, I don’t apologize for having decentralized and for 
bringing that services out to the community. I realize, however, that we will have some difficulty in 
recruiting professional personnel. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, you know full well, from talking to the professionals in the field, that 
this program is in a shambles and has been through its time. The Premier and you like to compare us 
with other provinces. In psychiatric services, you say we’re a leader; I say that we rank ninth. That’s 
what Dr. McLurg said — ninth in Canada, followed only by Newfoundland. Are you aware of that? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not uncommon for the members opposite to run down either 
the professional people in this province of the province itself. You constantly hear that from the 
members opposite. I want to tell the member that, while I don’t have the figures here, we compare very, 
very favourably on a per capita basis in the number of professional psychiatrists and psychologists which 
we have working in this province. I don’t have the figures here but I know we rank very well with 
Alberta — in fact, we have many more professional people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that any time you try to decentralize you are going to have some problems. I don’t 
apologize for this government’s having implemented that policy many years ago. I think we should 
continue along those lines, realizing that we have to recruit more staff. We have to look to the future to 
see how we can entice people to come into this province and work in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, I heard you say that perhaps it isn’t wise to talk to the professionals in 
the field; that’s what I got from what you were saying. I believe those are the people who know what is 
happening in psychiatric services — not the minister opposite. When will you come to grips with this 
problem and institute a meaningful program to put Saskatchewan first in the field of psychiatric services 
during these times of severe stress and drug abuse in our society? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, we are first. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — It’s simply a question of how we can improve even more those services which 
we are presently offering. Mr. Speaker, I think that in the next budget or in the very near future, we will 
have an answer for the members opposite. 
 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
291 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act respecting the Protection of Residences in Saskatchewan 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move that a Bill respecting the protection of 
residences in Saskatchewan be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a Bill to amend The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 
Address in Reply 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Mr. Chapman 
and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. Berntson. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, First I want to add my congratulations to the mover 
and the seconder of the motion, the member for Estevan and the member for The Battlefords. The hon. 
member for Estevan and the hon. member for The Battlefords have both made many contributions to this 
Assembly in the short time they have been here. I am sure they will continue to do so for many years to 
come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay a special tribute to my colleague from northern Saskatchewan, the 
member for Cumberland constituency, Norman MacAuley. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Since he has announced his retirement when his term in this legislature is 
completed, I want to take this opportunity during the throne speech debate to express my pride and 
pleasure in having served as a member of this legislature with him. During the years he has served the 
people of northern Saskatchewan, and served them well, many good changes have been made in 
conditions that affect the lives of people in northern Saskatchewan. Norman MacAuley has certainly 
done his part to make this happen. 
 
On behalf of all members of this legislature, I would like to wish you and Mrs. MacAuley many years of 
happiness in your retirement. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say a few words about the  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
292 

constituency that I have the pleasure of serving. It is a very large constituency, being 416 miles in length 
and from 160 miles to over 200 miles in width. The Athabasca constituency runs from the 54th parallel 
to the 60th parallel, up the Alberta border, up the 3rd meridian to the 59th parallel, then goes east to the 
105th meridian to the 60th parallel. It is a large constituency, Mr. Speaker, with thousands of fresh water 
lakes and rivers. They include the beautiful Clear Water River and the Clear Water Valley. It also has the 
Athabasca sand dunes. It is a great constituency with great people. I am very proud to be their 
representative in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the NDP government came to power in 1971, we have witnessed many changes in the 
North. I will mention some of them and their importance. In 1971 housing conditions in northern 
Saskatchewan were at an all-time low. Some homes had as many as 27 individuals living under one roof. 
In some cases there were three families to one house. As soon as spring came they would move out and 
live in tents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has now changed dramatically. Now it doesn’t matter what town you go into in 
northern Saskatchewan, you will find new homes, well kept, and very proud people living in them. There 
are still more homes to be built in northern Saskatchewan, public homes and homes for senior citizens. 
But the real serious housing problems have been tackled and fairly well completed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now have some of the most modern and up-to-date schools you will find any place in 
this province. While there is still some expansion and a few new schools to be built, the biggest portion 
has been completed. 
 
Recreation facilities are now being built all over northern Saskatchewan to fill a large vacancy which has 
existed for recreation. These new facilities have not only provided much needed recreation, but have also 
provided skill-training jobs in their construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sewer and water systems were non-existent in 1971. Now, full sewer and water systems are 
in place at La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval, and Green Lake. The newest town to 
receive sewer and water services this summer was Pinehouse. The Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan is now looking at sewer and water systems in such smaller towns as Turnor Lake, Jans 
Bay, Cole Bay, Michel village, St. George’s Hill, Patuanak, and Stony Rapids. Hopefully, in the not too 
distant future, these towns will enjoy the services of running water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, northern towns are now getting new fire halls, fire trucks, health centres, dust-free 
highways, bridges, and airports. Roads to such towns as Pinehouse, and Patuanak have been completed. 
The road to Dillon is just about completed. This road now de-isolates the communities of Dillon, St. 
George’s Hill and Michel village. This is a great asset to these towns. This now eliminates expensive air 
travel and treacherous road trips across little Peter Pond Lake and big Peter Pond Lake, as well as bad 
ice conditions in the fall and spring. Northern residents appreciate what they now have thanks to an 
open-minded NDP government which went ahead when opposition members said, “Stop.” 
 
We now have just about all the services in the North that any community in the rest of the province has 
and has had for many years. Now the big task facing Northerners and the Government of Saskatchewan 
is to provide economic security for all Northerners. At the present time, if all the services I have just 
mentioned are completed, we have  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
293 

what I consider a temporary recession on our hands. I feel that we as a government will have to direct 
funds to industries which will create northern jobs. Let me make this very clear, Mr. Speaker, mining 
will not solve our problems, it will only be a part of the solution. We have to invest in wood operations. 
We have many opportunities in northern Saskatchewan with the types of forests that we he in the Grizzly 
Bear Hills and Clearwater Valley. I sincerely think that we, as a government, are going to have to work 
closely with these communities to develop these resources. 
 
I think that we must have better utilization of our fish industry. Take a look at the thousands of lakes that 
we have in northern Saskatchewan. Take a look at the 7 million pound whitefish limit that we have on 
Lake Athabasca that is never touched — 7 million pounds of whitefish. Mr. Speaker, I feel that this 
resource has to be utilized. That is going to take some money invested in fish processing plants so that 
we can process this type of fish. It’s a fish that has to be filleted, but once it’s filleted it can be put on the 
market the same as any other type of fish. 
 
We now have a wild rice industry that is starting to boom in northern Saskatchewan. We have many 
trappers and fishermen who are getting involved in the industry of raising wild rice. It is becoming 
profitable. I think that the trapper or fisherman who can diversify and get into a small tourist operation 
and into wild rice, trapping and fishing, has a very bright future. These are the types of industries that 
we, as a government, are going to have to push for and help Northerners to expand on. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Speaker, education, both academic and vocational, is something we most 
certainly have to develop. We have to make sure that our young northern students have the best possible 
education at their disposal. We have to make sure that we expand our vocational training and the 
community college concept through which we can provide courses for young men and women who left 
school at an early age and want to go back to finish their schooling and get into trades such as plumbing, 
pipe fitting, and heavy duty mechanics. These, Mr. Speaker, we most certainly have to zero in on. We 
have to move on and the faster the better, as far as Northerners are concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now want to turn to the problems at Uranium City with the December 3 announcement by 
Eldorado Nuclear that it was going to close down operations at the Beaverlodge mine on June 30, 1982, 
and what the announcement means to Uranium City and the communities of Camsell Portage, 
Fond-du-Lac, Stony Rapids and Black Lake. Let me explain what it means when you shut down a 
community of 3,000 such as Uranium City along with all the services it provides. 
 
It provides many services, not only to the citizens of Uranium City, but also to the citizens of Camsell 
Portgage, Black Lake, Fond-du-Lac and Stony Rapids. One such service is hospital service. This is 
where the people of those communities go for their medical and dental services. This is where they go to 
purchase vehicles and to buy their supplies for their communities. Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious 
situation. We have all the schools, hospitals and supply services right in the community of Uranium 
City, and now we are faced with a closure. It was all done without consultation with the people or with 
this government, just 22 days before Christmas. There was no indication that this would happen. People 
in Uranium City were doing what most people do in anticipation of Christmas — buying gifts and 
making plans for the New Year, and working, Mr. Speaker. They were working hard at levels of up to 
5,000 feet below the ground, mining  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
294 

uranium. Those who came off the shift just prior to Eldorado’s announcement no doubt were filled with 
the confidence and hope that comes with hard work which is well done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what greeted them was the announcement that they wouldn’t have jobs any longer. What 
greeted them was a crass decision made without care or feeling. What greeted them was the power of the 
federal Liberal government, without direction, policies or programs, and bankrupt, which was cutting its 
losses at the expense of people — the people of Uranium City. 
 
But while the people of Uranium City are afraid of the future, they are also calm. They are not panicking, 
Mr. Speaker. They know that their provincial government is reasonable. They know that the Blakeney 
government will take time to talk to them and evaluate the situation. They know that this government 
will not make an arbitrary, ill-thought-out decision, because this government cares about people — 
people in Uranium City, people in Saskatchewan. 
 
I studies the interim report of Eldorado Nuclear Ltd. They had a loss of only $1.6 million on revenues of 
$17.1 million for 1981, compared with a loss of $5 million on revenues of $21.2 million for the same 
period in 1980. Things are getting better in their overall operation. That’s hardly reason for destroying a 
community of some 3,000 people, Mr. Speaker; it’s hardly a reason for destroying these people who 
worked for them and jeopardized their lives, some of them for over 25 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it very curious here. There is a federal Liberal government that builds the Mirabel 
airport in Quebec — an airport that is seldom used and cost taxpayers $366 million to build. Officials 
say that while the airport is drastically under used, business will pick up by the end of the century — the 
end of the century! Yet the Trudeau government still pumps money into it. But this same government 
won’t even take the time to look at alternatives for Uranium City. They just shut it down and kick the 
people out of work with no hope and no way around. This is the federal Liberal government which 
poured multimillions of dollars into the Come-by-Chance refinery — a gamble which finally ended with 
a %600 million bankruptcy. Last year, Petro-Canada bought the refinery for over $20 million. In other 
words, the Canadian taxpayers had to pay for the refinery twice. 
 
But the federal Liberals can’t support a mine in Uranium City and, if the mine is suffering from market 
conditions and high production costs, don’t even care to look at what else may be done to make the 
situation a little easier for the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the same federal Liberal government which invested $87 million in the Gentilly 
atomic power plant in Quebec, a power plant built with faulty materials, a plant which costs us $10 
million a year to run and hasn’t produced one bit of power in the past four years. The same government 
spent $13 million to refit an out-of-date aircraft carrier, the Bonaventure, which after being outfitted was 
sold to Formosa for $871,000 — a fraction of the price. It’s a list of white elephants, bad investments 
and just plain bad judgment by this old and tired government in Ottawa. It’s just staggering, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As Saskatchewan people know, there are only a few votes in Uranium City; there are many, many 
thousands in Ontario and Quebec. No consultation, no indication, just close it down. They might as well 
be mining copper in Chile for all they care about the people who live in Uranium City. What of the town 
council that has worked so hard to build the community? What of the people who have worked years in 
the mines? No  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
295 

matter, close it down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure all Saskatchewan was alarmed at the contempt for democratic process displayed 
by the Trudeau government in this instance. They’ve seen their rail service cut. They see the crowrate 
guarantees undermined — decision after decision made in an air-conditioned board room in Ottawa, 
decisions that affect our lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Uranium City and the people of Saskatchewan do not intend to let the federal 
government off that easy. Mr. Speaker, the Blakeney government does not intend to leave the people of 
Uranium City without any options. We will talk with them and find solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so the record is clear, I do not want to exclude the Conservative Party from having a hand 
in this callous act. I laughed the other night when the former Conservative energy minister for Canada, 
Mr. Hnatyshyn, cried crocodile tears for the people of Uranium City. Here is the same minister who 
wanted to privatize crown corporations; here is the same person who would have sold Eldorado Nuclear 
to Denison Mines. Of course, now that he’s in opposition, he finds a small place in his small heart for 
the people of Uranium City. It’s the same old story from Grits and Tories — wherever there’s a fast 
buck, or whenever they want to look good so they can grab power, they’ll say anything or do anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Uranium City want action. They don’t want Conservative crocodile tears. 
And what of the Conservatives in this House? Good heavens, they can’t even write their own speeches, 
far less have a plan for the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it can be argued that in an economic sense the Beaverlodge operation is not in a 
competitive position. The uranium market is currently experiencing a period of low prices and 
oversupply. We know that. We understand these market conditions, yet the outlook for the long term is 
bright for the industry in general. Steady growth of nuclear power capacity around the world means that 
by 1990, nuclear capacity will triple. It should be understood, Mr. Speaker, that the problems leading to 
the announcement of the closing of the Beaverlodge operation are not only related to present marketing 
conditions, but for the sake of explanation let us consider them. 
 
In the late 1970s, many utilities accumulated large inventories of uranium due to delays in start-up, 
licensing, regulatory delays and low capacity use. As interest rates rose and inventories became more 
expensive to hold and the utilities started selling them, this created an oversupply and contributed to the 
drop in price. Now it appears the price has bottomed out at about $23.50 per pound since June of this 
year. This price is below the cost of production for many low-grade mines in the United States and 
Ontario, and has led to a number of shut-downs in these areas. For example: during 1980 and ‘81, over 
20 United States companies announced shut-downs or cutbacks affecting almost 30 mines. Agnew Lake 
Mines Ltd. shut down its operations in Ontario in 1980. In Saskatchewan Cenex shut down in 1980, and 
Eldorado Nuclear Ltd. is also to shut down in 1982. Both, Mr. Speaker, were underground low-grade 
mines, unlike the rich open-pit mines elsewhere in northern Saskatchewan. These reductions will help 
bring the market back into balance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although it is true the market is poor in world nuclear capacity the forecast suggests that if 
only the reactors currently being built around the world are completed, nuclear capacity will tripe by 
1990. This increase in capacity will cause the demand for  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
296 

uranium to more than double. In all, over 30 countries have nuclear reactors or are building them, and 
projections for the long term show a shortfall of uranium supply beginning in the 1990s and during the 
next century. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can weather the current poor markets better than any other 
producing area. Its high-grade deposits and low cost of production will cushion it against current poor 
prices, while continuing to provide employment and economic opportunities for northern people. 
 
This brings me back to the Beaverlodge shut-down. Shutting down the Beaverlodge mine and mill at 
Uranium City in June of ’82 will leave some 830 employees without jobs. The 30-year-old operation is 
the main economic base for the 3,000 residents of Uranium City and accounts for 87 per cent of the local 
tax base. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, it has been evident that the question was not whether Beaverlodge would shut down, 
but when. The operation is Canada’s oldest uranium mine and one of its deepest underground mines. It 
has been affected by decreasing ore grades and rising production costs. Ore grades at the mine have 
historically been about 0.2 per cent or 4 pounds of uranium per ton or ore. This compares to an average 
grade of 7 per cent or 140 pounds of uranium per ton of ore at Cluff Lake and an average grade of 2.35 
per cent or 47 pounds per ton of ore at Key Lake. And the ore grade at Beaverlodge is getting lower. In 
addition to low-grade ore, Mr. Speaker, the ore is extremely expensive to mine and transport from the 
underground. 
 
Just to give you some idea of the Beaverlodge operations as compared with Key Lake, Beaverlodge has 
830 employees to produce one million pounds of uranium each year. Key Lake will have 500 employees 
to produce 12 million pounds of uranium per year. In 1980, production costs at Beaverlodge were $66 
per pound, or almost twice as much as the price they received for the uranium. By way of comparison, 
production costs at Cluff Lake and Key Lake are less than $10 per pound. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 
the Beaverlodge shut-down is a case of an old operation becoming mined out and uneconomic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Conservatives say it’s wrong to invest in uranium. They’re wrong. As in most criticisms 
they make, they’re not familiar with the facts. These were the same people who said it was wrong to 
invest in potash. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that Conservatives should take the lead from this 
government and expend a little energy in trying to help with the problems facing the people of Uranium 
City instead of trying to find some way to fault this government. Mr. Speaker, the people of Uranium 
City know this government has stood by them; they know this government has confidence in them and in 
their futures. We put our money where our mouths are. 
 
Here are just a few facts about this government’s commitments to Uranium City. From 1974 to October 
31 of this year, the Blakeney government has provided $550,000 for medical and dental care in Uranium 
City. The academic education branch of DNS (Department of Northern Saskatchewan) has provided 
nearly $8 million for schools, teachers and other educational needs from 1975 to the present. Over 
$800,000 has been spent to provide continuing education opportunities from 1978 to 1981; $2.5 million 
has been spent for municipal services such as sewer and water, streets, roads, from 1974 to the present; 
almost $3.5 million in capital projects and a few office buildings through the DNS building and 
municipal engineering branch; nearly $4 million in roads and transportation from 1975 to the present 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the rural and native housing program there have been 32 houses and 8 semidetached 
senior citizens’ units built at a total cost to the province of over $1  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
297 

million. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, this government does care about Uranium City and has been caring about the 
development of the North for some time. I think it’s terrible that the Conservatives want to use the 
closing of Beaverlodge mine and mill at Uranium City to degrade the best resource policies in this 
country. 
 
The opposition suggests we should close down all our operations and stop producing and exploring for 
uranium and other minerals such as gold, nickel, silver and graphite. Should farmers stop raising beef 
and hogs because prices change? No. We have an obligation to diversify our province’s economy; we 
have an obligation to deal with the problems created by outside interests. Yes, outside interests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I listened with amazement to the Leader of the Unionest Party the other day when, in the midst of this 
crisis for the people of Uranium City, he tried to suggest that Eldorado Nuclear was somehow owned 
and operated by this government. His former Conservative colleagues laughed; they thought it was really 
funny. But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan crown corporations are run with the benefit of people in mind, 
not profits. Mr. Speaker, I don’t think, and the people of Uranium City didn’t think, the member for 
Nipawin’s attempts at a cheap political shot were funny. Of course, it’s understandable the 
Conservatives would laugh at such a remark. After all, there’s a lot to laugh at on that side of the House. 
 
Nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, we are left with a serious situation in Uranium City. Let me tell you what this 
closure means to the people of Uranium City and area. It means small businesses are already moving out. 
It means a possible loss of school and hospital services that will affect the communities I mentioned 
previously. But more than this — the abrupt closure announcement was a betrayal, Mr. Speaker, a 
betrayal of the trust of the people who live there and a betrayal of the trust of this government. I say a 
betrayal by the federal Liberal government. 
 
I have already outlined some of the monies expended by this government in Uranium City — monies 
based on what Eldorado told us it was going to do. We trusted them; the people of Uranium City trusted 
them. In August 1976, Mr. Speaker, Eldorado announced plans to spend $34 million on expansion to 
1980, doubling its production capacity from one million to two million pounds. Their specific plans 
included the construction of a hydro station at Charlot River to free the company from dependence on 
expensive diesel-fired electricity. The station was constructed on schedule for $25 million. New housing 
was constructed to attract and hold skilled labour — over $20 million was spent on the construction of 
255 new housing units from ’76 to ’79, bringing the total Eldorado and Uranium City housing to 580 
units. 
 
Also, they continued in 1980 and ’81 to build homes and recruit labourers. There were improvement, 
expansion and mechanization of the mines and mill at a cost of over $25 million; purchase of a Boeing 
737 to eliminate bottlenecks in freight and passenger transportation at a cost of about $17 million. This 
is what they announced, Mr. Speaker. So we don’t feel too sorry for the market conditions they are 
suffering. It should be remembered that in 1978 Eldorado had a year of record profits of some $17 
million. We believed they were serious about their commitment to Uranium City, Mr. Speaker, but on 
December 3 we found out they weren’t. They didn’t offer any alternative to the people. They didn’t 
consult with this government to see how a gradual phasing out could be accomplished. No, Mr. Speaker, 
they just made an announcement that the mine and the mill would close down at the end of June next 
year. Mr. Speaker, this is a crown corporation of the federal government acting like the worst 
multinational  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
298 

conglomerate. Contrast this behaviour by a federal agency with the following example. When Caland 
Ore Company, a private concern in Atikokan, Ontario, a wholly owned subsidiary of Inland Steel, closed 
down, it offered four years notice initially, which stretched to six years with the actual phase-out period 
spread over the last 18 months. In consequence, a strong and successful locally directed effort to save the 
town was able to be mounted. Mr. Speaker, Eldorado, a crown corporation of the federal Liberal 
government, didn’t have time to sit down with the town council of Uranium City and the provincial 
government to work out a solution. 
 
There is one other little fact, Mr. Speaker, that many people aren’t aware of. In March 1981 the 
Government of Canada transferred to Eldorado a total of 15 million pounds of yellow cake. The 
Government of Canada had stockpiled this in the slump of the late ’60s at a cost of about $6 per pound. 
Today’s export price is approximately $24 per pound. So, Mr. Speaker, it means Eldorado got a gift 
from the Government of Canada with a value of some $420 million. Even with their losses they will still 
come out ahead with that kind of gift. 
 
So I ask, Mr. Speaker, why not have a gradual phase-down period over three to five years? Why not give 
the people of Uranium City a break? Where is the commitment to the development of the northern part 
of our province and our country by the federal Liberal government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Blakeney government will not let the people of Uranium City down. We will meet 
with them, and, as in most other things which have worked for Saskatchewan people, we will do it 
ourselves. We will work with the people of Uranium City and area to see that a bad federal government 
decision does not have disastrous consequences for the people of that community. Mr. Speaker, I will be 
supporting the main motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to participate in this debate on 
the throne speech. I think I will have to be rather quick, so I want to extend congratulations to the mover, 
the hon. member for Estevan (and he will continue serving his constituents well for many years in the 
future, there is no doubt about that), and the hon. member for The Battlefords, the seconder. They both 
did commendable jobs. 
 
I also want, at this time, to say a few words on the hon. member for Saskatoon Mayfair who has 
announced (or announced some time ago) that he would not be seeking the nomination for our party and, 
consequently, wouldn’t be running in the next provincial election. That would be Bev Dyck. Bev Dyck 
has served his constituents well. 
 
While I am at it, I might as well take the opportunity (if I can be so bold as to presume that he will not be 
running again) to say that the hon. member for Saskatoon Nutana also has served the people of 
Saskatoon very well in the past. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I think I will get right into the meat of what I want to say. So if 
you would allow me a few words about the economic and social philosophy of this government and how 
that philosophy directs its actions, that is what I want to speak about for a little while. I think this 
explanation is required because the members  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
299 

opposite clearly do not understand it and have been spreading an unusual amount of misinformation 
about it in recent months. 
 
I want to contrast the philosophy of this government with the philosophy of the members of the party 
opposite. Rarely in this province has that contrast been so clear-cut and obvious. The members opposite 
and their leader in the public gallery use many different labels to describe their political philosophy. 
With the coming to office of President Reagan in the United States, Tories here like to speak of 
themselves as neoconservatives or politicians of the new right. As if they were selling soap. Tories seem 
determined to convince people that their politics is a new, improved variety. I fully understand why the 
members opposite are so anxious to cut all ties with their past, particularly the past in this province in the 
1930s. I can understand their desire to speak of a bold, new vision. But most people in Saskatchewan 
know full well, Mr. Speaker, that Conservatives always get their best visions from glancing into read 
view mirrors. They always talk about what you need tomorrow, by lecturing you on the policies of the 
past. Now what is clear, Mr. Speaker, is that all this talk of the new right or a new vision is but a slick 
Hollywood marketing campaign. What is crystal clear is that these are the same old tired Tories. Now 
what is their bold new vision? What do they offer Saskatchewan in the 1980s? Well, they tell us that 
what this province needs is reasonable free enterprise. They tell us that the time has come to get the 
government off the backs of the people. Now, it seems to me that we’ve heard that kind of talk before. It 
seems to me that we heard it first from Adam Smith, and some of those members opposite probably got 
it right from his mouth. We heard it too, from Herbert Hoover, and that great Tory, R. B. Bennett. We 
heard it recently from Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and Premier Sterling Lyon. 
 
It seems to me that Tories in the past are synonymous. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan spoke so clearly in the election of ’78. It is also why the people of Manitoba spoke so 
clearly on November 17, when they decided to throw out a Lyon government. The people know what the 
Tories mean when they say, “It’s time to get government off your back.” They mean that you should 
forget about a dental plan for your children. You see, that’s government interference in your lives, and 
it’s time to get the government off your back. They mean that you should forget about a prescription 
drug plan because it’s time to get government off our backs. The Tories would say that you should forget 
about the Saskatchewan Hearing Aid Plan because that’s more government interference, and they’ve 
said that time and time again in this House. What about the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living 
(SAIL) plan? What about this plan which provides the elderly and disabled with wheelchairs and 
artificial limbs and respiratory aids, and whatever else they need to be able to leave institutions and live 
independently in their own communities? “Forget that,” the Tories would say. They would say that it’s 
time to get government off your backs. 
 
What about medicare? The Tories say that medicare should follow Otto Lang’s user-pay philosophy. 
That means medicare premiums like in Tory Ontario, where medicare coverage costs a family $552 a 
year, or in oil-rich Alberta where medicare premiums for a family are $228 a year. That’s what the 
Tories mean by getting the government off your back. 
 
Not only in connection with these services, but also when we try to help businessmen with Sedco loans, 
the cry mounts. “Let them use the banks,” they say. “Get the government off your backs.” Or when we 
help farmers through a hog price support program, they shout, “Stop that socialism. Get the government 
off your backs.” These old-fashioned Tories in disguise tell people that the best government is no 
government.  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
300 

Mr. Speaker, that philosophy isn’t something new. It was widely preached and believed about 1840. 
 
I said a few minutes ago, Mr. Speaker, rarely has the philosophy of the members opposite stood in such 
stark contrast to the philosophy of this government. And nowhere is this government’s approach to 
public policy more clearly shown and better served than through the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund is a public policy vehicle of which this government and most 
Saskatchewan people are very proud, and rightfully so. Now most people understand the role of the 
heritage fund, but I want to put it on the record here, for the benefit of the members opposite. They have 
proven to be very slow learners on this subject. Mr. Speaker, as you know, each year all the money that 
comes to the provincial government from non-renewable resources such as oil, natural gas, potash, 
uranium, coal and sodium sulphate is placed in the heritage fund, and each year this legislature decides 
what should be done with that money. There are no hidden deals, as is claimed is the case in Alberta. It’s 
all there for every member to see and question, and each year the largest single chunk of that money is 
used to keep down taxes in this province. 
 
Now let me explain. This year the heritage fund will contribute $550 million to the consolidated revenue 
fund. The consolidated revenue fund is the provincial day-to-day and week-to-week spending money. 
It’s the operating budget which provides the money to build hospitals, pay the nurses, renovate schools, 
repair highways and plough the snow. It pays your property improvement grants and provides all of the 
other services and programs with which most Saskatchewan people are familiar. 
 
This year, $550 million has gone from the heritage fund to that operating budget for our day-to-day 
expenses. Now, $550 million is a pretty significant contribution. It’s nearly one-quarter of this year’s 
total budget. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it’s more than all personal and corporate income taxes combined. 
Because that $550 million was available from the heritage fund, we were not only able to expand 
services and programs in this year’s budget, we were also able to cut income taxes for individuals and 
businesses. 
 
That’s the main way in which the heritage fund helps to keep your costs of living and your taxes down. 
But it’s not the only way. This year the heritage fund will contribute more than $65 million to provincial 
development projects. These are projects which will be of benefit to the province as a whole for many 
years to come. These are longer-term projects which we all know are good, but which will not pay for 
themselves directly. For example, this year the heritage fund will contribute more than $1 million for the 
technical institute in Prince Albert, more than $2 million toward the expansion of the technical institute 
in Moose Jaw, more than $3 million for the construction of forestry development roads in the North, 
more than $4 million toward the expansion and renovation of the college of veterinary medicine in 
Saskatoon, more than $800,000 toward the expansion of Ipsco (Interprovincial Pipe and Steel 
Corporation) in Regina, and some $18 million to help municipalities around the province with their 
various capital projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just a fraction of the list. To be blunt, if there were no heritage fund most of these 
projects would not be going ahead. If there were no heritage fund these important improvements would 
simply be left undone or income taxes would have to raised significantly to pay for them. 
 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
301 

Money from the heritage fund is also helping this province to attain long-term energy security without 
having to raise taxes significantly. For example, more than $63 million will be paid this year to 
companies to encourage the exploration, development and conservation of our petroleum and natural gas 
resources. That money will come from the heritage fund. More than $7 million has been put aside for the 
construction of a pilot ethanol plant. In total, about 70 cents of every dollar that goes into the 
Saskatchewan Heritage Fund is used to keep taxes down in this province. 
 
The Tory members opposite laugh. The fund keeps taxes down with a hefty contribution to the 
government’s operating budget. The fund keeps taxes down by paying for badly needed facilities around 
the province. The fund keeps taxes down by helping in the struggle for long-term energy security. About 
70 cents of every dollar goes to help reduce our cost of living. The rest, about 30 cents of every dollar, is 
set aside for long-term investments such as potash mines, oil wells, hopper cars — investments, Mr. 
Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are making, partly for themselves and partly for their children. 
These are the investments which we are making for the time when the resource money starts to run out. 
 
But the members opposite have made it clear, Mr. Speaker, that they don’t like this idea of investing for 
the future. They have said again and again that we should be using every penny of the heritage fund to 
pay today’s bills. 
 
Allow me to make a few quick observations. Firstly, the Tories seem to have forgotten that under their 
resource policy, Saskatchewan would never have had a heritage fund in the first place. The people of this 
province will recall that the members opposite have always accused us of taking too much money from 
the resource companies. They have always argued that we should have the same royalty structure for oil 
as they have in Alberta. If we had followed their price over the past seven years, the taxpayers of this 
province would have lost more than $1 billion in all royalties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total assets of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund today are just over $1 billion. Purely 
and simply, if the Tories had been in power over the past seven years, Saskatchewan would have had no 
money to put into a heritage fund. Now the members opposite have the gall to tell the people of this 
province how to spend money which their party would have given to the oil companies in the first place. 
Don’t you ever believe that the Tories have changed because by nature Tories cannot change. 
 
This year, when we and Alberta were negotiating with the federal government, when we decided that 
neither of us could lower our royalties except as part of a deal, the Tory leader went up and down this 
province saying, “Lower the royalties. Help out my friends, the oil companies.” So anxious was he to say 
that he stood for lower royalties (as Tories always have) that he would have had us desert Alberta in the 
course of our tough negotiations, thereby breaking the common negotiating front just so everyone would 
know that Tories stand where they have always stood: for lower royalties, for no heritage fund, for no 
money for the people of Saskatchewan, and for all the money for the oil companies and their 
cigar-smoking and bourbon-drinking executives, with whom they communicate quite often I am told. 
 
My second point, Mr. Speaker, is a question of political morality. I want you members opposite, when 
I’m talking about political morality, to pay attention because it’s meant for you. The opposition is 
saying, “We have bills to pay today. We don’t care about tomorrow. We want all this money now. Give 
me; give me.” Mr. Speaker, I think that  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
302 

most Saskatchewan people feel they don’t have a right to it all. They want their children to be able to 
enjoy some of this resource wealth, too. That’s the Saskatchewan way, Mr. Speaker, to live within our 
means today while planning a better tomorrow for our children. Our parents did that for us, as they took 
raw prairie and left this generation rich farmland. We are now taking all the easily recovered oil because 
we and the world need it. Surely we should leave a little something for our children. To do less is to 
dishonour our pioneers. To do any less verges on political immorality. That’s the Tory way, but it’s not 
our way. Mr. Speaker, I say that our way is the Saskatchewan people’s way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just have a minute or two left. I should like to spend the next few minutes on things 
pertaining more to Saskatoon and, in particular, the Saskatoon Centre constituency. One thing I should 
like to mention is the need to continue rent control. I believe that rent control is absolutely necessary 
when one considers the very low vacancy rate which exists in Saskatoon. I suppose that maybe that rate 
will not get any lower now that we have a good government in Manitoba. The influx of Manitobans into 
Saskatchewan will probably stop and probably the influx from Alberta will also stop. You may be 
interested to know that last year 12,000 Albertans decided to leave the jungle and come back to good old 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rent control should offer protection to tenants and landlords alike. I believe it’s doing that. I 
don’t believe we need a situation in Saskatoon like they have in cities like Calgary and Edmonton, where 
rental accommodation is scandalously high because that’s what the traffic will bear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rent control has been under attack by Tory MLAs for a long time. They claim that it’s not 
necessary. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — I want that to go on the record: “Hear, hear!” from the members opposite. They 
are against rent control; they are against renters. I just advise you never to walk through Saskatoon 
Centre constituency unless it’s in the dead of night. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — For shame! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Yes, for shame. They claim it’s not necessary. I tell you, sir, that I have 
thousands of constituents in Saskatoon Centre constituency (yes, hon. member for Nipawin, some even 
go down to Arizona, your constituency) and they will tell you that rent controls are absolutely necessary. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, thousands of constituents to back you up is a powerful backup, and so I urge this 
government to continue rent control into the future. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to say a few words on the need for increased funding for 
the Western Development Museum (WDM). There are a few other things that I wanted to mention, but I 
think I will leave that now because my time has run out. Mr. Speaker, in case you are wondering, I will 
definitely be supporting the motion. 
 
MR. MacAULEY: — Mr. Speaker, as my colleague for Athabasca said, I’ll be retiring after the session. 
He is, of course, right. I think I’m very lucky to be here today, with the illness  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
303 

I’ve had, and I’m very proud to be able to come back to say a few words to my constituents of 
Cumberland. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacAULEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to join with other members of the legislature in 
supporting the throne speech. In the last two years, and especially in the last year, we have been giving 
our main attention to the constitution of this great country of ours. For the first time in 114 years, we will 
now have the opportunity to change our constitution without recourse to the Parliament of Great Britain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the changes taking place both in the federal and provincial governments, the 
people of Indian ancestry are very much concerned about what is taking place. Mr. Speaker, treaty 
Indians are protecting their treaty rights, their land entitlements and their aboriginal rights. The 
non-status and Metis people of this province are also very much concerned about their aboriginal rights. 
I support these aboriginal rights, land entitlements and treaty rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is quite evident that in the past the people of Indian ancestry have not been treated very 
well in this country, especially the treaty people. For many years they were banned from using alcoholic 
beverages, with the result that many of them purchases out-of-treaty Indian status, with the further result 
that many of the so-called Metis people of this province are now called Metis, but they are really 
full-blood Indians. Also, we now have hundreds of full-blood Indian women who have become 
non-status because of marriage. Mr. Speaker, we can now see why the federal government long ago 
maintained the suppression of the Indian people, when many of them were not aware that their land 
entitlements were at stake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is easy to see now that the Fathers of Confederation gave no thought whatsoever to the 
problems that could occur after they were gone, and were not at all concerned that thousands of blood 
Indians were going to lose their land entitlements. To make matters worse, succeeding generations of 
politicians have allowed this situation to continue until we are now faced with having to find a remedy 
for the past thoughtlessness of the federal politicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I commend the Premier of this province, the Hon. Allan Blakeney, for his part in making it 
possible, in the future, for Indian people of this province to obtain their treaty rights, their land 
entitlements and their aboriginal rights. He had the courage and the guts to stand up for what is right for 
the Indian people of this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacAULEY: — Mr. Speaker, may I say a word or two about the northern half of the province. 
The Department of Northern Saskatchewan (DNS) has been having consultation during the past year 
with the people of northern areas regarding the new act concerning municipal affairs. That is another 
step toward improving local  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
304 

municipal governments in northern Saskatchewan and gives the opportunity to all northern people, 
Indian and white, to take part in local government in that area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1982 the government will be providing skill-training programs for Northerners, and I 
welcome these programs. Every effort must be continued to establish training programs in northern 
Saskatchewan. A noticeable area of need is the establishing of fish hatcheries and skilled northern 
people to maintain these projects. There has also been a noticeable reduction in fish population in the 
last 10 years and many of the Indian people still depend on this food product for their living. 
 
The new mining development in northern Saskatchewan has already made an impact on northern people 
and, when further training has taken place, there will no doubt be an improvement in the employment 
situation in the northern areas. 
 
The northern roads are continuing to improve, providing more access to and from the South and other 
northern areas. The road from La Ronge to Nemeiben River is under construction now and Highway No. 
106 from Prince Albert to Creighton and Flin Flon is also under construction and much is being paved. I 
may say that the road is much appreciated by the people living in those areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since I was elected in 1975, I have noticed a great change in northern Saskatchewan. These 
include better health services, better educational facilities, better transportation, better roads and better 
housing, electric power in most communities, better telephone service, and legal services right in the 
North for the northern people. I am sure that if the members of the opposition would only travel to the 
North, they would see and appreciate the changes which have taken place in the last few years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel we should take more notice of what is taking place in Saskatchewan. Large amounts 
of chemicals are going into the ground in the farming areas. One must realize that these chemicals will 
eventually turn up in the rivers of our province and also possibly in the drinking water in our villages. 
People living along the river in communities such as Cumberland House and The Pas will also have to 
deal with this problem in future years. I wish to urge our government to take serious note of what is 
taking place in the area of pollution and chemicals. 
 
Another area of importance is the forest fires in our province and all people travelling in northern 
Saskatchewan during the fire season must be careful. Forest fires have been a big loss to our province 
every year and game and other wildlife are destroyed. I understand it took close to $21.4 million to 
suppress forest fires in 1981. Mr. Speaker, as anyone can see, $21.4 million could be put to much better 
use in health or education services, just to name a couple. Regardless of how much we spend on forest 
protection, it will be of no use if the people of this province and others do not take care. I suggest a good 
advertising campaign might help to bring this serious problem forcefully to the attention of the public at 
large. I commend the pilots of the tanker planes and all the staff of the fire protection branch who 
worked day and night throughout the past summer and early fall to cope with these forest fires. I plead 
with the public at large for their co-operation when travelling in the North in the summer — remember, 
you will eventually be the losers if these huge fires continue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in commenting on the economy of this province, I would like to point out that it has been 
awarded an A-plus rating for its growth. We must redouble our effort to maintain this position. 
However, if the people in this province continue to demand large  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
305 

grants, this situation may change. This might be the case if money continues to be taken out of this 
province by people leaving the country on holidays for long periods of time, especially when this country 
as a whole is suffering from high unemployment and high interest rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need Canadian money to be spent in Canada. We need to manufacture goods in this 
province and all prairie provinces, and to export goods ourselves, rather than purchasing these goods 
from overseas. 
 
Another point I would like to mention is that we all must work together with determination to overcome 
one very serious fault which continues to hamper Canada, both economically and socially. This is that 
we do not seem to be able to value ourselves as a nation undivided. This is that we do not seem to be 
able to value ourselves as a national undivided, but only as separate ethnic groups. I would like to see 
one Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a word or two in Cree, because this will be my last speech in this 
House. 
 
(The next portion of Mr. MacAuley’s speech was spoken in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I wish to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the throne speech on their 
excellent presentation. Their constituents must be very proud indeed to have such men in their areas. Mr. 
Speaker, I will not be voting for the amendment but I will be voting for the throne speech. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, it’s a pleasure to take my place in this Assembly 
to reply to the throne speech. It’s a pleasure to represent the Moosomin constituency. I’d like to say on 
that note that I enjoy representing that constituency and working with the people and assisting them in 
resolving their problems. I am prepared to represent them for as long as they choose to elect me. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to commend the member for Cumberland who has just taken his place in the 
Assembly. His presentations are always honourable and sincere. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, today I would like to address three areas of concern. They are the 
economy, the health department and the agricultural department. You see at the outset that on a daily 
basis this provincial government advertises the performance of Saskatchewan. It advertises, Mr. Speaker, 
that we are a have province. It advertises that the family of crown corporations will ensure our future 
wealth. The problem is that the people of Saskatchewan are suffering under a heavy tax burden. Our 
resource wealth is being sunk into non-renewable resources. Mr. Speaker, if we continue with the 
economic plan of the NDP, we will have no resources, no heritage fund, no jobs, and we will have high 
taxation. 
 
In addition to spending resource wealth to control every aspect of the economy, taxes are also increased 
to pay for social services, health and education. Let me list the areas that the NDP is in, or proposes to 
get into: pulp mills, a malting plant, potash mining, uranium mining, a packing plant, a noodle factory, 
land development, shopping  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
306 

centres, hotels, motels, air lines, expensive executive buses, farming, computers, a steel mill, office 
equipment, a sodium sulphate mine, oil and gas, industrial pumps, house construction or companies, 
highway construction companies, grain cars, personal financial investment companies, saw mills and 
grain futures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the question of their involvement in oil, I would like to touch very briefly on the 
involvement of Saskoil in the province of Saskatchewan, or rather should I say in the province of 
Manitoba, as it is involved in the oil fields in the Kirkella area. I wonder, Mr. Speaker, would it not be 
prudent for the government to utilize its own Saskatchewan crown corporation, the people’s crown 
corporation, Saskoil, to do some drilling on this side of the border, in Saskatchewan, so the 
Saskatchewan people could have access to jobs and opportunities. Mr. Speaker, that is the NDP 
conglomerate referred to as “the family.” 
 
I have just laid out before you that happy family of crown corporations and other conglomerates. Let me 
take an example or two from that list. 
 
World markets for malt have been identified in excess of 500,000 tonnes per year. At the same time we 
are selling malting-quality barley for feed to export customers. That is a loss of millions of dollars every 
year to the farmers of Saskatchewan. That isn’t orderly marketing. That is not development in 
Saskatchewan and that doesn’t produce jobs for Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, that is blind 
stupidity. How long can you continue to sacrifice farm incomes on the altar of philosophy? 
 
Let’s take another example from agriculture. The Minister of Agriculture claims that farmers are ripped 
off by rapeseed crushers. Only one company, Mr. Speaker, crushes rapeseed in Saskatchewan, and that is 
CSP Foods and that is the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. Is the Minister of Agriculture saying the Pool is 
ripping off farmers? Cargill intended to build a crusher at Melfort. That is another option for producers 
that would increase quotas to farmers. That is a local market. That is development. But the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, who never understood agriculture, calls Cargill down every change he gets. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Industry and Commerce sat on the fence when he should have 
supported his own constituents 100 per cent. Mr. Minister of Agriculture, I would like to ask you this 
question: what are you doing about the rip-off you say is taking place? 
 
Those are only two examples of this government’s bungling. They plan to spend $400 to $500 million to 
buy up existing oil fields. That, Mr. Speaker, ties up heritage funds in depleting resources. That will 
increase the tax burden on all of us. That will not create jobs. That will not expand the economy. That 
will not provide opportunity for the young people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The economic policy of the Government of Saskatchewan will guarantee that Saskatchewan will never 
fully realize the potential which its people know is there. 
 
Let me turn now, Mr. Speaker, to the area of health, a concern to the people of Saskatchewan. I would 
like to read into the record a letter that was written to the doctors of this province, signed by Dr. J. S. 
MacMillan, who is, Mr. Speaker, the president of the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association). What 
does he say in that letter? Let me quote: 
 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
307 

The minister made it abundantly clear that in reviewing physicians’ fees he is quite happy to examine 
the gross incomes without looking at the amount of work being carried out by Saskatchewan 
physicians in the service of their patients to generate that income. He acknowledged that 
Saskatchewan’s physicians might be rendering more services than their neighbours and suggested 
that physicians might find a way of decreasing the utilization of medicare. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, wouldn’t it be fair to ask yourself why the Minister of Health would be asking the 
doctors to limit the utilization of medicare? Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the worst part: 
 

It was the Minister of Health’s position that to this end physicians should: (a) discourage return 
visits; (b) tell patients who are in the office frequently (say, every two to three weeks) that their 
problem might not be medical; (c) decide how many hours a week they should reasonably work 
(and he raised the figure of 60 hours) and refuse to work past that; (d) place more emphasis on 
preventive health. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that those are very damning comments about our Minister of Health. 
I would suggest that the people of Saskatchewan have reason to be very gravely concerned about the 
direction this government is taking in health. 
 
Let’s look at another comment the minister has made, not on one but on two occasions. He has stated 
that he believes in long waiting lists as a sign of an efficient hospital system. Mr. Speaker, I fail to 
understand the logic in the Minister of Health’s thinking that a long waiting list is a sign of an efficient 
health system. 
 
I would like to ask this question: does the Minister of Social Services subscribe to the same thinking as 
the Minister of Health? Does he believe that a sign of an efficient nursing home system would be a long 
waiting list? Obviously he must, because there is a long waiting list to get into nursing homes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make sure that the record is clear that this government’s position on 
health is a very shaky position. I would like to again refer to some of the questions that I raised in 
question period today, questions to the Minister of Health about how he is shifting the responsibility of 
health care in the province of Saskatchewan to local government. 
 
I referred during question period to a front page story written by a hospital administrator who is 
desperate to obtain assistance from the government and to have an understanding of the people in the 
area that hospital serves. We on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, support the in-home care program, 
the nursing home institutions that we have, and medicare. It is interesting to note that every time we say 
that we support medicare or the nursing homes or the in-home care program, the government laughs. I 
don’t know why they would want to do that. Obviously they can’t be to political, because in real terms 
who could possibly be opposed to medicare? Who could be opposed to caring for the health of our 
citizens? Absolutely no one in the province of Saskatchewan, be he politician, be he a member of the 
cloth, be he a doctor. It wouldn’t matter, Mr. Speaker, what he was. All people support good and 
reasonable access to health care. Obviously the Minister of Health does not support that concept. 
 



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
308 

Mr. Speaker, I am not going to belabour the Minister of Health with all these criticisms. Certainly they 
have been well laid out numerous times. I’m sure the Assembly’s time is better spent in ways other than 
going over the many errors and bungles and acts of irresponsibility that have recently been performed by 
the Minister of Health. But, Mr. Speaker, I still firmly believe that it was necessary to raise it in the 
House and make sure that the minister is getting the message. Obviously he must be; I see him taking 
notes. 
 
I would like to move very briefly into some agricultural concerns that I have. I would like to set it on 
record that the Minister of Agriculture (and it’s too bad that he isn’t in the House at this time) took a 
very serious plunge downward in his popular approach to agriculture. Certainly, yesterday he was 
making his election speech — at least I would have thought it was an election speech, the way he was 
carrying on. He was putting on quite a good show for the House. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
Minister of Urban Affairs thinks it was a good speech. I don’t know whether dramatics in the Assembly 
— pointing of fingers, clenching of fists and those kinds of things, and making comments in this House 
that certainly aren’t in line with my thinking — are very commendable on the part of the Minister of 
Agriculture . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Heaven only knows, he is on record as having put himself in 
the hole far enough and now we see, Mr. Speaker, that he has done it again. 
 
Take a look at the positions that he has taken. I think it’s fair to quote his comments out of the Hansard 
from yesterday. I quote from December 7, page 272. He starts out by referring to my desk mate, the 
member for Wilkie: 
 

The member for Wilkie talked about magpies. Four times the members opposite were all on their 
feet voting against the Saskatchewan Beef Stabilization Act. 

 
Yes, we on this side of the House voted against The Beef Stabilization Act. That’s number one. Number 
two, like other legislation that is passed in this House, whether or not we agree with it, it is a program 
that was launched in the province of Saskatchewan. So if we are to be responsible on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, it’s not our responsibility to scuttle that program, as the minister is attempting to 
lay before this Assembly. It’s our responsibility to help the Minister of Agriculture (in this case, the beef 
stabilization program) draft that program through its regulations in a way which will be workable — 
workable primarily for the cow-calf operation. That’s the backbone of the cattle industry. That’s what we 
are trying to do. So when the minister gets up, he loses even more credibility by saying, “Oh yes, here we 
have the opposition. They originally voted against it; now they are up talking about how to improve it.” 
Yes, we are! Doesn’t he understand the parliamentary system? I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if he does. I don’t 
think he does. 
 
The fact of the matter is that a lot of the members opposite don’t understand the parliamentary system. I 
say again, yes, we voted against the beef stabilization program. But now that it is a ship afloat, if you 
like, we are on it and we surely don’t want to scuttle it. So we’re going to do all we can to help that 
government opposite, and particularly the Minister of Agriculture, to make it work for the benefit of the 
cattle producers. 
 
What did he say beyond that, Mr. Speaker? He said: 
 

And at the 16 meetings in June, October and November, the Tories sent out their henchmen with 
their speeches and their questions written out on  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
309 

paper. Down in Stoughton, in the southeast part of the province, where the meetings were held for 
the producers from the constituencies of Souris-Cannington, Moosomin and Indian Head-Wolseley, 
they went so far as to attack the integrity of the members of the beef stabilization board — people 
from the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Western Canada Cow-Calf Association, the 
Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association and the National Farmers’ Union. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, from those comments stated in this House (which are in black and white and easy for 
you people to understand) by the Minister of Agriculture, what do we draw? I’ll tell you what I draw 
from those comments. They are totally out of line and they are not true. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to inform this House why those comments irk me so badly. I want to tell this House 
now. There was a beef stabilization meeting in Moosomin; there were from 200 to 300 people there. I 
don’t know whether they were Liberals, NDP or Conservatives. I don’t know what their politics were 
because the majority of them were cattlemen. The majority of them had cowboy boots on, and I don’t 
know if you can tell the politics of an individual by the boots he wears, but I don’t think so. They were 
involved in the cattle industry and concerned about the cattle industry, and they were concerned about 
the beef stabilization program. And, Mr. Speaker, they came out to that meeting seeking information. 
 
I made a telephone call to our agricultural representative before that meeting, and I said to him, “Look, 
there could be a problem at that meeting. Those people there might get into a debate, into an argument as 
to whether or not that program should be in existence. I want to tell you that I’ll be there to take notes for 
my information, but I will not speak because I had my say on that legislation here in this Assembly and I 
voted against it.” 
 
I told that agricultural representative what I would do and that would be to assist him (because he was 
chairing the meeting) to keep that meeting on track, in other words, to assist in not letting it break down 
into a debate as to whether that program should or should not exist. I offered my assistance in that 
regard, on behalf of the cattle producers of that area. And for the record, Mr. Speaker, I did not say 
anything at that particular meeting. Not one word did I say during the formal setting of that meeting. 
Certainly, I met with the cattle producers after. I met with people who are members, I suspect, of almost 
every, if not all, of the organizations I quoted to the Minister of Agriculture. I had no differences with 
them. I had no shame in telling them that I voted against the beef stabilization program. I told them why. 
 
After I acted in sincerity, the Minister of Agriculture came into this House and laid a charge like that. 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, when the day comes, the low day, when the farmers and cattle producers of 
this province need politicians (whether they be Liberal, NDP, or Conservative) to tell them how they 
should think, then I tell you it will be a black day in the province of Saskatchewan. A black day indeed! 
And I tell you that it’s going to be a black day December 7. We will all remember December 7, for the 
Minister of Agriculture, as a result of his comments, has cast some terrible aspersions on a lot of cattle 
producers in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not the first time the Minister of Agriculture has made blatant attacks on individuals 
or groups in the province of Saskatchewan. I suppose it would be  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
310 

fair to say that’s enough time on the Minister of Agriculture, and certainly enough time with reference to 
the beef stabilization program since it has been mentioned and discussed many times in the House. On 
that note, and on the heels of those comments that I made respecting the decisions that are made from 
time to time by cabinet ministers, I think it is important to lay out the recent Gallup polls. What do the 
recent Gallup polls say about big government, including cabinet ministers who impose their will on the 
people of Saskatchewan? What will they say? We’ll take the Prairies, which takes into consideration 
Saskatchewan (although that happy little Maritimer, the Premier, came out here and I think he thought it 
was a ship or something, but anyway, it is part of the Prairies). I want to quote from the Leader-Post, 
Wednesday, December 2. It very simply states that the question asked of the people being polled was 
this: 
 

Speaking of our future, which do you think will be the biggest threat to Canada in the years to come: 
big business, big labour, or big government? 

 
And going down the list and taking the Prairies, we see it’s 22 per cent for big business, 23 per cent for 
big labour, and 50 per cent for big government. There is nearly as much concern in the province of 
Saskatchewan that big government is going to sink this province as with big business and labour 
combined. 
 
So I say, Mr. Speaker, that if the government wants to lose office, then it should keep up with its 
dictatorial attitudes that are imposed on the people of Saskatchewan, because the Gallup poll indicates 
that is the number one fear in the Prairies and in particular in Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to touch on something else that was imposed on the people of Saskatchewan and that is the 20 per 
cent sliding gas tax. Boy, I’ll tell you, if that doesn’t bother you in the province of Saskatchewan I don’t 
know what does. Let’s take a look at what happens when a Saskatchewan consumer fills a 40 litre gas 
tank; that is $15.84, based on an average price of 39.6 cents per litre. Saskatchewan, through the 20 per 
cent ad valorem tax, gets $3.16, SGI gets 60 cents, for a total of $3.76; federal excise tax, $4.96; and the 
provincial royalty, $2; total government take, $10.72. In other words, if we were to take off government 
tax, if big government wasn’t imposing its will on the consumers of this province, then we could buy gas 
for two-thirds of what we’re having to pay for it in this province today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to raise another point which I think is very important to have put on the record, 
particularly in this year, designated by the United Nations as the International Year of Disabled Persons. 
Here in the province of Saskatchewan the time has come for a building accessibility law. I recognize that 
the human rights of the disabled have been advanced by the publication of the accessibility standards by 
the human rights commission. I contend that that action is not enough. I contend that if the government 
is really serious about accessibility legislation for the disabled, it should introduce it without delay. I find 
it unconscionable that it has taken years to develop a building code that has yet to be tabled in the 
legislature and, furthermore, that there still is no accessibility law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, passing a law about accessibility will not in itself change attitudes. What it will do is bring 
people into contact. It is this which changes attitudes. Mr. Speaker, in all seriousness, call on the 
government not to make a mockery of the International Year of Disabled Persons by just paying 
lip-service to their legitimate aspirations. I say the government should take definite action and bring 
forth accessibility legislation. 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
311 

Regarding senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, the record of the government in its attitude toward senior 
citizens is outrageous. For the record, I would like to quote from an editorial which appeared in the 
Prairie Messenger called ‘opting Out the Aged’: 
 

Saskatchewan, the home of medicare, hospitalization and denticare, the province that prides itself on 
being the nation’s social laboratory, opts out of its social care one whole segment of its people. The 
elderly who need care in nursing homes and senior citizens’ residences have two choices: to enter as 
paupers so that government has no choice but to treat them as welfare dependents, or to retain their 
personal independence at the cost of spending their life savings on monthly instalment payments. 
 
The member for Regina Rosemont rightly criticized his own government recently on this issue. He 
pointed out that the elderly, most of whom prefer not to be living in nursing homes, are being 
penalized for longevity and ill health. The present policy has other ill effects as well. It encourages a 
welfare mentality of dependence and hopelessness. Why should the citizens of the province strive to 
save and progress financially when the government in the end penalizes those who are fortunate in 
having done well? It awards those to whom the province owes the most — its pioneers, its elderly, 
those who have worked the longest, paid the most taxes and contributed the most often in services 
and involvement — the worst final indignity possible, stripping away all independence, self-esteem 
and pride and impoverishing them in order to give them what the elderly deserve to have under any 
conditions: a home, care, food and a helping hand. The nation’s social laboratory owes its elderly a 
better deal. 

 
It’s rather an interesting editorial. Certainly we on this side of the House can’t be the only people who 
are thinking that the government’s whole health package — whether it be care for the elderly people, the 
disabled or everyday attention to the health needs of the people of Saskatchewan — is deteriorating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude some of my comments on a matter that it would seem the 
government has some difficulty in addressing. It’s an issue, none the less, because of changing economic 
times which have required a lot of the women in our society today to go out into the workforce. At the 
same time, they want to retain that right, ability and desire to have children and to raise a family. They’re 
being forced by what I believe is a regressive economic policy of this government to move out into that 
workforce. Therefore, it is creating yet another situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to discuss day care just for a few moments. It is well known that more women are 
working either by choice or necessity. Fewer women are staying at home until their children reach school 
age. The extended family has all but disappeared. While single-parent families are more and more 
common, some families are re-examining the assumption that a child’s place is in the home until the age 
of six. Consequently, the demand for day care has never been greater. The Progressive Conservative 
commitment to day care is not new. We have long recognized the importance of good, accessible day 
care, as the past record shows. Mr. Speaker, there are, however, fundamental differences between us and 
the government of the day. Let’s take a look at those differences. 
 
Some would assert that there simply isn’t enough low-cost day care to go around.  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
312 

Financial pressures and today’s changing attitudes have caused many people to turn to day care, but the 
demand for subsidized spaces has outstripped the supply. Waiting lists pose serious problems for single 
parents who need to work but can’t get their children into day care they can afford. 
 
Universal day care, perhaps as an extension of the public school system, has been suggested as a solution 
by some outside of the government. Mr. Speaker, we profoundly disagree. Responsibility for a young 
child’s care rests with the family, not the government. We feel that is the way it should be. The 
overwhelming majority of parents are perfectly able to make arrangements for their children’s care and, 
obviously, have the right and the responsibility to do so. Universal day care would undermine the role of 
the family. It would contradict cherished and time-honoured values. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consider the costs alone. The funding needed to provide universal day care would be 
staggering. Any government has a responsibility to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan who don’t have 
children or don’t need subsidized day care, as well as those who do. I ask: why should universal service 
be government sponsored when many families can cover the costs themselves and others don’t require 
the service? 
 
The welfare of our children is all-important. Certainly, none would argue that a hand should not be 
stretched out to help parents who can’t afford the care their children need. Families should not be asked 
to choose between their children’s welfare and a desperately needed second salary. The challenge facing 
Saskatchewan is to help meet the needs of these families while, at the same time, being responsible in 
the management of tax dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a Conservative government would make day care more accessible. More attention would 
be given to encouraging expansion and use of private-home day care. Mr. Speaker, increasing the range 
of choice in quality day care for all citizens is an important priority. New concepts in day care should be 
encouraged by offering start-up costs to promising innovative approaches. The rest should depend on the 
initiative of private citizens and organizations in our communities. Mr. Speaker, while government can 
offer financial support and fresh ideas, the success of day care in Saskatchewan is ultimately dependent 
on the initiative of individuals — those who establish and run day care services, and parents, who must 
be the final judges of which system works best and has the most to offer their children. 
 
Our children are our future. They have a right to the best care we can give them as parents and to the 
security of a warm, happy environment. Responsibility for giving a child this security and care, 
especially in the early years, lies with the family. So day care should not be a universally imposed system 
proclaimed by government as every child’s right; rather it must remain a personal choice by each family 
in the best interests of their child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the role of government in day care, as Progressive Conservatives see it, is to make the best 
use of the resources available to those families who need it, but can’t afford it alone, and to help 
communities and individuals provide a variety of good day care service to all parents choosing to take 
advantage of them. In following this course, Mr. Speaker, we are placing our faith in the judgment of 
Saskatchewan families, as opposed to that of the Saskatchewan government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have covered a fairly wide range of topics in a reasonably short length of  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
313 

time, given my past record. Mr. Speaker, at this point I would just like to say that I will be opposing the 
main motion and supporting the amendment. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you. I want to open my remarks by noting a number of 
inaccuracies that have just been made by the member opposite. The member for Moosomin brought to 
the attention of this House, in his closing remarks, two criticisms of the Government of Saskatchewan 
which I thought were extremely interesting. One was a criticism by the member opposite that this 
government has not been committed to accessibility for the handicapped. He went on to criticize this 
government for not supporting a commitment to accessibility legislation and for not supporting 
accessibility standards. I thought that was a very interesting criticism. The member neglected to note the 
comments in the throne speech which say: 
 

In this International Year of the Disabled the Government of Saskatchewan is pleased to 
announce that it will give prompt consideration to the enactment of accessibility standards in 
public buildings based on the recommendations of an advisory committee which has been 
established to consider a uniform building code. This committee is reviewing the comprehensive 
standards proposed by the provincial accessibility committee and already adopted by the 
Department of Government Services as guideline specifications for all new and renovated 
provincial government buildings. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — He also neglected, Mr. Speaker, to bring to the attention of the legislature the fact 
that the Government of Saskatchewan has already committed approximately $1.5 million this year, the 
International Year of the Disabled, for accessibility to public government buildings. 
 
I think we’ve just witnessed an example of the kind of misleading statements that are frequently made by 
members opposite. I wish that members opposite would at least read the throne speech before they 
criticize the government. 
 
It was also interesting to hear the member opposite talk about the need for day care. I am very pleased 
that the member opposite who, when I stood up six months ago in this House in May and called for 
expanded day care programs, was on his feet, followed by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, 
opposing those programs and opposing my comments. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — I say, Mr. Speaker, I am glad to see that they are now supporting day care; but I do 
feel that their reversal of position is a very interesting one six months before we go into a provincial 
election . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Having been diverted slightly from the remarks I intended to 
open with, as a result of the comments made by the member for Moosomin, I want to say that it’s a 
pleasure for me to take part in this throne speech debate this afternoon. I am honoured to be representing 
my constituents in the provincial legislature and I am especially pleased to be representing them on 
behalf of the New Democratic Party. 
 
There are three prominent issues that residents in my constituency have brought to my attention on 
numerous occasions over the past year. I want to begin my remarks by comments on those three issues 
which are: increasing interest rates,  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
314 

university funding and concerns over VIA Rail cutbacks. 
 
First, I would like to comment on the question of interest rates. One concern, of course, that my 
constituents have is the rapidly increasing cost of living and particularly the high interest rates on 
mortgages that many families are facing. In this respect, Mr. Speaker, I am extremely pleased that our 
government has introduced in the Assembly today legislation that will protect home-owners from 
foreclosure by the banks in the event that they are unable to meet their mortgage payments. This will 
offer many home-owners an increased sense of security during times which are very uncertain. We, of 
course, realize that this legislation is only one of many steps that are required to protect home-owners 
from high interest rates. The most effective solutions lie at the national level and our government has 
advised Ottawa that the burden of high interest rates could be substantially eased if the federal 
government would re-establish the policy of legislated fixed interest rates which it abandoned in 1969. 
At that time, Mr. Speaker, the federal Liberal Party argued that doing away with the legislated interest 
rate of 6 per cent would lead to increased competition between the banks, and that that would drive 
down the interest rates. They were supported in the position by the federal Conservative Party. Only the 
New Democratic Party voted against that proposal at the time, and only the NDP is insistent now in its 
demand that high interest rates be controlled through a lower interest rate, set by legislation in the House 
of Commons, rather than by the banks at the leading of the Bank of Canada. 
 
Unfortunately, it does not appear that the federal government has any intention of implementing such a 
plan. I believe, in addition to passing The Home-owner Security Act, our provincial government ought to 
extend direct financial assistance to all home-owners through an increase in the provincial home 
mortgage interest tax credit program, so that possible savings are increased to $750 a year from the 
present maximum benefit of $250. Our provincial government was the first and only provincial 
government in Canada to bring forward such a tax credit program. I now propose, Mr. Speaker, that in 
these difficult times, our government extend that program and expand its benefits. 
 
I want to comment for a moment now on university funding. A large number of residents in my 
constituency teach and study at the university. They are naturally concerned about the cutbacks in 
funding to post-secondary education announced in the federal budget. They are also concerned about 
what future levels of provincial funding will be. As the throne speech emphasizes, Mr. Speaker, our 
government will continue to fight against the federal health and post-secondary education cuts, which we 
estimate will cost Saskatchewan $33 million this year and $285 million over the next five years. At the 
same time, however, our government has made it clear that we are not prepared to allow these cutbacks 
to have an impact upon our provincial institutions. 
 
I was very pleased with the official announcement by the Premier last week that all the federal cutbacks 
in post-secondary education announced for 1982 will be made up by our provincial government. 
 
The resource policies of our government are now providing us with the revenues needed to shield the 
university from what will be more than a $10 million reduction in post-secondary education funding this 
coming year. Beyond these positive measure, Mr. Speaker, it must be realized that the University of 
Saskatchewan has been facing financial difficulties quite apart from the federal cutbacks. The last three 
years have seen tight budgets for both universities — budgets which have fallen short of the rate of  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
315 

inflation and which has not taken into account the rapidly increasing student enrolment. In Saskatoon, 
student enrolment is at least 1,000 over predictions made a short time ago. While university funding 
should not be tied to enrolment directly, this major enrolment increase has clearly added to the financial 
needs of the university. 
 
The university is experiencing other financial pressures as well. Energy and teaching equipment costs are 
rising well above the rate of inflation. The excellent construction program our government has 
implemented on campus has actually resulted in extra operating expenses for additional buildings, and 
these must be budgeted for. Faculty salaries, particularly starting salaries, are falling behind those for 
comparable positions for qualified persons in the private sector, and tuition rates, while having dropped 
dramatically as a percentage of the university budget, have risen to the point that they are now actually 
the highest in western Canada. 
 
In Saskatoon these pressures have resulted in reductions in service at the university including the 
phasing out of two departments and the Institute for Northern Studies. Other departments have 
experienced reductions of staff or loss of teaching assistant positions, and the library has come under 
considerable pressure. Mr. Speaker, our universities have and must continue to offer a high quality of 
education. It is thus most important that the pressures I have expressed be responded to quickly in the 
upcoming provincial budget. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that they will be. And I urge our New 
Democratic Party government to continue its tradition of strong support for the universities by ensuring a 
significant increase over and above inflation to the two universities in the 1982-83 provincial budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a third area that is of special concern to my constituents are the cutbacks recently 
implemented by the federal government in VIA Rail service to our city. The federal Minister of 
Transport announced the phase-out of direct transcontinental rail passenger service from Winnipeg to 
Saskatoon and Edmonton this July, and those cutbacks were officially implemented on November 15. 
This is another one of those federal decisions that is almost incomprehensible, Mr. Speaker. Before the 
Supercontinental service was discontinued on November 15, passenger service one way from Winnipeg 
to Saskatoon stood at over 175,000 passengers a year. Ridership had increased by 40 per cent over the 
past four years. From every policy viewpoint, Mr. Speaker, it made sense to improve rather than phase 
out that service. 
 
In times when energy conservation is imperative, the train offers the most energy conserving means of 
travel of any mode of transport. For students, senior citizens, and families of low or moderate incomes, 
train travel is much more affordable than the plane. For larger trips it is, of course, much more 
comfortable than the bus. Relative to other forms of transportation, rail passengers service is also the 
least subsidized form of transportation. Yet in light of all these facts, Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government chose to phase out service through Saskatoon at a time when Saskatoon and the West is 
really the only area of Canada whose economy is growing to any significant extent. 
 
It is also incredible that some members on the other side of the House, such as the member for Thunder 
Creek, made comments stating that they in fact were not opposed to the cutbacks. The member for 
Thunder Creek indicated that he had no special desire to VIA Rail service continued, that he was not 
particularly upset about the cutbacks. Mr. Speaker, I think that that is truly an incredible statement for 
any member of the  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
316 

Saskatchewan legislature to make about the discontinuance of a major transportation service to 
Saskatchewan people. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the decision by the federal government is a real blow to 
Saskatoon, and for many smaller communities like Melville it means the complete loss of any kind of 
passenger rail service. 
 
I am pleased that our provincial Minister of Transport, the Hon. Gordon MacMurchy, has done much to 
fight the federal government’s decision. Each local region of Saskatchewan affected has also fought the 
phase-out. In Saskatoon, where I and a number of other concerned citizens organized to fight the cut 
backs, we found Mr. Pepin, as federal Minister of Transport, simply impossible to deal with. He refused 
all our requests to meet with him in Saskatoon to discuss the problems the loss of direct service would 
pose. And when we sent a delegation to Ottawa, he was completely insensitive to its request. It is simply 
another example of what we have, unfortunately, come to expect from the federal government. 
 
I was pleased that our government joined in initiating court action against the federal government on this 
issue. While the court today has ruled that Ottawa can legally act unilaterally to phase out rail service 
without consulting the Canadian Transport Commission or without holding public hearings, I believe 
that that judgment should be challenged. I’m pleased to see that Transport 2000 will be appealing the 
decision. Thus I want to urge our provincial government to participate in the court appeal against the 
federal government on the VIA Rail issue, and not to follow the path recently announced of not 
participating. It is imperative, Mr. Speaker, that our provincial government fight this decision to the very 
end and not leave a stone unturned in trying to get it reversed. 
 
I want now, Mr. Speaker, to comment on some of the other areas of the throne speech that I believe are 
of special importance and some of the new policy initiatives that I believe are required. 
 
One area that I want to touch on is that of alternative energy sources. Another welcome announcement in 
the throne speech is the proposed amendment to The Power Corporation Act, which will more clearly set 
out the authority of SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) to encourage energy conservation and to 
promote the development of alternative forms of energy. 
 
As members of the House know, I have, since being elected, attempted to encourage our government to 
invest in alternative forms of energy, particularly wind, solar, and biomass development. The 
announcement of the pilot ethanol plant in last year’s budget was one important example of the 
initiatives that have been taken in this area. Much more could be done, however, in promoting the use of 
solar energy and wind power and in making use of sources of biomass, such as garbage, as a potential 
source of fuel. 
 
Action also needs to be taken to remove some of the institutional impediments to the use of alternative 
energy sources by ensuring that credit is made available to those who incorporate alternative energy 
sources into the design of their commercial operations and residences. 
 
Another institutional barrier that must be overcome is zoning regulations which, for  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
317 

example, generally fail to protect the user of solar energy from losing access to the sun at some point in 
the future, as a result of neighbouring construction. Our provincial government should therefore 
introduce amendments to urban planning legislation making provision for municipalities to pass by-laws 
protecting the right to sunlight. 
 
More demonstration projects in the area of solar and wind energy would also be a very welcome 
initiative. Our provincial government has implemented a very successful series of residential energy 
conservation demonstration projects. We should not implement a similar series of projects, 
demonstrating the agricultural, commercial and residential applications of solar and wind power. 
 
In the area of energy conservation, Mr. Speaker, I can say with pride that our provincial government has 
the most progressive set of programs in Canada, but much more needs to be done. 
 
One area of great importance is home retrofit, where the Saskatchewan Power Corporation $1,000 
interest-free loan and the federal CHIP (Canadian Home Insulation Program) at present only provide 
financial incentives for a fairly limited insulation job. I believe that what is needed is a greatly expanded 
provincial assistance program for home retrofit in which, depending on income, interest-free loans of up 
to $6,000 would be available for home retrofit projects in which fuel consumption is reduced by 40 per 
cent or more. Such a program would reflect the fact that a comprehensive retrofit job on a home can cost 
$6,000 to $10,000 today. The existing retrofit programs, in contract, are simply encouraging projects 
which only save between 10 and 20 per cent of fuel costs and involve much smaller expenditures. An 
expanded home retrofit program could substantially reduce natural gas and electricity demands for home 
heating in Saskatchewan and offer substantial savings to individual consumers. It should thus 
significantly reduce the amount of natural gas our government needs to buy from Alberta, and should 
also have a moderate impact in reducing electricity demand for home heating. Financial assistance to 
help home-owners undertake major energy conservation projects in their homes is especially important 
during periods when higher interest rates result in savings from conservation being discounted into the 
future very rapidly thus undervaluing long-term returns. 
 
Given the inflationary pressures home-owners are now facing, it is extremely important that our 
government, in the next budget, set in place incentives that will make long-term investments, such as 
energy conservation in existing homes, financially attractive in the shorter term. If a major home retrofit 
program is to be successfully undertaken, it is important to also have in place a proper support system in 
terms of retrofit standards, building inspection and trained construction personnel. Initiatives at the 
provincial level should be taken immediately to put this support system in place. 
 
I want to just comment, Mr. Speaker, in closing on this topic, on what some of those initiatives should 
include. First of all, a revised provincial building code needs to be introduced, which would include 
insulation standards well above the national building code. The revised guidelines should reflect the 
Saskatchewan climate and the building techniques available in the province. Secondly, and more 
importantly, specific standards for a residential retrofit program must be established in conjunction with 
the home-owner assistance plan. 
 
Thirdly, a retrofit program will require high-quality workmanship and a much more comprehensive 
program of building inspection. Additional building inspectors would  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
318 

need to be hired by the province to inspect retrofit projects. Staff capable of doing energy audits on 
existing houses before and after retrofit would also need to be hired and trained. Such a program would 
almost certainly stimulate a major expansion in the energy conservation industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Commercial opportunities would include things like the expansion of firms specializing in home retrofit 
and house sealing, the manufacture of air-to-air heat exchangers, research and manufacture of 
energy-efficient windows, the manufacture of insulated window shutters and curtains and other forms of 
mobile window insulation, and the manufacture of energy-conservation-testing equipment, such as 
equipment for measuring air tightness and heat loss. 
 
Not only would the implementation of a home retrofit assistance program stimulate the expansion of 
such conservation industries, but by taking the lead in energy conservation in Canada, Saskatchewan 
could put itself in a position to market materials and contract out skilled personnel to conservation 
projects in other parts of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two other areas I would particularly like to comment on, and one of them is the 
transport of hazardous materials, which I was pleased to see was addressed in the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
That section of the Speech from the Throne notes that it is the intention of our provincial government to 
introduce complementary legislation to the recent federal legislation governing the handling and 
movement of dangerous goods, and also announces that the existing provincial inspection staff will be 
trained to serve as dangerous goods inspectors. In addition to the present announcement in the throne 
speech, which I very much welcome. I believe that other measures should be considered by our 
provincial government to reduce the risk posed by the transport and storage of hazardous materials. 
 
This matter is of special concern to my constituency, Mr. Speaker. Every month, upwards of 150 
different kinds of hazardous substances are shipped through my constituency. These include everything 
from chlorine, propane and vinyl chloride, to high explosives, tear gas material, ammunition, and liquid 
sodium cyanide. Saskatoon has at least 62 locations where dangerous materials such as insecticides, 
sulphuric acid or chlorine are stored. Several preventive measures to reduce the risk of accidents could 
be taken with the assistance of the provincial environment department and the provincial emergency 
measures organization (EMO) and such measures could include the following actions. 
 
First, assistance could be provided to help relocate high risk commercial outlets and storage facilities to 
safer parts of the city, for instance locating them in an industrial area and close to an emergency access 
route. These facilities are now sometimes found near residential neighbourhoods where they pose a 
much higher risk. 
 
Second, separation distances should be established for all facilities storing hazardous chemicals or other 
dangerous materials. There should be an automatic separation distance from other adjacent buildings. 
 
Third, the provincial government should not allow high-rise or apartment construction within a set 
distance of any major rail or traffic route where dangerous goods are regularly being transported. These 
are all examples of how better prevention could be  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
319 

achieved through improved urban planning with the assistance of the province. 
 
Attention should also be given to the storage of hazardous materials within our schools. Many schools 
have a large number of chemicals on hand, and in some cases they are improperly labelled and 
improperly stored. Any legislation and regulations which are passed should attempt to include provisions 
which deal with the labelling and containment of hazardous materials. As the recent accident involving 
the spill of Golden Malrin at the Regina Bus Depot demonstrated, federal labelling and containment 
regulations are woefully inadequate. 
 
While the Saskatchewan Transportation Company did, of course, not realize that they were actually 
shipping a hazardous material, the fact remains that there are no regulations at present which prevent the 
shipment of toxic chemicals in glass, as was being done when the bus depot accident occurred. Neither 
are there regulations which require the ingredients of a chemical, or even the toxic ingredients of a 
chemical, to be listed on the label so that in the event of exposure the proper medical treatment may be 
given quickly. In the Regina Bus Depot accident, the ingredients of essentially 75 per cent of the 
chemical involved were unknown and could not be readily obtained for immediate medical treatment. 
 
In general, as I have mentioned on previous occasions in this legislature, there is a need for a greatly 
expanded provincial emergency measures organization that is well funded and that can act as a central 
training organization for local groups across the province to respond to accidents involving the transport 
of hazardous materials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area I would like to comment on is an initiative that our provincial government has 
taken recently, while not specifically mentioned in the throne speech. It is the matter of freedom of 
information — a matter of some considerable importance to the future operations of our government. 
 
I was very pleased when the Attorney General recently announced that former Chief Justice Culliton was 
being asked to undertake a study into whether freedom of information legislation ought to be passed at a 
future sitting of this legislature. I am strongly in favour of the passage of such legislation for I believe the 
assurance that public access to information will always be provided as a legal right is important to 
strengthening the workings of democracy in any province. 
 
Justice Culliton is asked to review the recently introduced freedom of information legislation in Nova 
Scotia and also the proposed federal bill on freedom of information. I want to particularly urge, at this 
time, that the format of Nova Scotia Bill not be adopted because this has a large number of fundamental 
weaknesses which greatly reduce the effectiveness of freedom of information legislation. 
 
The Nova Scotia freedom of information act provides a good example, in my view, of what we should 
seek to avoid in Saskatchewan. The preciseness with which material must be requested before it can be 
obtained is one serious weakness. Unless very precise requests are made, the information may not be 
released under the Nova Scotia Bill. 
 
Another weakness is the lack of requirement for the deputy head of a department to actually respond to a 
request for information when it is made. The Nova Scotia Act states that where the deputy head has not 
responded to a written request for information within 15 working days of its submission, the deputy is 
deemed to have  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
320 

denied the request. 
 
A third weakness is that the final appeal, when information has been denied under the Nova Scotia Act, 
is made to the legislature itself rather than to the courts, thus making appeal tedious and on occasions, 
highly political. 
 
The Nova Scotia legislation also provides for quite widely defined exemption sections — wide 
categories of information that can remain confidential — and makes the error of stating a number of 
areas where information is specifically to be made public, thus leaving further confusion over what is 
intended to be made available. The courts may well decide to exclude from their interpretation of what is 
to be released all classes of information not specifically itemized for public release in the Act. 
 
These criticisms of the Nova Scotia freedom of information legislation highlight what a Bill in 
Saskatchewan should contain in order to be effective. 
 
Firstly, the exemptions from the rule that all information is to be made public should be precise and 
should be narrow in scope. Loosely worded or broadly defined exemptions would inevitably mean that 
much information would not become public. 
 
Secondly, an independent review body must be available to make binding decisions on appeals against 
denials of request for information. Appeals should not be made to the legislature. 
 
Thirdly, there should be a strictly enforced time period during which the provincial government should 
either meet or deny the initial request for information. 
 
Finally, under new freedom of information legislation, all final versions of reports and documents and 
names of files should be indexed by the government department for which they were prepared. These 
indices should be published and regularly updated. In addition, the Act should make provision for the 
indexing and release of information on a subject-by-subject basis. Without these provisions, freedom of 
information legislation would become ineffective, because it would simply not be possible for people to 
know what information is available. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one final area on which I would like to comment, and that emerges from the recent 
oil-pricing agreement concluded between the Government of Saskatchewan and the Government of 
Canada. That is indeed, Mr. Speaker, an agreement of which I believe all citizens in Saskatchewan can 
be proud. 
 
One can consistently see through that agreement how the Government of Saskatchewan has made a 
better deal for the people of Saskatchewan than the Government of Alberta was able to negotiate for the 
people of Alberta. One can consistently see in that agreement how the people of Saskatchewan will be 
getting a larger share of the revenues from oil in this province than will be the case in the province of 
Alberta. 
 
One of the other things that agreement does, Mr. Speaker, is to pub in place the necessary pricing 
arrangements that will lead to the establishment of a heavy oil upgrader, and will make such an upgrader 
feasible in this province. Of course, one of the issues that that raises is the question of the environmental 
impact of the upgrader, and here, one of the very important concerns is the question of acid rain. 



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
321 

The effects of acid rain have been well established, and it’s not my intent today to elaborate on them in 
this legislature. I think that across Canada the question of acid rain has become recognized as a very 
serious environmental issue. Some people paint it as the most serious environmental issue that many 
regions in Canada face. 
 
I think the question of acid rain and the question of the upgrader become important in this context: that 
the upgrader and the environmental policies put in place for that upgrader will be the real test of what 
our provincial government’s policy on acid rain is going to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is urgent at this point that our provincial government establish stack standards for 
nitrous and sulphur dioxide emissions — in other words, acid rain emissions — in the province of 
Saskatchewan. At the present time one of the shortcomings of our environmental legislation is that stack 
standards for acid rain emissions are not in place. There are only emission standards for ground level 
nitrous oxide and sulphur dioxide emissions. There are no standards for those emissions at the stack. 
 
I believe that it is urgent, Mr. Speaker. It is imperative that our government introduce and establish these 
standards as quickly as possible. And with the construction of any upgrader in the province of 
Saskatchewan, these standards must be established for that upgrader. 
 
The other important aspect of the acid rain issue is going to be the policy and the position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan with respect to acid rain emissions by the province of Alberta. The 
Government of Alberta has, in my view, set highly inadequate acid rain standards for the tar sands plants 
which have been built in Alberta to date. There is no sign that the Conservative Government of Alberta 
is going to move quickly in the future to ensure that plants are going to be built in such a way that the 
most up-to-date scrubber technology will be installed in those new tar sands plants. 
 
A recent federal parliamentary task force report outlined the urgency of the situation with respect to the 
problem that the Alberta tar sands plant posed the province of Saskatchewan. That task force report, Mr. 
Speaker, emphasized the urgency of the Government of Alberta’s not being allowed to increase acid rain 
emissions in that province to any greater degree than they already exist. It will be imperative, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Government of Saskatchewan take a strong position with the Government of Alberta 
on this issue — a much stronger position than has been taken to date. 
 
I would say that before we are in a position as a provincial government to take a strong stand on acid rain 
with the province of Alberta, we have to have strong, tough standards in our own province. We have to 
be willing to enforce the same standards that we ask the Government of Alberta to enforce, even though 
our sources of acid rain are not nearly as substantial as those of the province of Alberta. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I call in this legislature today for the Government of Saskatchewan to set 
standards for acid rain emissions, to set tough standards in all areas of acid rain with respect to all future 
plants, to make the heavy oil upgrader and the environmental standards that are set for it an example to 
all other governments in Canada (particularly to the Government of Alberta) and to insist from the 
Government of Alberta that it put in place acid rain emission standards. These must ensure that the  



 
December 8, 1981 
 

 
322 

northern environment of Saskatchewan, the northern lakes of Saskatchewan, and the northern forests and 
soils of Saskatchewan are not destroyed by the inept environmental policies of the Conservative 
Government of Alberta. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to close by simply saying that the throne speech clearly 
contains many positive announcements for Saskatchewan people. Much remains to be done. I am 
confident that the New Democratic Party will lead the way in accomplishing many of the new initiatives 
which I have suggested today. It should be clear that I will be supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to make some brief comments and call it 5 o’clock and then 
pick it up again at 7 o’clock. I wish to respond to a couple of questions raised by the member for 
Saskatoon-Sutherland and his concern about the acid rain arising out of the tar sands projects in the 
province of Alberta. The member did not bring forward the fact that some fairly extensive hearings were 
conducted in the Cold Lake area and the Fort MacMurray area by the Government of Alberta. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan was, of course, requested to make submissions to that particular 
hearing — both by the people making the investigation in the Alberta environment department and by 
several rural municipalities on the Saskatchewan side. They repeatedly requested assistance and 
repeatedly requested help; yet no money was forthcoming to assist them in preparing their brief. No brief 
basically was made by the Department of the Environment of the Government of Saskatchewan. I think 
the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland is going a little overboard in casting all the blame on the 
Government of Alberta, when our government stood by and did virtually nothing while those hearings 
were taking place. I agree with the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland that important acid rain protection 
mechanisms must be in place for the heavy oil upgrader that will be built in Saskatchewan. As I 
understand from the representations made by the consortium, this problem is being addressed in a very 
serious way, primarily by the engineers putting the project together. That is primarily Husky Oil. In fact, 
the emissions of acid rain from the proposed heavy oil upgrader will be less than some of the emissions 
coming from the Saskatchewan Power Corporation’s coal-fired generators in Saskatchewan, and clearly 
less than the proposed one that the Government of Saskatchewan seems so bent on forcing onto the 
people of Gravelbourg. 
 
I think the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland had better address his questions and concerns first to the 
Government of Saskatchewan, because that’s the jurisdiction we deal in, and second, to the province of 
Alberta because the Government of Saskatchewan is every bit as much at fault in creating acid rain with 
regard to its regulations as is the Government of Alberta. 
 
I’m also glad to see that the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland has now finally joined in the fight for 
freedom of information legislation in Saskatchewan. 
 
I can give advice to the member for Saskatoon-Sutherland, however, I would very much be surprised if 
we ever see freedom of information legislation tabled as long as the members opposite are the 
Government of Saskatchewan. We will not see freedom of information legislation. I suspect that the 
report coming will not be such that the  



 
December 8, 1981 

 

 
323 

government will push forward with freedom of information legislation. But I congratulate the member 
for Saskatoon-Sutherland for his support of an issue for which I have fought during my time in this 
Assembly: freedom of information legislation in this province and in every other province and country. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I have some more things to say after 7 o’clock. I would now like to call it 5 
o’clock. 
 
POINT OF ORDER 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I wasn’t aware, Mr. Speaker (that’s why I rose a little late), that you were going 
to move to orders of the day at this time. 
 
I would like to, if I may, raise a point of order and refer to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules, page 104, 
paragraph 319, subsection (3). I will, if I may, refer to a few sentences out of that particular paragraph: 
 

In the House of Commons a Member will not be permitted by the Speaker to indulge in any 
reflections on the House itself as a political institution; or to impute to any Member of Members 
unworthy motives for their actions . . . 

 
I refer to that particular rule in Beauchesne’s as it relates to the Minister of Agriculture’s comment 
yesterday, December 7, beginning on page 272 of Hansard, where he said: 
 

And at the 16 meetings in June, October and November, the Tories sent out their henchmen with 
their speeches and their questions written out on paper. Down in Stoughton, in the southeast part of 
the province, where the meeting was held for the producers from the constituencies of 
Souris-Cannington, Moosomin and Indian Head-Wolseley, they went so far as to attack the integrity 
of the members of the beef stabilization board . . . 

 
It goes on from there, but I won’t continue any further. Mr. Speaker, I felt that that certainly qualified 
under the ruling that I just laid before you, for your information. I respectfully request your ruling and 
perhaps the hon. member could withdraw the comment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’ll take the earliest opportunity to examine the record as the member 
indicated in his remarks on the point of order, and report back to the House at the earliest opportunity. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


