






















































Hansard: November 30, 1981


(44) 45 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
November 30, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Congratulations to the Western Canadian Agribition Board 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I would like to congratulate the 
Western Canadian Agribition Board for hosting the best livestock show in North America. I congratulate 
the city of Regina for being a good host city. I’d like to welcome the exhibitors and the visitors attending 
this year’s Agribition. I wish them a successful Agribition and a pleasant time while visiting our city and 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to join with the member for Rosetown-Elrose in 
congratulations, in welcome and in good wishes to the Board of Directors of Western Agribition on their 
show. Mr. Speaker, I have not yet had an opportunity to make a tour of Agribition but I will be doing so 
on Thursday morning. I’ll be looking forward not only to viewing the exhibits and livestock on display, 
but also the opportunity to meet with producers and buyers represented there. 

 
QUESTIONS 

 
Help for Home-owners Concerning High Interest Rates 

 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, after you’ve encouraged home-owners to 
wait until 1983 to renew their mortgages, and in light of the Conference Board’s predictions that interest 
rates will likely rise next year, will you be prepared to cover the losses that these home-owners will 
definitely incur when they are faced with rates perhaps in excess of 20 per cent in 1983, when they could 
have renewed in 1982 at perhaps 15 per cent? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I hope that nothing I have said would be held to be 
encouraging people to defer the renewal of their mortgages past the time that they thought was prudent. 
Clearly, they will have to make their judgments as best all of us can about when interest rates will be at 
their lowest. Interest rates have been dropping. It seems only reasonable and prudent to give 
home-owners the opportunity to take advantage of any drop that there may be in the interest rates. If, in 
fact, interest rates go up, then I would advise home-owners to renew their mortgages when interest rates 
are lowest, without being able to tell them when, any more than the member for Regina South can tell 
them when. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the Premier. On Friday I indicated that the credit 
unions held 50 per cent of the mortgages in Saskatchewan. I should have added that credit unions and 
small trust companies hold 50 per cent of the  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
46 

mortgages in Canada. Here in Saskatchewan those small trust companies like Co-operative Trust, 
Saskatchewan Trust and Pioneer Trust are all Saskatchewan-owned trust companies, Mr. Premier. Will 
you be prepared to cover the losses incurred by the credit unions and their members and the small trust 
companies? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the hon. member is obviously asking questions 
which are quite speculative, since he has not studies the terms of the Bill, nor has anybody else in the 
House studied the terms of the Bill. Accordingly, I think it’s not very productive for us to talk about how 
many losses are going to be incurred by a particular piece of legislation which is not yet before us. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the Premier. The outline of the legislation in the throne 
speech has caused some concern among the credit union movement in the province of Saskatchewan and 
I suggest, as well, some of the small Saskatchewan-owned trust companies. Obviously the statements 
made by members of the government opposite have created some confusion in the minds of people 
possibly affected by the legislation. Would the Premier now commit to table that legislation in the House 
this afternoon so that those affected can immediately assess the impact of that legislation and its effects? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the short answer is no. The legislation will be tabled in due 
course. May I advise the hon. member that, prior to its being tabled, representatives of the government 
will have discussions with representatives of the credit union movement in order to obtain their views 
prior to our deciding upon the final form of the legislation for tabling in the House. 
 
MR. LANE: — I would hope that the Premier would include with the credit unions the 
Saskatchewan-owned trust companies as well. Wouldn’t the Premier be prepared to admit that it would 
have been a far more prudent approach for the government opposite to have consulted with these groups 
prior to making the announcement in the throne speech and that it would have been far better 
government to have, in fact, discussed it with those affected prior to putting it in the throne speech and 
raising expectations or causing doubts and confusion? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very, very common for governments to state 
general policy in a throne speech and details in legislation. I think members opposite are not being 
reasonable if they expect that every piece of legislation mentioned in a throne speech will be available in 
detailed form within two or three days of the throne speech, indeed even before the debate starts. Anyone 
who has any familiarity with throne speeches will be aware that in many cases (I take some federally) we 
have legislation announced with respect, let us say, to competition legislation which six, eight, ten 
months later is not in detailed form before the House. We will be acting to get the legislation in detailed 
form before the House as soon as possible, but we make no apologies for giving in the throne speech our 
general policy and stating our specific policy in the legislation to follow. 
 

Recommendations of Omamawi-Atoskewin Conference 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, as the guest speaker at 
the Omamawi-Atoskewin conference you will be aware of the recommendations of that body. In light of 
the recent demonstrations at the opening of this legislature, the drums and so on, is it your government’s 
intention to implement all of the recommendations that have been put forward by that conference? 
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
47 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we are obviously going to consider the recommendations 
put forward by that conference. We will not be swayed by the fact that a demonstration may have been 
mounted by any particular group at the time of the opening of the legislature. We will consider the 
recommendations on their merits. I noted, and I’m sure hon. members noted, that so far as we could 
ascertain the persons engaged in the demonstration were not representatives of the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indians (FSI), were not representatives of the Association of Metis and Non-Status 
Indians of Saskatchewan (AMNSIS), and were not representatives of the Saskatchewan Native Women 
or of the friendship centre organization, but we were advised they were a group of students from the 
university. It may well be that they are not fully versed in all of the policy positions of the FSI, AMNSIS, 
and other recognized native organizations. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. In light of your government’s apparent 
lack of appreciation of the historic significance of the native populations of our province — and I say 
that in light of some of the actions of your government — may I recommend to the Premier and his 
government a book written by Byrna Barclay called Summer of the Hungry Pup. I’ve asked the pages to 
distribute copies of that book to members of your government who I believe can read. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I think the member for Nipawin realizes he was thoroughly out of 
order. He rose to ask a supplementary. He did not ask a supplementary. He put forward a book, so the 
member is out of order. 

 
Environmental Impact Study on RM of Caron 

 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister in charge of the environment. Mr. 
Minister, could you tell us if your department has been requested by an oil consortium, which is shortly 
to build a heavy upgrader plant, to do an environmental impact study or whether you have already done 
one in the RM of Caron, on the south half of 23-18-28-2 and on the section 14-18-28-2, with the 
intention of building an oil upgrader plant? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my opinion that the department officials have not been 
requested to do so, but for a more precise answer I will take it as notice. 

 
Options in RM of Caron Concerning Heavy Oil Upgrader 

 
MR. THATCHER: — Question to the Premier in the absence of the Minister of Mineral Resources. 
Will the Premier confirm or deny that an oil consortium, with the blessing of his government, has taken 
options in the RM No. 162 of Caron, and that the land section numbers are south half of 23-18-28-2 and 
all of section 14-18-28-2? Will the Premier confirm that the options were taken at $2,000 per acre? 
Would the Premier confirm that the amount of the option money for the next two years is $200 per acre 
or $32,000 per quarter? And will the Premier confirm or deny that this will be the site of the heavy oil 
upgrading plant? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, obviously that is not a question within the purview of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. We would have no particular knowledge, as a government, of what the 
consortium has done. It is my understanding (and I speak only at second hand, Mr. Speaker, and 
apologize on that account) that the consortium has taken options on some property generally north of 
Moose Jaw and some property generally  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
48 

south and west of North Battleford or Battleford. I am not familiar with any terms of the options, if my 
information is accurate. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier confirm 
or deny that the consortium under the company name 559390 Saskatchewan Ltd., a company which is 
basically an outgrowth of the law firm of Rushford, Nidesh, etc. in Moose Jaw, has taken the options 
which I have described to you? Will the Premier, in light of the fact that he has already indicated he 
doesn’t have a position on it, and since Gulf Oil has already indicated its preference to be Lloydminster, 
and since Husky Oil has already indicated publicly its preference is in the Northwest, kindly tell us what 
his corporation, Saskoil, is going to do? Is it, in fact, going to take a position? Or is it the Premier’s 
intention to dangle this heavy oil upgrading plant at all three regions until he decides the polls are right 
and he can safety call an election? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, if the weather weren’t quite so uncertain in the next 28 days, 
I would respond in the appropriate way to that sort of a comment. I can only say that I am unaware of 
any statement by Gulf Oil, in any official way, as to where they want an upgrader. I am unaware of any 
by Husky Oil or by Saskoil. So far as I am aware, all five members of the consortium have been 
supporting the view that in general two sites ought to be pursued, one in the Northwest and one in the 
general Moose Jaw area. I am not now suggesting that only site in the Northwest was the general 
northwest area and in the general Moose Jaw area are, it is my understanding, being extensively studied 
at this time and all members of the consortium agree with that course of action and one of them have 
committed themselves to any single site. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Premier, would you comment on a statement by a Saskoil spokesman, 
Wayne Ferguson, who confirmed that a technical and environmental report submitted this summer to the 
five member consortium was done and that there was a recommendation of a primary and a secondary 
site? In other words, Mr. Premier, Mr. Ferguson is in effect saying that a decision has been made. How 
long are you going to dangle this site at these communities that badly need it, and when can we expect a 
definitive and substantive answer on the part of your government? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is making a good number of leaps in logic. 
It is my understanding that each of the five members of the consortium, and so I am advised, has 
commissioned various studies in order that they might be informed as to the relative merits of various 
potential sites for a heavy oil upgrader. I am now advised authoritatively that the studies which have 
been done by Saskoil were for their use and were not passed on to the consortium as the hon. member 
suggests. Doubtless the other companies, and certainly Saskoil, are considering all the material available 
to them, including any studies by consultants, in order to be able to discuss with their consortium 
partners the appropriate location. I say again that it appears to have been narrowed down to one in the 
general Moose Jaw area and to a site (I’m not sure there were specific sites in this regard) in the general 
northwest area of Saskatchewan. 

 
Extension of Dental Plan to Adults 

 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the Minister of Health. Mr.  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
49 

Minister, there seems to be a bit of confusion within your cabinet. On Friday we had the Minister of 
Agriculture in favour of loopholes, the Minister of Finance against loopholes and the Premier using the 
loopholes. At a recent NDP nominating convention in Melfort, the Minister of Agriculture announced 
that there would be an expansion in the dental plan to include adults, a statement that was later denied by 
you. Are you or aren’t you going to extend the dental plan to include adults? And when? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I am very pleased that the member for Maple Creek 
asked me the question today so I could thank my seatmate for helping me out in this particular regard. 
Any pressure that any of my colleagues can give me in this regard I welcome very much. 
 
Over the weekend I was asked whether or not we would be extending the dental program. My answer to 
the press was yes. Certainly we promised in 1975 that we would be providing senior citizens with 
substantially reduced prices. It is still our intention to carry out that particular promise. However, since 
that time it was felt that we should maybe act more progressively on the preventive health aspects, since 
this minister has been speaking about that for some time. Therefore, we would expect that either within 
the next year or two . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I am sure glad he is on your side and not on this 
side. Mr. Speaker, in short answer to the member, yes, we do intend to carry out our promise. At the 
present time we are extending our program in each succeeding year to age 18. I think our next priority 
would be the senior citizens. That doesn’t mean that the government couldn’t act upon implementing a 
comprehensive dental program in the foreseeable future. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — In the election year. 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Well, that is not a bad idea either. But I certainly think that should be one of 
our priorities and I thank the Minister of Agriculture for announcing it so early. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Minister, you still haven’t answered my question. A public statement was 
made by the Minister of Agriculture announcing the expansion. You subsequently denied it. Now, are 
you or are you not, and when? Was the Minister of Agriculture’s statement in Melfort the other day 
nothing more than vote bait? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture said that people in this province 
could soon be enjoying an extension of the dental program. When the media asked me, I said, “Yes, I 
agree with the Minister of Agriculture.” Soon, to him, might mean five years or ten years. To the 
Minister of Health, hopefully, it will be two years. 
 
I am very hopeful that we will be able to announce an extension of the dental program — a 
comprehensive dental program for senior citizens. We did announce in last year’s budget, Mr. Chairman, 
that we would start a pilot project. That pilot project is under study at the present time. We have had 
detailed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member asks where, I think we would be looking at a town 
such as Wadena, possibly, for the pilot project. Extension discussions presently are being held with the 
college of dentistry and the dentists of this province as to how we can involve them, and what kind of 
delivery service we would want for an adult or senior dental program. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — When, Mr. Minister, when? You say “soon.” You say, “the foreseeable future.” 
When? You announce a pilot project. It hasn’t even come into effect. When can we expect that? 
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
50 

HON. MR. ROLFES: — This government is committed to a comprehensive dental program. We do not 
have to convince ourselves; we do not have to tell the people of this province that we are for a 
comprehensive medicare program, such as I heard announced at the PC convention just recently, only 20 
years after we have implemented medicare. 
 
I can assure the people of this province that within the next term of this government we will have some 
form of comprehensive dental program for senior citizens. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Minister, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Obviously his seatmate 
needs all the help he can get in developing health policy. The mistake you made was in not keeping him 
abreast of the policy changes you had made in his department. The opposite, however, would be 
disastrous to the agricultural community, and I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture would give this 
House his absolute assurance that under no circumstances will Herman ever be allowed to work on 
agricultural policies? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! It is not within the jurisdiction of the Minister of Agriculture. 
 

University Tuition Fees 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — A question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, in view of the mass concern expressed by 
the university students in this province regarding the high tuition rates at the universities in 
Saskatchewan, will you give this Assembly your assurance that there will be no unreasonable increases 
in university tuitions in the coming year? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the university tuition fees are set by the university 
and, accordingly, I would not want to give the hon. member any assurance as to what the board of 
governors might decide. 
 
With respect to the rate of tuition fees, I would ask the hon. member to compare them and if he can find 
on Conservative province, other than Alberta, which has lower fees, I would be interested in knowing 
what they are in that province. In my understanding, our fees are about the same as Alberta’s and lower 
than any province which now has a Conservative government. 
 
This is not to suggest that we would not wish that there were more money for universities and, 
accordingly, lower tuition fees. We would wish more money for almost any government service. But, on 
the whole, I think a look at what has happened in the last 10 years of our government (tuition fees have 
borne a steadily smaller percentage of the total university costs so that they would now be below the 10 
per cent level, I believe, when they were above the 25 per cent level when we took office) indicates that 
we have had a concern for the fact that tuition fees are, in part, a burden on students. There was no 
bursary program when we came to office. That has now been put into place and, all in all, I think it is 
much easier for students to go to university than it was 10 years ago. This is not to suggest that we have 
reached the pinnacle; it is to suggest that we have made very substantial progress. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary, Mr. Premier. I don’t think the fact of comparative university 
tuitions is much comfort to a young student who is facing these in the  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
51 

province of Saskatchewan. But be that as it may, Mr. Premier. And that fact that the universities 
commission sets the tuition fees, be that as it may, it still relies upon tuition fees or government grants to 
operate the universities. 
 
Are you aware, Mr. Premier, that at present the University of Saskatchewan has to drop three programs, 
one which I think would be of interest to this government: northern studies, far eastern studies and plant 
ecology? It has to drop them and I suggest, and would you not agree, Mr. Premier, the reason it has to 
drop these programs is that in 1971 actual dollars (that is taking into account inflation) the grants to the 
University of Saskatchewan from this government have decreased from $44 million (in constant dollars) 
in 1978 to $42.9 million in 1981. Would you not agree that that is a lack of responsibility by your 
government toward adequate funding of higher education? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I noted that the hon. member picked 1978 figures. I suppose 
the hon. member can go back over the 10 years and find a period when it is possible to say that in 
constant dollars the grants have not increased, although it is not merely that simple because there are 
other flows of money from the Government of Saskatchewan to the University of Saskatchewan which 
don’t show up in grants — things like grants from my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, for 
FarmLab and things of that nature. 
 
With respect to far eastern studies, I think I can only quote what the president of the university is quoted 
as having said in the press, that this depended upon the particular talents of a particular professor who 
has retired. With respect to plant ecology, that has been, again quoting from the newspaper reports, 
melded with the biology and zoology departments, as I recall it. And with respect to general cutbacks, 
one would hope that any organization, be it the university, or the Government of Saskatchewan, or any 
other organization, would constantly be engaged in cutbacks. Just as any living organization must add 
new programs, so it must jettison old programs, otherwise it becomes a simple fossil. The University of 
Saskatchewan will have to make its decisions as to which programs it tries to cut back and which 
programs it tries to add. This is a function that every government, and every university, and every 
organization of that type has to go through. 
 
May I just make one further correction? The hon. member suggested that the university fees were set by 
the universities commission. It is my understanding that that’s not accurate and that they are in fact set 
by the board of governors of the respective universities. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — We’ve now reached 2:30 p.m. and I wonder if we may move down the agenda to 
special order and return later this day to complete the balance of routine proceedings. 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 
MR. CHAPMAN: — Mr. Speaker, in rising to move the address in reply to the Speech from the 
Throne, I would like to thank the Premier for the confidence he has placed in me today and the honour 
he has bestowed upon the constituents of Estevan, whom I  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
52 

have the privilege to represent. 
 
Before I begin my remarks about the Speech from the Throne, I would like to say a few words about the 
Estevan constituency. The Estevan constituency has a rich history. Before settlement the Assinboine 
Indians left their offerings to the great Manitou at the Roche Percee, pierced rock, a landmark famous 
throughout the province. Only a few miles south of the city of Estevan was the trail used by the boundary 
commission which surveyed the international boundary. The Wood End post was established in the 
constituency by the North West Mounted Police in 1874 on its famous march to the mountains. 
 
The history of Estevan constituency has been shaped by its rich natural resources. We have productive 
land suitable for a variety of agricultural uses. In the Souris Valley we have valuable wildlife and 
recreation resources. But, Mr. Speaker, the resources with the most impact have been coal and oil. These 
resources have been a source of great wealth to our constituency, but unfortunately they have also 
brought great sorrow. September 29 of this marked the 50th year since the riot took place in Estevan 
which resulted in the death of three miners, Julian Gryshko, Nick Nargan, and Peter Markunas. I was 
proud, Mr. Speaker, to be present at the ceremony held to commemorate the contribution of these men 
and those who had contributed to the labour movement in the area over the past 50 years. The ceremony 
marked the establishment of a coal miners’ corner on the northeast corner of the Estevan Courthouse, a 
long-awaited and well-deserved tribute to our pioneers and those involved in the lignite industry. 
 
There is one other historical fact that I’d like to mention today. The opening of the legislature last 
Thursday marked another, I think, happier anniversary. It was exactly one year ago last Thursday that the 
people of Estevan elected me as their MLA. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — Let me inform the hon. member that I am proud to be in the company of some of 
those extremely capable representatives from the Estevan constituency, including Charles Cuming, Kim 
Thorson, Russ Brown, Ian MacDougall, Bob Kohaly and Bob Larter. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — I am also proud to be able to say that because of the strength of the policies of the 
Blakeney government, the electors of the Estevan constituency set aside the leaders of both the Liberal 
and the Conservative parties in one election. I think this is a particularly important time to be in office. 
Under the leadership of Allan Blakeney we have steadily built the economy of our province. We Stand 
on the threshold of unequalled opportunity and face new and tremendous challenges. As a nation, we can 
pride ourselves on reaching an agreement on the constitution. As a government, we can pride ourselves 
on the essential contribution made by our Premier, Allan Blakeney, and our Deputy Premier, Roy 
Romanow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, without the role played by the two hon. members, we could not have had the constitutional 
settlement that we have today. If it had not been for Saskatchewan’s argument that a consensus of the 
majority of the provinces plus the federal government was required on constitutional change, no solution 
would have been possible. We would have been stuck with the proposition that the federal government  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
53 

could act alone. We all know how unsatisfactory that would have been. Yet the position of the members 
opposite would have put us in that situation. Their legal arguments were rejected by the supreme court. 
 
The second outstanding contribution was made when the Deputy Premier and Jean Chretien worked out 
the beginning of the compromise that saved the conference. We can all be proud of our new constitution 
and especially of the role that the Blakeney government played in its creation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that our resources have shaped the history of the 
Estevan constituency. The Speech from the Throne takes note of the most recent event which had a 
major impact on our resources: the new Canada-Saskatchewan oil agreement. I believe the new 
agreement will be very beneficial to the people of my constituency. On behalf of the people of Estevan, I 
would like to congratulate the Minister of Mineral Resources on the excellent job he and his department 
did in negotiating this agreement. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — It’s one more example of the firm grasp this government has on the needs of the 
industry, and of its determination to resist the federal government and uphold the right of the people of 
the province to gain a fair return for their resources. As the people of my constituency know, this 
agreement did not come easily. Saskatchewan’s industry was damaged severely by the provisions of the 
national energy program. We made it clear to the federal government that we could not accept those 
provisions which caused drastic cuts in production, exploration and development activities. 
 
We agreed with the federal government at the outset on the objectives set in the national energy 
program: Canadianization, security of supply, opportunities and equality. However, the Saskatchewan 
government expressed grave reservations about the means of achieving them. The Blakeney government, 
however, worked closely with the industry during the latter part of 1980 and the early part of 1981. 
Numerous meetings were held between the provincial government and representatives of the industry, 
resulting in two programs: the well servicing assistance program (WSAP), and the temporary oil fields 
servicing support program (TOSS). Under the well servicing assistance program, $6 million in grants 
were made available. These grants were created to cover 60 per cent of the eligible service costs incurred 
in the repair and maintenance of oil wells in the province. The objective of the plan was to help prevent 
the industry from losing qualified personnel and equipment to U.S. oil fields, due to a severe reduction 
in repair and maintenance work. They were initially made available on a six-month basis, but remain in 
effect. 
 
The plan was recognized by both the industry and the government as a temporary one, until an 
agreement was reached. It was created as a direct result of submissions made to the provincial 
government by the Saskatchewan oil wells servicing and supply associations. 
 
On the advice of the industry a second plan, the temporary oil field servicing support program, was 
added to supplement the well servicing assistance program. This plan made an additional $2 million 
available to the oil industry to provide grants to help  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
54 

Saskatchewan-based servicing and supply companies retain staff who would otherwise be laid off 
because of the lack of work, and to provide assistance to pay this interest on idle equipment those 
employees would normally be operating. 
 
The temporary oil field servicing support program was monitored by a five-member committee including 
two representatives of the industry to, first, assess the implementation of the program and, second, 
identify companies that have special needs which were not covered by the terms of the program. Mr. 
Speaker, as the Speech from the Throne indicates, over $2 million was paid out through those programs 
to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have outlined a few of the events leading up to the new oil agreement. I am sure that the 
bad times for the industry are over because the new agreement not only ensures stability for the next six 
years, it is also a new type of an agreement. There are three key elements in the new agreement: 
 
1. Concession for the marginal low-volume wells which predominate in Saskatchewan; 
 
2. Incentives for the heavy oil sector; 
 
3. Agreement by the federal government that crown corporations do not pay taxes. 
 
marginal wells, those producing less than 35 barrels a day, account for about one-half of Saskatchewan’s 
annual production. These will be given relief on the federal incremental oil revenue tax and on our 
provincial taxes and royalties. 
 
To develop heavy oil production both governments agree to additional incentives to bring the price for 
enhanced recovery oil beyond the world price. These will come in the form of earned depletion 
allowances against federal taxes and decreased royalties at the provincial level. In addition, the 
governments are committed to $15 million each in research and development moneys in the heavy oil 
and the lignite extraction industries. The agreement will also, I believe, permit the plans for the $1.2 
billion heavy oil upgrader plant in the province to go ahead by about 1985 or 1986. 
 
With respect to the crown corporations, Ottawa has now agreed not to collect the taxes. Saskatchewan 
has agreed to pay equal moneys or equal grants in lieu of the taxes. Both sides have agreed to keep the 
matter out of the courts for the duration. Unpaid crown corporation taxes are currently estimated at over 
$30 million, with perhaps another $50 million to $60 million in unpaid petroleum and gas revenue taxes 
from Saskoil and Sask Power. On the other hand, federal legislation to split some $400 million from 
export charges on Saskatchewan’s heavy oil is still awaiting approval. The agreement provides an 
equitable distribution of revenue, with $6.1 billion for the industry, $5.8 billion for Saskatchewan, and 
$3.5 billion for Ottawa. The reaction of local oil men from my constituency is also encouraging, as the 
Estevan Mercury noted in its headline, Local Oil Men Optimistic with the Energy Agreement. The 
comments in the story were that of cautious optimism and recognized that the industry will need time to 
turn around. 
 
I think optimism on the part of the industry is justified, Mr. Speaker, by the difference in pre-agreement 
and agreement prices. The average wellhead price for old oil as of August 1971, before the agreement, 
was $17.80 per barrel; the price rises to $21.15 per barrel on October 1 and $23.50 per barrel on January 
1, with the industry getting almost the entire increase. To be more precise, that means the provincial 
government is  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
55 

passing on the entire October 1981 increase of $2.50 per barrel directly to the industry. In addition, the 
province will take only 12 per cent of the January increase for old oil as defined for royalty purposes. 
Furthermore, the interim assistance programs (TOSS and WSAP) will be continued until they are no 
longer necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new agreement will also bring increased revenues for the province. These revenues will 
be of vital importance in setting up the heavy oil upgrader, ensuring security of supply in Saskatchewan. 
Finally, it will provide a better framework within which both governments and industry can make their 
plans and it provides greater certainty about the future for both producers and consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a quick summary of the new agreement, which I think is a good one for Estevan and 
a good one for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — Of course, as oil revenue rises for the producer and the federal and provincial 
governments, it also rises for the consumer. That’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a reality that must 
be faced. We cannot afford to ignore the limits of our energy resources. We can no longer squander them 
by keeping our prices artificially low or by letting the multinationals take the profit, yet that is the policy 
Conservative leader, Grant Devine, would have us follow. He and his party have consistently advocated 
a royalty structure like that of Alberta. The PC policy for the years 1974 to 1981 inclusive would have 
cost the people of Saskatchewan $1.152 billion. This year alone an Alberta royalty structure would have 
cost the province over $261 million. Mr. Devine wants us to sell off our energy reserves cheap. He’s 
against our provincial royalty structure: he’s against our provincial sales tax on gasoline; yet he would 
have the province send $1 billion to develop a network to import Alberta natural gas. 
 
I’d like to take a few moments to discuss the Devine natural gas megaproject. A complete feasibility 
study by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation on a comprehensive rural natural gas distribution system 
indicates it would cost one billion dollars. Of course the Conservatives don’t say which taxes should go 
up to pay for this promise which would cost over $1,000 for every man, woman and child in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Perhaps they favour greater borrowing and an increase in public debt. 
Perhaps they feel the farmers can pay. SPC is expanding natural gas in rural Saskatchewan where it 
makes economic sense to do so. 
 
It is easy for the Tories to make a billion-dollar promise, especially when they don’t say where the 
money is coming from. And where do the Conservatives expect the money to come from? Everyone 
could pay, Mr. Speaker, but income tax would have to double for the next five years. Yet Conservatives 
want a tax cut. All gas customers could pay, but this would double gas prices. Yet Conservatives want 
the gas prices frozen. The 60,900 new customers could pay, but how many of them can afford $20,000 to 
partake of the Conservatives’ cheap energy scheme? SPC can’t pay. SPC’s trying to borrow one billion 
dollars would be like a business with a profit of $30,000 a year trying to borrow $1.5 million. Debt 
charges alone, without touching the principal, would be more than five times the annual profit. 
 
I can only wonder, as I am sure the people of Estevan constituency wonder, why the Leader of the 
Opposition wants to promote Alberta natural gas sales over the energy resources we have here in 
Saskatchewan. Does it make sense, Mr. Speaker, for us to set  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
56 

up an energy system where we are completely dependent on another province’s government to determine 
the cost and the amount of the energy we consume? When I hear Mr. Devine talking like that, I recall 
former PC federal energy minister, Ray Hnatyshyn, telling the people of Canada that his government 
couldn’t guarantee Canadians enough fuel to get through the winter. What about our oil resources in 
Estevan? Are we then going to drop this government’s policy of developing our coal reserves, improving 
our exotic recovery techniques for light oil, and developing our heavy oil reserves? That may be Mr. 
Devine’s position and that of the Conservative Party, but it is not ours. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — The Blakeney government is committed to developing energy security for 
Saskatchewan in Saskatchewan. I am pleased to see that the Speech from the Throne expands that 
commitment through increased energy conservation measures and the development of alternate forms of 
energy. The Saskatchewan Power Corporation is the logical vehicle through which to work. My long 
association with the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has given me a great deal of respect for the ability 
of that crown corporation to meet the challenge of changing energy needs, and I am sure that it can meet 
this one. 
 
Let me dwell for a few moments on agriculture. At the same time we face the need to develop and secure 
our energy resources, we must recognize that agriculture faces equally fundamental changes. The 
Canadian Wheat Board has offered farmers the opportunity to increase our wheat sales to 30 million 
tonnes by 1985. That’s 4 million tonnes above this year’s target. The need for more food is great, and not 
just for the Third World. Eastern European countries now face food shortages. We must grown more and 
through new techniques, we can. 
 
To help farmers increase production, the Blakeney government has introduced a new and different idea, 
the FarmLab. The FarmLab program commits $25 million to help the agricultural industry meet the food 
demands of the next decade. Under the plan, the University of Saskatchewan and the farmers will work 
together on a variety of research projects related to soil and water management, weed control, grain 
variety testing, livestock feed requirements, animal reproductive efficiency, toxicity testing, agricultural 
economic analyses and biotechnical research of new products for farm use as well as new uses for farm 
products. The program will also provide increased opportunities for training the skilled manpower that 
will be needed to sustain the agricultural industry in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the program will do a great deal to increase the exchange of information between the 
people of the university and the farmers who are getting the day-by-day experience. I’m sure it will work 
to the benefit of everyone, including the consumer. This is a new program which has never been tried 
before anywhere in the world, and I am confident our farmers and scientists will make it work. 
 
In my constituency of Estevan, I am pleased to see two projects are being carried out. Colin and Tracy 
Beaulieu of Estevan are growing new varieties of winter annuals. Gary and Margaret Conrad, also of 
Estevan, are conducting soil fertility trials. Mr. Speaker, it’s encouraging indeed to see research projects 
brought directly to the farmers in my constituency. It’s a practical approach to a new challenge facing 
agriculture and one with a worldwide humanitarian benefit, as well as an economic benefit for 
Saskatchewan. 
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
57 

While the prospect of increased wheat sales is a bright one, other agricultural producers are not so 
fortunate as to have the Canadian Wheat Board marketing their produce. Hog and beef producers have 
suffered severely from the ups and downs of the free market, and I use that work advisedly. The 
agricultural policy of the Blakeney government is aimed at improving the stability of the industry. That 
is why, Mr. Speaker, first SHARP, the Saskatchewan Hog Assured Returns Programs, was introduced in 
1976, and that is why this year the Minister of Agriculture has introduced the voluntary beef stabilization 
program for slaughter cattle. Saskatchewan producers can now at least be assured of recovering their 
costs of production. 
 
I know that beef producers have been hard hit over the last few years by increasing costs and fluctuating 
returns. The investment required to keep cattle has become too large for the farmers to gamble. They can 
no longer afford to hold out over a prolonged period of low prices. I know many farmers who never 
before have considered a beef marketing plan, voluntary or otherwise, who are now saying that this plan 
provides the protection they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plan is so attractive because of the principles on which it is built. There are five 
highlights of the plan which make it different. First, the plan is voluntary. The Saskatchewan plan is a 
voluntary plan. It’s up to the producers. If the producer is interested, he joins. If he’s not interested, he 
does not join. It’s as simple as that. Second and most important, the plan is based on the costs of 
production, not on a return based on a declining income. Payments based on the cost of production mean 
that in beef the producer is guaranteed a percentage of feed cost, bedding cost, veterinary and breeding 
cost, building cost, equipment cost, pasture cost — all actual costs. 
 
Third, the Saskatchewan plan is a producer program. Feeders can be enrolled in that program, but only 
as they are owned by bona fide cow herd owners. 
 
Fourth, it stabilizes the animal at slaughter weight. The largest part of the cost in producing finished beef 
lies in the cost of carrying the cows and producing the weaned calf. The finishing of the animal from 500 
pounds on to finished weight carries less risk and is less costly. No plan can stabilize the animal twice, 
so animals are stabilized at the level of the greatest return to the producer in the long run. This is the 
slaughter level. This level also produces the greatest returns to the industry in the province as more 
animals are finished in Saskatchewan and fewer are sent out to be finished. 
 
Fifth, the Saskatchewan plan is a long-term program funded by contributions from the producer which 
are matched dollar for dollar by contributions from the government. The Saskatchewan plan is not a 
one-year ad hoc program. It’s a long-term protection plan for the producer, based on his costs of 
production. The producer contributes to the stabilizing fund; the government contributes an equal 
amount to the stabilizing fund. Over a period of 20 years, the pay-outs from the fund will balance the 
pay-ins. 
 
But, good as we believe the plan to be, Mr. Speaker, it cannot be viewed as a permanent solution for the 
beef industry. Beef is a national industry, and only the federal government can implement permanently 
effective marketing and stabilization programs. Saskatchewan has put its case for a national plan before 
the federal government on many occasions without results. We can only hope that once again when the 
Blakeney government and the province of Saskatchewan have shown the way, others will follow. Other 
governments cannot ignore the statistics that show the Saskatchewan record in putting young farmers on 
land and backing them up when they  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
58 

face bad weather, poor markets and transportation problems. 
 
Today, Saskatchewan has a greater percentage of farmers under the age of 25 years than either Manitoba 
or Alberta, and a greater number of farmers under the age of 25 years that both of these provinces put 
together. Mr. Speaker, that didn’t just happen. It came about because the NDP government listened to 
farmers and worked with them to create the land bank and FarmStart — two programs which together 
have put over 7,000 new farmers on the land. No other government has such a comprehensive program 
for agriculture. To deal with bad weather conditions, there is the Saskatchewan crop insurance program 
which now covers 43,000 farms for almost one billion dollars. When drought hit, the Blakeney 
government responded with emergency programs. 
 
To help get produce to market at reasonable costs, the Blakeney government has fought long and hard 
for the crowrate. We have spent $55 million for 1,000 hopper cars to move Saskatchewan grain to 
market. 
 
The Blakeney government has also consistently supported orderly marketing. For grain companies, that 
has been through the wheat pools and the Canadian Wheat Board; for poultry, dairy and egg producers, 
the successive Saskatchewan governments have supported supply management. Finally, as I have 
mentioned, stabilization programs for hogs and, now, cattle have been created. But we must remember 
that until we have a national government to support these plans, they are threatened daily. It’s a 
never-ending battle to preserve the family farm and the rural way of life that has been directly 
responsible for so many of the values and uniquely Saskatchewan achievements that are part of our 
heritage. 
 
The Blakeney government is determined to see that the strength of Saskatchewan rural municipalities is 
maintained. For local governments to provide needed services, they must have money to do the job. 
They need the authority to spend the money as they see fit — based on local decisions. In line with those 
beliefs, the Saskatchewan government, through the introduction of revenue sharing, has turned over 
greater amounts of money to municipal governments. In 1971, when the NDP government took office, 
local governments were receiving less than $1 million in total assistance from the province. This year 
they will receive $95 million. The new revenue-sharing escalator year means that the revenue pool will 
increase automatically each year. 
 
Saskatchewan municipalities also receive money for building from the province. Almost every town in 
Saskatchewan has benefited from capital grants under the CCF program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — Mr. Speaker, throughout the Estevan constituency I see communities receiving 
help from the provincial government to build new recreational facilities and new senior citizens’ and 
low-income housing, to replace or expand sewer and water facilities and to build new roads. 
 
I would like to take the Assembly on a tour of my constituency this afternoon. In Lampman we would 
see a new recreation facility complex that has been completed with the help of some $49,260 in grants 
from culture and youth and a new water treatment plan build in part with CCF and municipal water 
assistance grants. In Bienfait  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
59 

we would see an ambitious paving project which has been completed with $107,461 made available by 
the Department of Highways under the urban assistance cost-sharable program. In Torquay we would see 
a new skating and curling rink built in part with community capital funds and recreational grants from 
the Department of Culture and Youth. In Macoun we would find that a new plastic water and sewer 
system has been installed, helped with a $14,630 grant from the Department of Urban Affairs. 
 
These are only a few examples. I could go on at length. The improvements in our rural communities in 
the past ten years have been tremendous. The communities themselves have provided the foresight, the 
drive and the ambition to undertake these projects and they have been backed by the Blakeney 
government with action, not words. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — The strength of our communities in Saskatchewan, for all aspects of community 
life in large part, relies on what I think is a very amiable topic for the throne speech — volunteers. Our 
prairie tradition of neighbour helping neighbour is still very much alive. Saskatchewan has a 
working-age population of some 699,000 people, says Statistics Canada, and 26.9 per cent of them, or 
188,000, did volunteer work in the 12 months ending February 1980. That is the highest participation 
rate for volunteers in Canada and well above the Canadian figure of 15.2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, such 
co-operation is the Saskatchewan way. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — Another one of the reasons these communities have retained their stability is that 
they now have facilities to keep senior citizens in their homes. Our home care program and our nursing 
homes provide new alternatives for senior citizens. We want new opportunities for senior citizens to live 
as independently as possible and to receive as much care as they need. 
 
This year we were able to accomplish for our senior citizens something we have wanted to do for a long 
time. We restructured the fees for special-care homes to make them more consistent, and we reduced 
most of these fees substantially. The uniform fee level for levels 2, 3 and 4 care is now $390 per month. 
The amount which senior citizens receive from old age security and federal and provincial supplements 
would easily cover that cost and allows our senior citizens to live in the dignity which they rightfully 
deserve. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — I think, along with medicare, the drug plan, aids to independent living and other 
innovations like special holiday packages designed by tourism and STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company) — the Golden Green Wednesdays — that we are making progress toward providing security 
and opportunities for older people. As we move into the ’80s we can be proud of our leadership in this 
field. 
 
In health care too, the Blakeney government can look with pride on its achievements and with 
confidence toward the future. It used to be thought that the best health care system meant the biggest, 
most technically sophisticated institutions. The idea was to close down local hospitals in order to spend 
health dollars on centralized urban treatment facilities. Saskatchewan was a leader in bucking that trend. 
We have  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
60 

continued to support smaller hospitals and to place less emphasis on institutional care and more 
emphasis on supporting individuals in the community. The result is a health care system which tries to 
treat the person and not just the disease. 
 
We have already embarked on a number of programs aimed at prevention. The dental plan is one which 
has proven tremendously successful. I could tell you about the statistics of the plan, but I won’t. If 
anyone doubts its success, he has only to walk through our primary schools to see the results on the 
smiles of the children. I think the people of Saskatchewan recognize the value of the dental program and 
they recognize who can offer leadership in preventive health care — the Blakeney government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one final area that I would like to touch on in my remarks today. I have said that we 
are beginning a new stage in Saskatchewan’s development. Part of the challenge we look forward to is 
directing our coming prosperity into opportunities for people in Saskatchewan to share in the 
development of our province. One of the major challenges to face Saskatchewan and Canada in the 
1980s will likely be a shortage of skilled workers rather than a serious shortage of jobs. In fact, workers 
in western Canada face astounding job opportunities over the next decade. According to the federal 
government forecast, 560,000 to 700,000 new jobs are expected to be created in the West this decade. 
 
Although the studies promise vast job opportunities, they also provide a warning that the federal 
government and the provincial governments must pave the way by altering and increasing training 
programs and changing educational attitudes. Among the predicted changes are: 
 
1. 70 per cent of the growth in the labour force will be women; 
 
2. There will be a sharp increase in the number of native workers; 
 
3. There will be an increased migration of workers from eastern Canada; 
 
4. Up to 250,000 skilled foreign immigrants could be needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan’s economy moves toward greater stability, diversity and planned growth, 
we face the ever present challenge to improve employment opportunities for Saskatchewan residents. To 
ensure there is an adequate supply of skilled workers to meet the rapidly growing needs of the economy, 
the Blakeney government is now moving toward that goal. As a result of studies undertaken to determine 
technical and vocational needs, the province is now proceeding to increase availability of training 
through expansion of facilities, provide greater access through decentralization of programs, and provide 
a more efficient training in many of its programs. The partners in this task — the workers, the 
employers, and all levels of government — must work co-operatively toward this end if it is to be 
achieved. 
 
Fortunately, in Saskatchewan we have an extra advantage in working toward our employment objectives 
— crown corporations. Because our crown corporations are owned and operated in Saskatchewan, we 
have more jobs and more kinds of jobs in Saskatchewan. Take the potash corporation, for example. It 
employs miners, of course. It could be argued that those jobs would be here no matter who owned the 
mine. But it is only because the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan belongs to Saskatchewan that there 
are head office jobs — jobs in accounting, public relations, marketing, research and engineering. 
Saskatchewan people like David Dombowsky, the president  
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
61 

of PCS, from Avonlea, Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — And they like Roy Lloyd, the president of the Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation (SMDC), and many, many others, who are proving their energies and skills in our own 
corporations. In our public corporations, we can make sure that these opportunities are shared by men 
and women, by native people and by disabled people. We have the opportunity to put our social 
objectives into practice. Through public ownership, opportunities are there today, and there will be more 
because the experience and the knowledge gained by Saskatchewan people have a way of blossoming 
and growing. 
 

We have also made a start in the North. People in the North had few job opportunities and they had little 
control over their own lives. That is changing, Mr. Speaker. Today many northerners are living in houses 
built by contractors, driving along streets planned by locally elected councils, teaching in new schools 
run by locally elected school boards. I think it is fair to say that progress is coming throughout the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an ebb and a flow to history. After years of struggle we now see the constitutional 
crisis resolved and a long-term energy agreement reached with the federal government. We have seen the 
resurgence of right-wing governments throughout the western world over the past four years of so. They 
have quickly discredited themselves. The honeymoon is over for Ronald Reagan. Margaret Thatcher 
faces certain defeat in England and we have a Canadian version, Sterling Lyon, who has already received 
the verdict of the Manitoba electorate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan we have been fortunate to escape that “supply 
side” economics. The Blakeney government has steadily built our economy and improved our quality of 
life. We in Saskatchewan have gathered our strength and are prepared. We look forward to a new era. 
Although we face great challenges, we have confidence that the right-wing extremism will be swept 
aside and that the people who believe in working together and in co-operation will take their place. 
 
In Saskatchewan Allan Blakeney has led us through a difficult time. For the future, new challenges face 
us. Under his leadership, we will be well prepared. The Speech from the Throne is ample evidence that 
we remain in the vanguard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member for The Battlefords: 
 

That an humble address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor of the province as 
follows: 
 
To His Honour the Honourable Cameron Irwin McIntosh, Lieutenant-Governor of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly of the  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
62 

province of Saskatchewan in session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 
speech which Your Honour has been pleased to address to us at the opening of the present 
session. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I would like to express my appreciation for the 
honour and the privilege of the opportunity to second the motion moved by my friend, my colleague and 
the member for the good constituency of Estevan, with respect to an address in reply to the Speech from 
the Throne. Congratulations to the member for Estevan for an excellent address and a presentation well 
prepared and put forward on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan for this Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — Mr. Speaker, this privilege is not mine alone; I am happy to share it with the people of 
my constituency, The Battlefords. On behalf of each and everyone of those good people, I would like to 
express our sincere appreciation to our Premier, the Hon. Allan Blakeney, for having afforded the 
citizens of The Battlefords this most welcomed and most sincerely appreciated privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I move on to the main text of my address, I would like to take a moment to 
recognize some of the events that have occurred in the past year. We, in the Northwest, would like to 
express our sincere appreciation again to the Premier of Saskatchewan for having recognized the 
importance of representation from our region in the cabinet by the appointment of Bob Long, member 
for Cut Knife-Lloydminster as Minister of Highways. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — Because I have known our new Minister of Highways for many years and have had the 
opportunity to benefit from his broadly-based provincial knowledge and his sharp political judgment, I 
was fully confident that he would be perfectly capable of dealing with the task, and his performance has 
proven that was well-placed confidence. Congratulations, Bob! 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier has said on many occasions that the task of selecting cabinet ministers from 
such a broad expanse of talents, as those displayed by my colleagues, is indeed a difficult one. To the 
satisfaction of the people of Saskatchewan, however, he proved worthy of the task when he selected the 
hon. member for the constituency of Shaunavon as the Minister of Social Services. The Hon. Dwain 
Lingenfelter brings youth, ambition and aggressive decisiveness to the cabinet table. We on this side of 
the House are proud of him and we would like to congratulate him as well. 
 
Finally, we from the Battlefords would like to offer our congratulations to the new Minister of Culture 
and Youth, the Hon. Dr. Clint White. Our Canadian and more particularly our Saskatchewan culture is 
yet in its youth and our youth are forever in need of culturing. The voice of youth and the crying need for 
the development and preservation of our culture are too often overlooked in favour of the needs of those 
with stronger voices. Because of his varied background, having worked in a number of different 
disciplines, we in the Battlefords are confident that the voices of youth and the preservation of our 
province’s culture will be clearly heard through the voice of Dr.  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
63 

Clint White. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — Mr. Speaker, 1981 was the International Year of the Disabled, a year set aside to draw 
the attention of the world community to the plight of disabled people. I applaud every single effort by 
our government or any other government which has contributed to the success of this year. I applaud as 
well the efforts of all the groups and individuals throughout the provincial community. The job, 
however, is not done. This year must not be considered a final effort. It must merely serve to launch an 
ongoing commitment — like the throne speech commitment — to enact accessibility standards in public 
buildings. In Saskatchewan many groups and individuals have been recognized and each has been 
appreciated, but there is a group which I would like to pay particular attention to and that is all of the 
volunteers. I want to take this opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks to every volunteer worker who 
has put forward effort and time so generously for the worthy programs that are carried on year in and 
year out in our province. 
 
Now I’d like to speak with respect to the Speech from the Throne. It is a document of commitment. It is 
a commitment by this government to protect the people from losing their homes because of high interest 
rates, at least for 1982; to regulate the transportation of dangerous goods; to protect our people and our 
environment; to expand our unified family court system; to strengthen preventive health programs; to 
increase mental health services; to help to provide small communities with all-weather access roads; to 
introduce a pilot project to help local communities promote economic development in their own 
communities. These, Mr. Speaker, are but a few of the commitments that have been made. The people of 
Saskatchewan know that when we say, through the Speech from the Throne, that over 30 existing acts 
and new pieces of legislation are to be amended, for a New Democratic government that’s a 
commitment. We don’t make empty promises. 
 
We don’t make fuzzy headed, woolly, ill-thought-out references to silly phrases like “economic 
sensibility.” We don’t promise to spend money on wildly extravagant schemes like promising to put 
natural gas in every farm in Saskatchewan until we have worked out the cost and are confident that the 
corresponding income will be there to pay for it. We don’t sell off our resources for a song an vaguely 
enunciated promise like the Tory and Liberal governments have done every since Canada became a 
country. Just witness the vagaries of the Crow’s Nest agreement and the lack of commitment to it. Mr. 
Speaker, we don’t promise to sell off our profitable crown corporations to rich friends or foreign 
corporations, like the members opposite readily advocate or like the ill-fated and short-lived Clark 
Tories do in Ottawa. 
 
Nor do we bring down a budget full of ill-thought-out proposals and double-talking political trickery, 
then promptly start retracting it piece by piece before the ink even dries like the federal Liberals. That 
simply isn’t our style. We believe in planning, thinking, consulting and then making commitments which 
we keep. I am repeatedly confounded by the apparent lack of respect the members opposite have and the 
Tory leadership seems to have for the political intelligence of Saskatchewan people. They seem to think 
that if they distort the facts nobody will notice. They make promises to lower taxes and increase services 
while, at the same time, reducing the amount of government involvement (or interference as they call it). 
They seem to think that the people of Saskatchewan won’t think through that kind of an impossible, 
contradictory proposal. 
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
64 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, the Tories and the people of Saskatchewan that I don’t think the 
Saskatchewan people are stupid. I know the people of The Battlefords are perfectly capable of thinking 
through those empty kinds of promises. I know the people of The Battlefords recognize the benefits of 
good government and the important role it must play in any successful society. I know the people of The 
Battlefords know in whom they can put their trust. I know they recognize this government as one they 
can rely upon to plan for the future, to lay out those plans in well thought out legislation, well thought 
out programs and then deliver those programs. 
 
We can deliver balanced budgets, medicare programs, dental programs, home care programs, 
preventative health programs, improved roads, expanded educational opportunities, revenue sharing, 
consumer protection, cultural opportunities, preservation of our heritage, senior citizen housing, minority 
protection, oil agreements and the constitution. They know we can deliver those kinds of benefits. They 
know when we promise to deliver, we keep our promise. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — Mr. Speaker, the people of The Battlefords just simply have to look around the 
constituency and they can see those fulfilled promises every day. They see a new senior citizen highrise, 
another group home, a new activity centre, a water line made possible through revenue sharing, new 
sewer lines, new recreational facilities, operational grants for senior citizen clubs, an expanding 
community college, new industrial parks, ongoing work toward the completion of a ring road around the 
city, a new provincial office building, a new land titles office, new companies to serve an expanding oil 
industry, renovations of the beautiful and historic courthouse, and a new park named after Eiling 
Kramer, thanks to the imaginative thinking of Battleford Councillor Joe Degenstein. They can see them 
by the dozens. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Where did you get all this money? 
 
MR. MINER: — Oh, we get it from the resources, Mr. Speaker, when I consider the commitment this 
throne speech makes to the people of Saskatchewan, I consider it in the light of some recent comments 
made by the Leader of the Saskatchewan Conservative Party following the fantastic victory of Premier 
Pawley in Manitoba in its provincial election. Now, what did this Leader of the Saskatchewan 
Conservative Party say? He said it was a clear warning to the Saskatchewan government, Mr. Speaker, 
for once the Leader of the Conservative Party was right. Pardon me, we have always known he was 
“right,” but for the first time he was also correct. The results of the Manitoba election were a clear 
warning to this government. They were a clear warning not to sell our publicly-owned crown 
corporations to the private sector, a clear warning not to attack and vilify our public employees, a clear 
warning not to fire people to satisfy the outdated Conservative way of thinking, a clear warning not to 
ignore the plight of farmers and the working people in a time of national economic crisis, a clear 
warning not to leave the needs of renters and home-owners to the gentle treatment of landlords and 
banks, and a clear warning not to entrust the future of Saskatchewan and its people to multinational 
corporations. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, I believe the Conservative leader when he said that the Manitoba election was a clear 
warning to this government. Mr. Speaker, we sincerely appreciate the manner in which the Manitoba 
people registered their opinions. We, on this side of  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
65 

the House, listened and watched closely to what occurred in the Manitoba election. We were persuaded 
by the results of the election that people do want an alternative to regressive, destructive policies and 
programs of the Conservative and Liberal governments. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — The people of Manitoba said they were tired. They were fed up with the Lyon 
government. It was the most Conservative government in Canada. Manitoba people said they wanted a 
stake in their future. They wanted a government that would put their interests ahead of the Great West 
Life Insurance Company or any of the other financial institutions that the Lyon Conservatives had 
entrusted their future to. They said no to an Alcan smelter. They said yes to the idea that all people can 
have a stake in their future, like they had in Manitoba with the NDP government and they have in 
Saskatchewan today. 
 
This throne speech, Mr. Speaker, just proves my point. Our New Democratic Party government has 
continued to work on behalf of the people of the province, continued to develop new ideas, plans, and 
solutions to meet the needs of the people who live here. The throne speech proves that the Blakeney 
government is, once again, first off the mark with common sense programs and leading all other 
provinces by many lengths: leading in health care, in support for our farmers and agricultural research, in 
environmental legislation and protection — leading on all fronts, Mr. Speaker, in the field of policies 
and programs and plans for people. This throne speech, once again, sets out clearly and hopefully a set of 
possible, workable goals for us to achieve with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have a strong economy. We have an economy where all sectors work together for the common good. 
While our resources economy continues to be strong, it is not growing at the expense of other parts of 
our economy. Agriculture continues to be our mainstay. Agriculture continues to be supported in its 
challenges by this government. Mr. Speaker, I would like now to make some comments about how those 
challenges are being met by this government. 
 
The Canadian Wheat Board tells us the long-term market prospects are excellent. My colleague from 
Estevan has already pointed out that we will need to produce approximately 48 million tonnes of all 
grains by 1985 in order to meet those export commitments. This government believes that a sustained 
increase in grain production can occur. We have faith in our farmers’ ability to produce, and we have 
backed up that faith by investing in hopper cars to help them move that grain to market. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, our farmers are productive. How productive? That is documented by the fact that in a 
comparison of farm cash receipts from January to July of this year among the provinces of Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and Manitoba, Saskatchewan outstripped both Alberta and Manitoba in the percentage 
increase of farm cash receipts. 
 
The increase is reflected as well in the estimated net farm income in Saskatchewan for 1981, as 
compared to those two other provinces, according to Statistics Canada. On the basis of 69,000 farms in 
Saskatchewan, the average 1981 realized net farm income is estimated at $17,000 per farm in 
Saskatchewan. Compare that to Tory Alberta, with 58,000 farms and an average realized net income 
estimated at only $14,600 — almost $3,000 less than in Saskatchewan. In what was until November 17  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
66 

of this year another Conservative stronghold, 28,000 farms had an average realized net income estimated 
at a mere $6,000 per farm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Moosomin can hardly wait to get the opportunity to move or second a 
Speech from the Throne, but I’m pleased to say that the people of Saskatchewan can wait for a very, very 
long time. 
 
I couldn’t help but think when the Minister of Health announced that we will have a dental program that 
it might be a good idea to distribute a set of teeth to the opposition so that they can put some teeth in 
their opposition instead of spitting some teeth in the opposition. 
 
Nor, Mr. Speaker, our government is confident in what the farmers can produce, and they are confident 
that their NDP government won’t let them down when the going gets tough. In 1981 alone, 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture budget was increased by a full 30 per cent. But more important, last spring’s 
budget addressed the greater question of what framework of economic support farmers need in place to 
help them do what they do best, and that is to produce. We heard them, Mr. Speaker, and we have 
introduced programs to help farmers, to provide them with access to land and provide them with access 
to tools of agriculture, trade and all-out support for production and marketing of their products. We have 
today, for instance, Mr. Speaker, over 2,500 farmers farming land that is provided by the Saskatchewan 
land bank program, and there are still over 300 farmers on the waiting list wishing to sell their land to 
the land bank. As of October 1981, the land bank commission owns almost 1.1. million acres of land in 
Saskatchewan, and all of it is leased to Saskatchewan farmers. That represents about 1.5 per cent of the 
total land base in Saskatchewan, and the support for the concept of leasing land to farmers is growing 
among farmers right across Canada. Land bank is an idea whose time has clearly come. Just to show the 
point, Mr. Speaker, on November 5, 1981, a report in the Western Producer quotes the country-wide 
survey of farmers by Canadian Farm Surveys Ltd., as saying in part, and I quote: 
 

Among those interested in expanding their land base in 1982, half said they would do it through 
rental agreements. It is obvious that renting land is the most favored option for both prairie and 
Ontario producers. The figures indicate that there is a clear trend toward renting land to achieve 
expansion in the present economic climate. 

 
That’s just what the land bank is doing. Good planning, Mr. Speaker — working with farmers. Once 
again the NDP government in Saskatchewan anticipated what was happening in the economy, and it set 
up the land bank. It enables new farmers to get started and helps existing farmers to expand without 
large scale investment in land at backbreaking interest rates. 
 
Now, contrast that attitude and the action of the Saskatchewan government working with farmers with 
that displayed by rich Tory Alberta — the province that the Saskatchewan Conservative leader says we 
should copy. Now here is what the Tory Government of Alberta is doing there. On September 24, 1981, 
again in the Western Producer, an article sums up the Conservative approach to farmers quite well. It is 
entitled, “Alberta Can’t See the Farmers for the Oil.” It reports a meeting held in Taber, Alberta between 
Alberta farm leaders, Premier Lougheed and his agriculture minister, Dallas Schmidt. Briefly, it reports 
what farmers in Alberta and farmers in Saskatchewan already know about Tory promises in general, and 
about Tory promises about agriculture in particular. It says, and I quote: 
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
67 

Premier Peter Lougheed has admitted his Alberta government gave short shrift to agricultural 
matters during the last year. The Premier’s admission came as no surprise to most Alberta farm 
leaders who for the last several months have privately complained of inaction in agriculture as 
the industry was being hit by high interest rates, low prices for products and the impasse in 
dealing with the crowrate. 

 
The article continues, Mr. Speaker, Premier Lougheed said: 
 

Albertans should not creep into a habit of thinking that there is a problem. If there is a problem, it 
is the responsibility of the government to solve it. 

 
Now, I find that last remark absolutely astounding. If governments don’t step in to work beside farmers 
when they need a hand to deal with the challenges of their livelihood, who will? Will the federal 
government? Will the private grain trade or the packing houses in eastern Canada? Not likely, because 
these are the very people who have been the cause of the prairie farmers’ problems in the first place. The 
statements also make it clear that farmers should not pin their hopes on a Tory government either. No, 
Mr. Speaker, it is the clear responsibility of governments to work with farmers and all citizens for the 
common good. 
 
Yet it doesn’t surprise me that the Conservatives here in Saskatchewan would suggest we all follow the 
Alberta Conservative example by refusing aid and assistance to farmers. The Conservative leader here 
has already made the Devine assertion that 80 per cent of Saskatchewan family farmers are unproductive 
and should stop farming. And his colleague, the member for Moosomin, supported his leader’s edict 
when he stated that the family farm is an outmoded concept — that bigger is better. He stated that family 
farms aren’t important, that the life many of us here knew as children and the values we grew up with 
should be discarded, cast away on a refuse heap of history, or Tory progress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Conservatives say that they care about families. If they care so much, why are they 
attaching the very backbone of our rural society in Saskatchewan — our family farms and our farm 
families? Compare this crass Conservative refusal to work with farmers with the record of the Blakeney 
government — a record of success, Mr. Speaker, of working with Saskatchewan farmers which holds 
great promise for the future for all Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Give me an example. 
 
MR. MINER: — You want some examples? I’ll give you some, like the over 5,000 loans and grants 
totalling $178 million since 1973 to FarmStart clients. That’s real help when farmers needed it. Farmers 
tell me that they’re glad to get the help and the government was glad to be of service to them. Why, 45 
per cent of all hogs raised and sold in Saskatchewan in 1980 were produced by FarmStart clients; 40 per 
cent of major bee producers having 30 per cent of the colonies are FarmStart clients; 53 per cent of the 
provincial fluid milk producers have received assistance through FarmStart; approximately 19 per cent 
of all poultry producers in the province who are registered with the various poultry marketing boards 
received assistance through FarmStart; in terms of sheep production, 11 per cent of the sheep producers 
in Saskatchewan received FarmStart assistance. 
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
68 

Mr. Speaker, there’s another interesting aspect to all this. The excuse the Conservatives in Alberta use 
for not helping their farmers with the many problems facing them is that they have just been too busy 
negotiating an oil agreement with Ottawa over the past year. Now, doesn’t that beat all? Too busy jetting 
back and forth to Ottawa to help their own farmers. The reason that I find that so interesting is that 
Saskatchewan, too, was negotiating with Ottawa on an oil agreement. Our government was also 
negotiating with Ottawa over energy, and our government was negotiating with Ottawa over the 
constitution. And our Premier was contributing what is clearly the most useful and lasting contribution 
of any person involved in the discussion to the unity of Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — He clearly contributed the keys to opening the roadblock in the discussions which 
finally led to the accord. Yet, Mr. Speaker, our government didn’t forget to introduce a drought program 
when dry weather threatened farmers, while the federal government fiddled around changing the rules of 
a program that never ever did work very well. 
 
The Blakeney government wasn’t too busy to provide over $32 million in assistance to beef producers 
since 1976, and in this year’s budget a further $4 million to stabilize the beef industry in Saskatchewan. 
The beef stabilization plan will contribute to revitalizing our custom feeding and our packing house 
capacity, which could increase dramatically according to two University of Saskatchewan agriculture 
analysts. 
 
The Blakeney government took time out of its busy schedule to protect Saskatchewan farmland from 
foreign and out-of-province speculators with the establishment of the Saskatchewan Farm Ownership 
Board. It wasn’t too busy to get $514,278 worth of payments out in the third quarter of 1981 to farmers 
under the Saskatchewan Hog Assured Returns Program. But, in Tory Alberta, Mr. Speaker, there is no 
help for the beef industry. Conservatives there have said no to cattle producers. 
 
The Western Producer, October 1, 1981, reports the dire straits of Conservative agricultural policy, 
which has left Alberta cattlemen in a mess. The article titled “No Help for Alberta Cattlemen,” says: 
 

Alberta’s debt-ridden cattlemen will not receive provincial assistance at this time, the agriculture 
department announced. 

 
No help, Mr. Speaker. No help for farmers. Alberta Conservatives are too busy negotiating with Ottawa 
for a fair deal for the private oil companies in their province. 
 
These are the people the leader — or is it leaders? — of the Conservatives in this Assembly says we in 
Saskatchewan should copy. Members across the way continually plead with and whine at this 
government to follow the Alberta model. I am so glad that we have chosen our own way — the 
Saskatchewan way. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — I have spoken of some of the many ways this government has assisted farmers in 
gaining access to land, acquiring the tools to farm it, and meeting special conditions that affect farmers. 
But there are other uniquely Saskatchewan approaches that this government has taken to build a strong 
and healthy agricultural community. 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
69 

One of the most recent, Mr. Speaker, is the new FarmLab program. As I mentioned earlier, we have 
production targets to meet. The FarmLab program will help us to meet these production targets by 
providing $25 million over the next five years, as my colleague from Estevan has already said. 
 
What makes this program unique are two features. First of all, it’s based on a simple, workable premise. 
In order for it to work, everyone involved has to take full part. The program combines the expertise of 
the University of Saskatchewan — the scientists there — Saskatchewan agriculture and the expertise of 
Saskatchewan farmers to conduct the actual research on farm projects. FarmLab committees select 
farmer-initiated projects to be carried out in their area. 
 
Anyone can become a FarmLab co-operator, propose a research project to a FarmLab committee and 
actively participate in the project. FarmLab is an investment in the agricultural future of Saskatchewan, 
and for the farmer it is an investment in the future of his or her business. 
 
The second thing that makes FarmLab unique is that it reflects something special about the relationship 
among government, its institutions and the people it represents in Saskatchewan — a special attitude of 
trust, the ability to work together in a common cause. It reflects the very underpinnings of Saskatchewan 
society. We can work together as farmers, as researchers of the university and as members of the 
government. We can work together — and we do work together — for the good of all. 
 
Unlike the Alberta government, we believe that when our people have a problem, we, the government, 
have a problem too. The Blakeney government is never too busy to work with the people in this 
province. The list of examples of the Saskatchewan government working with farmers could go on and 
on. 
 
While the federal Liberal government, for instance, has no policy regarding the shortfall of capacity 
regarding western rail main lines, Saskatchewan’s government does. We say investment is mandatory if 
the West’s economic potential is to be realized. While the federals wax hot and cold about purchasing 
hopper cars, this government has purchased 1,000 hopper cars at the price of $55 million to deliver 
Saskatchewan grain. Action, Mr. Speaker, action, and a continuing commitment to Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
The concern of this government for its people is all encompassing, Mr. Speaker, and no more so than in 
the field of health care. Much of what exists right across Canada today in the field of public 
responsibility for good health had its beginnings in the long fight to establish hospitalization and 
medicare in Saskatchewan. Today we see that fight continuing against the Conservative forces who wish 
to drag us back into the dark ages of user-pay health care. This government is fighting that battle. We are 
fighting it and we will continue to fight it as long as it is necessary. 
 
At the same time new approaches to good health care are being promoted and funded by the government. 
Some of these new initiatives are directed at the prevention of health problems, such as the community 
psychiatric programs at Shaunavon, Ponteix, Meadow Lake, Lloydminster, Maple Creek, Leader, and in 
the Melfort-Tisdale area, the community alcoholism programs at Melfort and North Battleford, and the 
$150,000 for psychiatric day vocational rehabilitation programming in Regina. 
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
70 

Preventative pilot projects in health care, such as Seniors Counselling Seniors in the 12 home care 
districts, the school health program project, the prenatal nutrition and therapeutic diet counselling 
project, and increased grants to city health departments, will ensure that Saskatchewan remains in the 
forefront of the newest developments in the area of preventative health. 
 
Let me turn to the environment, Mr. Speaker. As Saskatchewan continues to grow through the ’80s, 
protection of our environment will become an even more important consideration of this government. 
It’s a matter that this government takes very seriously. 
 
In 1980, both The Department of the Environment Act and The Environmental Assessment Act were 
greatly strengthened. These changes reflect a deeply held belief of this government that our environment 
must be respected and its protection ought to be the first consideration in any development. 
 
It’s tough legislation, Mr. Speaker. The DEA (Department of Environment Act) now allows the 
environment minister to order the immediate clean-up of any spill, regardless of whether or not the issue 
of who is at fault has been settled. Now the owner and the processor of a hazardous substance are both 
responsible for damages caused by a spill. For instance, the owner could be a manufacturer, and the 
processor could be a company transporting the material. They could both be held responsible. The Act 
also now requires any person having knowledge of a hazardous product spill to report it immediately, 
and provides for compensation to innocent third parties suffering financial loss or personal injury as a 
result of a hazardous product spill. These are just a few of the tough new provisions, Mr. Speaker. As 
well, part of the new royalties for mining companies are being set aside in an environmental policy of 
this government which reflects our belief that industry as well as individuals should be responsible for 
their actions and that environmental concerns should not take a back seat to profit seeking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, protection of the environment will become more complex and expensive in the years ahead 
but those challenges will be met. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have outlined a few areas of commitment of this government to the people of 
Saskatchewan. There are many, many others which make it evident that the Blakeney government is 
following through, keeping the promise. The throne speech is also a statement by this government. In 
total and each of its parts, it says that the NDP government rejects the proposition that the sum total of 
self-interested acts, the aggregates of calculated greed in the corporate board room and the private 
market place, are the building blocks of social justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe in free enterprise but I do believe in the entrepreneurship of man, and as a 
member of this legislature and a member of a democratic socialist government, I have watched with 
dismay the destructive economic and social actions taken by our right wing conservative government in 
the United States headed by President Reagan. Yet it’s not enough to have to hear and see the terrible 
effects that those outdated conservative policies are having on the American people. We now have to 
listen to the Conservatives here in Saskatchewan applaud Mr. Reagan’s ways. Yes, that’s right, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact, the member for Indian Head-Wolseley says in a recent pamphlet to his constituents, and 
I am quoting directly: 
 

We are living in a time that needs strong action and determination such as  



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
71 

exhibited by President Ronald Reagan of the U.S.A. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it’s not the Alberta Conservatives whom they want us to copy, it’s the U.S.A. 
 
I just wish the Tories would make up their minds what brand of right-wing reactionary government they 
want Saskatchewan to copy. But now Conservatives want things done in Saskatchewan the way Ronald 
Reagan is doing things in America. Mr. Speaker, let me briefly outline some of the results of Ronald 
Reagan’s mismanagement of the American economy. Reaganomics is starting to unravel. In October 
past, the Dow Jones average plunged to its lowest point in 18 months. The U.S. economy is at a 
standstill. Unemployment is edging upwards. U.S. inflation has been double digit for the last three 
months. Over 10,000 U.S. companies have filed for bankruptcy so far this year, which is a 48 per cent 
increase over last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Conservatives in Saskatchewan are saying we ought to do things that way and we don’t 
agree. We think that there are better ways to manage economy — ways that work for the good of all 
people. We don’t agree with the right-wing Reagan conservative approach but let me tell you that we do 
agree with the tenets of a new papal encyclical called “On Human Labour.” 
 
Now listen to this, Mr. Speaker. The newest message from Pope John Paul II to people everywhere is 
that human life and labour have higher uses than as fodder for a brutish struggle for the largest return on 
invested capital. Now, Mr. Speaker, for the benefit of all in this House, including the press, I want to tell 
you that I am not a Catholic, but that does not stop me from admiring the strong leadership that the Pope 
has displayed in this papal encyclical. According to the papal philosophy as set out in this new 
encyclical, making the free market the centralist mechanism of society is an abdication of responsibility 
in favour of an unchecked and dangerous economic individualism. For Pope John Paul II, economics 
begins not with money, but with people. He reaffirms the right to private property, but not what he calls 
“the exclusive right to private ownership of the means of production.” He endorses their socialization 
under suitable conditions. Private property such as a small business, house, car, tools, etc., which are 
inalienable, are in the first category. 
 
In the second category are factories, laboratories, technology and, Mr. Speaker, natural resources. These 
he regards as candidates for socialism on the grounds they are a common inheritance of human beings 
and often the product of the work and invention of generations. He calls for many kinds of “joint 
ownership of the means of work.” In any event, he is talking about a more humane society, one in which 
your private property, your house and your car, are retained as is, but not control and ownership over 
huge multibillion dollar enterprises that shape and bend the lives of millions here and abroad. 
 
He talks about safety in the work place, social security, health services and the right to unions for 
bargaining and representation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recommend the reading of this Papal encyclical to the members opposite who believe that 
society should be organized with its truly needy living off the slops at the bottom, its vast middle class 
competing by slashing each others throats to get by, and for the few at the top, all taffeta and dinner 
jackets. 
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
72 

Conservatives support Reaganism. Reaganism blames Dr. Spock for the bruising that family life has 
undergone, but not John Paul II. He puts the blame on an economic system that separates mother from 
child. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a better way. Saskatchewan people have told us that they believe, through our 
publicly owned enterprises, our joint ventures in mining, research, public services and other business, 
that we are creating a society where people can work to live, rather than live to work. They have told us 
and we have listened. It is important to listen. I believe the importance of listening can best be 
emphasized by a little poem that a friend of my 14-year-old daughter has recently sent to her. It is 
entitled “Ecoutez.” 
 

I had a problem, so I tried to tell a friend 
She didn’t listen. 
So I tried my sister, but her ears were closed; 
Mom didn’t listen either. 
So I went to my room and sat on my bed, 
And I talked to my rag doll, 
Not out loud, but in my head. 
I told her everything and I cried, 
But she just sat there, looking blank, saying nothing, 
She couldn’t answer, but she listened. 

 
The important thing to that 14-year-old girl was that she could find someone that she truly believed was 
listening. The people of Saskatchewan truly believe — and indeed they know — that we as a 
government have listened. We will continue to listen; we will hear and we will act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MINER: — Mr. Speaker, I heartily endorse the direction pointed in the Speech from the Throne on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think what we have just heard is reason enough, but I 
am sure that members on both sides will support the recommendation, when we advance it later, to again 
establish a rules committee to see if we can come up with some vehicle to eliminate the torture that we 
have just been subjected to. We all recognize, Mr. Speaker, that democracy doesn’t come cheap, but I 
don’t know just how much we are expected to pay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was sorry for the circumstance which caused me to miss the delivery of the throne speech. 
But I certainly wasn’t sorry that I missed it, because from all reports and from glancing through it since 
I’ve come back, I’ve decided (and I think it is generally accepted throughout the province), that it was 
just a ho-hum, tired old document with very little substance. 
 
There was one item of substance having to do with some mortgage protection legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Premier may be bringing in — he’s not sure yet. He doesn’t know yet, because after the Speech 
from the Throne the other day, in an interview he said, “Well, we expect to have it passed within about 
10 days.” Today in question period he said, “Well, we’re still consulting with the credit unions and the 
trust companies and I haven’t seen it.” I take from that it’s not likely even drafted. If it is drafted, why is 
it drafted when we are still looking for consultation? It seems a bit of a contradiction. 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
73 

Contradictions are what we are getting a lot of these days. We have the Minister of Finance who stands 
up and says, “I favour closing those tax loopholes.” We have the Minister of Agriculture standing up and 
saying, “Well, maybe we shouldn’t act in haste. Those tax loopholes might be a good thing.” Then we 
have the Premier in one. The other contradiction was that wise old Minister of Agriculture (I said “old” 
Minister of Agriculture, tired but wise — not always on track, but wise) suggested in Melfort the other 
night what we should have. What we are going to have, I think, is an extended denticare program to 
include the adult population. So what did he do? He said “Well, we are going to have this extended 
denticare program to include the adult population.” The Minister of Health said, “Well, no, we are not 
going to do that.” Then he came back and said “Well, maybe we’ll do it for the senior citizens.” Then he 
said, “We have this little project going on out there to study the feasibility of it.” He admitted that 
perhaps the timing was the important thing, and perhaps that an election year would be the time to bring 
in such a process. 
 
Now I want to talk briefly about another contradiction, and it has to do with my friend, the minister 
responsible for SGI. He was somewhat critical of me the other day for calling him a lame duck minister. 
I apologize for that because I was probably just a little bit upset at the writing of that letter. He said 
“How can a robin be a lame duck minister?” Well, I accept that. If he wants to be a lame robin minister, 
that’s good enough for me. In any case, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote for you a bit of an article from 
Saturday’s Leader-Post. It has nothing to do with the article with your picture in it, Mr. Speaker. In any 
case, this is about a new role in the offing for the old SGI building. 
 

Negotiations are under way to turn the old Saskatchewan Government Insurance Building into a 
hotel and professional office complex. 

 
Well, I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, and members opposite, we don’t want that money showing up in a 
new hotel or a new mine or in a television ad. They cannot be trusted to guarantee that the money goes 
into improvements in the . . . Oh, what’s this? Well, I’ll tell you, I thought I was reading from my 
speech. What this is, is a news release issued by the Minister of Agriculture. He says we shouldn’t be 
putting public money into hotels, mines and TV ads. That’s just another sign of a tired, old, decrepit, 
senile government that’s losing its grip, Mr. Speaker. I will have a lot more say about that tomorrow and 
I therefore beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Report of Legislative Librarian 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, by leave of the Assembly, I move, 
seconded by the Hon. Mr. Bowerman: 
 

That the report of the legislative librarian dated November 23, 1981, and tabled in this Assembly 
on November 27, 1981, be referred to the standing committee on communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 



 
November 30, 1981 

 

 
74 

The Assembly adjourned at 4 p.m. 


