






















































Hansard: April 30, 1981


(2718) 2719 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 30, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MRS. DUNCAN:  — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to introduce to you and to the members of the 
Assembly, 10 grade 6 students. They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They have journeyed to Regina 
from Hazlet. They are accompanied by their teacher, Cheri Severson, as well as parents, Jennifer 
English, Amy and Ralph Sloan, and Dawn and Elvin Forbes. I do hope the children enjoy the 
proceedings today. I will be meeting with you for pictures and drinks about 3 p.m. Perhaps after 
question period, you might have some questions you would like answered. I would ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming the students here, and wish them an enjoyable day and safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN:  — Mr. Speaker, through you, I would like to welcome 50 grade 8 students from 
Martensville in my constituency, as well as the 11 adults who have accompanied them. They are seated 
in the east gallery, I will be meeting with them later to answer any questions they may have about what 
happens in the House. I ask you all to join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Western Power Grid 
 
MR. ANDREW:  — My question is to the Attorney General, in the absence of the Premier. At the 
western premiers’ conference which has just concluded in Thompson, Manitoba, it would appear that the 
Government of Saskatchewan has once again short-circuited the western power grid potential to 
develop. Would the Attorney General give us any indication as to when we might see a decision from 
this government with regard to the whole question of the western power grid. I understand both the 
provinces of Manitoba and Alberta are prepared to go with it. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member’s question is predicated on 
an incorrect statement of facts. I would refer the hon. member, as I would all members, to the 
communique on this particular matter. The communique reads as follows: 
 

Premiers Lyon, Blakeney and Lougheed, noted that since the agreement of 1978 conference to 
undertake a conceptual study of a western power grid, significant progress had been made. (Then it 
goes on to talk about detailed feasibility.) The premiers instructed their ministers to give the highest 
possible priority to complete the internal analysis and joint financial studies 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2720 

now available on the western power grid, and to advise the premiers, on the earliest possible date, of 
the recommendations. 

 
That, Mr. Speaker, sums up the decision taken by all three of the affected premiers, from Alberta, 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba: the recording of progress and the instructions to their ministers to give 
high priority to the internal analysis and join financial aspects of this matter. That is the position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan in concert with the other governments. 
 
MR. ANDREW:  — Supplementary question. The press statements today out of the Globe and Mail, 
would seem to indicate that Saskatchewan is again holding an opposite fly in the ointment, if you like. Is 
it not your understand, Mr. Attorney General, that Alberta is ready to proceed with the power grid. Of 
course, Manitoba always has stood ready. Is that not the position of Alberta that it is ready to go and that 
Saskatchewan is really holding up any negotiation at this point in time? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not going to presume to answer on behalf of the 
province of Alberta. It obviously is in a better position and is properly the government which must 
answer for its own decisions. But I do want to indicate to the hon. member opposite that this is a 
communique issued by all three of the premiers - Lyon, Blakeney and Lougheed. I don’t care what the 
Globe and Mail or any other newspaper might say about the matter. It is very difficult to go behind the 
three provinces’ agreement. The three-province agreement says, as I have articulated, that there is 
progress and that they have instructed their ministers to give the highest possible priority to completing 
the internal analysis and joint financial studies of the material now available on the western power grid, 
and to advise the premiers at the earliest possible date of their recommendations. 
 
Those are the exact words of the communique by Lyon, Blakeney, and Lougheed. I don’t know what 
could be plainer than that, what could be more straightforward than that, and for the member opposite to 
draw a long bow, putting it bluntly, somehow putting it on the shoulders of Saskatchewan, I think, is 
playing pure politics with this very important matter. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDREW:  — I think the Attorney General would agree that obviously the communique is a 
compromised statement. Is it not in fact true, Mr. Attorney General, that the policy of the provincial 
government is the same as I’ve set out before - what I would call the poli pause, if you like - that there 
will not be any agreement on the western power grid until after the next provincial election in the 
province of Manitoba? And that’s because of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Kindersley may know, or 
pretend to know, when the next Manitoba election might be, I, for one, don’t know that, and neither does 
the minister in charge of the power corporation in Saskatchewan. It could be as early as June or October 
of 1981, or as late as October of 1982. I think to drag politics into this matter, as the hon. member 
continually does, is indeed a very shameful and partisan operation by the Conservatives opposite. The 
members opposite laugh, and they can laugh if they want, but I want them to explain to me why it is that 
this communique by the three premiers, including Premier Lyon - the premier who, supposedly, these 
people are the spokesman for in this House, as opposed to the interests of the province of Saskatchewan, 
and for the taxpayers of the 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2721 

people of the province of Saskatchewan - why these three premiers agreed to this position take on the 
western power grid? Now it is either truthful or it isn’t truthful. And I’m submitting to the hon. member 
opposite that it is indeed an accurate reflection, and I would ask him and the Conservatives opposite to 
stop playing politics with this very important project, and let’s get on with the job of analysing it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Overtime Dispute in Correctional Camps 
 
MR. HARDY:  — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Minister of Labor. Mr. Minister, 
for the last two, three, or four weeks I’ve been bringing up to you the problems of SGEA (Saskatchewan 
Government Employees’ Association) employees in Saskatchewan with regard to wilderness camps. I 
guess I should ask the question: has the audit been completed? If so, what were the results and what will 
your recommendations be to the public service commission? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER:  — Well, I think it’s accurate to say at this point, Mr. Speaker, that the final 
assessment was completed for the permanent and the non-permanent employees as late as yesterday 
afternoon. The labor standards people in the Department of Labor are in the process of preparing what 
they refer to as the instrument, or the memo, or the letter, which will refer the findings to the employer, 
in this case the Department of Social Services and the public service commission, for this adjudication. 
As in other circumstances where there is a difference of opinion between the employer and the 
employee, I don’t propose to stand in my place and offer figures, because they are dependent upon a 
number of allegations and suppositions. Accordingly, I think it would be most inappropriate for me to be 
delivering up figures that have been arrived at at this time. This will be done in the immediate future. I 
understand the instrument to transfer to the public service commission this information, and the rationale 
for the judgment made, is in the process of being prepared and will be forwarded to the public service 
commission and the Department of Social Services directly. 
 
MR. HARDY:  — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, was this overtime taken back to 1978 or 
was it just followed back to June of 1980? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER:  — Well, the statutory provisions allow the Department of Labor, through the 
labor standards branch, to go back as far as three years in any adjudication which they undertake. I said 
before, the current collective agreement became effective in July 1980, that is, a year this coming 
summer. At that point in time there was a decision made, when that collective agreement was signed, 
that these employees would be regarded no longer as field employees. The Department of Labor does 
not intend to attempt to justify or interpret the collective agreement, and whether those employees were 
field employees prior to July of 1980 or not is not for the Department of Labor to decide. That should 
appropriately be the subject for negotiation between the parties and could, I suppose, properly be 
resolved by an arbitration tribunal. But for me to provide any further details would be irresponsible. I 
think this would be more appropriately decided by the employees and their employer, in light of the 
deliberations and the adjudication done by the Department of Labor in the labor standards branch. 
 
MR. HARDY:  — Mr. Minister, it was drawn to my attention (and I think to yours, too) that actually 
this problem originated in 1978, and, in fact, I think you were asked to look as far back as 1978. I also 
would like to ask you: have you taken into consideration the 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2722 

training staff and the casual workers who have been working part-time there, too? They would also be 
entitled to this overtime. Has you department looked into this portion of the work? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER:  — In answer to the hon. member’s question, I’m sure that the labor standards 
people have looked at all of the elements and requirements, and the decisions have been rendered on the 
basis of the records that have been provided to them. Obviously, there has been a determination made 
for not only the permanent employees, but, as I indicated to you yesterday, a judgment has also been 
made more recently on 18 non-permanent employees. I am not going to detail the investigation and 
adjudication that has taken place over a number of weeks. I’m sure the member will appreciate that I 
don’t spend my afternoons and evenings sitting around with the labor standards people who have been 
examining records and making their judgment on the basis of fact. 
 
I can’t give, nor should I offer, any more information to the hon. member than has been provided to this 
point. 
 
MR. SPEAKER:  — Final supplementary. 
 
MR. KATZMAN:  — Mr. Minister, my understanding of The Labor Standards Act indicates that, if an 
employee asks you to check the code to make sure he was paid for his proper hours back to 1978, which 
is fewer than the three years, it is the duty of your department to confirm back to that date whether he 
deserves overtime. You indicate you are only checking back to when the new agreement was signed. 
Why are you not checking the additional portion? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER:  — I’ll do it again slowly and carefully, if I may, Mr. Speaker, I did not indicate 
that the department was only doing its adjudication back to July 1980. I said there was a difference of 
opinion between the employees and their employer as to the status of the employees prior to the date of 
the signing of the last collective agreement. The adjudication has been done for back over a period of 
time, as required by the provincial statute. Certain assumptions have been made, with the final 
adjudication not ours to make, with respect to whether those employees were or were not field 
employees. But an adjudication has been made. The determination of the status of those employees will 
have to be a judgment made by someone else. Certainly not the Department of Labor. 
 
MR. HARDY:  — I have a question for the minister responsible for the public service commission. 
Now that the Minister of Labor has said that this audit on the overtime has been completed, is your 
department now prepared to pay this overtime due to the employees? And how long will it be before 
they can expect reimbursement of their overtime pay? Thirdly, when can these employees expect to get 
back to the negotiating table (I understand they have been out for over two weeks) and finalize this 
contract? While they are finalizing it, would your department not consider an averaging-of-hours 
contract to be a good idea? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI:  — Mr. Speaker, I am certainly not going to negotiate in this Assembly; 
there is a more appropriate forum to do that. I am unable to indicate what the disposition of the matter 
being dealt with by the Department of Labor is going to be, until we have received a report with its 
recommendation. I think, as the Minister of Labor has indicated at least twice already this afternoon, that 
report, and the decision has not yet been completed. When it is completed, we obviously will act 
accordingly, 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2723 

and I should indicate to the member that there is no doubt about that. 
 
The public service commission has always been ready to negotiate with the Saskatchewan Government 
Employees’ Association to resolve this issue, has been ready and willing to negotiate since the 
beginning of the present agreement, and continues to be ready to negotiate, as is indicated by the fact 
that there is, on the part of the government, an offer to increase the camp differential from $20 to $45 
per day. This, I think, is a pretty sincere indication of the good faith in which the public service 
commission has carried out the negotiations. 
 

Increase in Water Pumping Equipment Rental Fees 
 
MR. PICKERING:  — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture. In light of the 
abnormally low spring run-off, many farmers and ranchers are replenishing their supplies from 
alternative sources such as dugouts, sloughs and creeks. Last year, the rental for pipes and pumps owned 
by the Department of Agriculture was $125 per mile for 24 hours, and $210 for two miles. How do you 
justify a 20 per cent increase for the rental of this equipment this year? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY:  — Mr. Speaker, it is simply an analysis of the experience from last year 
and applying that analysis of costs to the situation this year. 
 
MR. PICKERING:  — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. That is all well and good, but would the 
minister not admit that your government continues to gouge the producers on ever-increasing rents for 
this equipment, which is owned by the department and was purchased from PFRA (Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Administration) for the measly price of $1 some years ago? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY:  — Mr. Speaker, I will provide the information with respect to the capital 
costs for the hon. member, I point out to him that there is an overall program relating to drought, of 
which the pumping program is one small part. I think if the hon. member considers what we have 
announced and what we will be announcing shortly, he will see that this government is moving to assist 
the farmers within this government’s capacity, in fact, to do so. 
 

Removal of Enclosed Telephone Booths 
 
MR. HAM:  — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister responsible for Sask Tel. Mr. Minister, it has 
come to may attention that Sask Tel is removing the enclosed pay telephone booths throughout the 
province. These booths are being replaced with a single-pole open pay phone. Can you tell me why this 
is happening? 
 
HON. MR. CODY:  — Mr. Speaker, we always look at various services to the public, and if we think 
we can increase those services, we do just that. As far as I’m concerned, the service which is now there 
is not being decreased in any way. 
 
MR. HAM:  — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. During inclement weather such as storms, dust storms 
and snow, etc., many Saskatchewan citizens and others make emergency phone calls. Do you feel that 
you are providing a service to the public when an individual has to make a phone call during a 
snowstorm in an open booth, or with the lack of a booth? 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2724 

HON. MR. CODY:  — Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly haven’t been out in the country to see where 
these phone booths have been taken away. I don’t know of one in my area that I can identify as having 
been taken away. If the hon. member would like to give me the information as to where the phone booth 
has been take away and a single booth put up, I would certainly be more than happy to look at the 
situation. I can’t identify them, obviously, but perhaps he can. 
 
MR. HAM:  — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister telling this House that they are not 
installing these one-pole telephone stations? 
 
HON. MR. CODY:  — I didn’t say they were not installing one-pole pay stations. of course, not. we 
have all kinds of them throughout the province, and that is not the suggestion at all. I’m just suggesting 
to you that I do not know of any that have been taken away and a one-pole phone installed in its place. 
 

Grasshopper Poison 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — A question to the minister of Agriculture, Mr. Minister, I notice on March 20, 
under a question from my colleague for Thunder Creek about the prevention of a grasshopper 
infestation, that you are providing grasshopper poison at $1.50 per pail to the farmers. Be that as it may, 
that is only a portion of controlling the grasshopper hatch that may infest this province this year. What 
plans do you have to control the hatch of grasshoppers on Crown lands? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY:  — Mr. Speaker, I will have to take notice of the question. 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — While you are taking notice then, Mr. Minister, take notice of the fact that many of 
the Crown lands, the ditches, the community pastures, roadsides, abandoned railroad lines are the places 
where the majority of the hatch takes place  — not the farmer’s fields. Will you look at a program using 
aerial spray to control the grasshopper infestation on these publicly-owned lands? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY:  — I agree with the hon. member that we need to be prepared for a 
grasshopper outbreak. I indicated to the hon. member in a statement in this House some time ago the 
efforts that are being planned. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how we can go about preventing the hatching, 
but if there is some scientific knowledge that I am not aware of which will prevent them from hatching, 
we will look into it and attempt to respond to the hon. member with respect to it. 
 
I will provide for the hon. member the policy with respect to Crown lands. He raises the issue of other 
lands, railway rights of way, road allowances, etc. I’ll indicate to the hon. member the programs for 
those particular area. I doubt that we would provide the spray free of cost to the CNR or the CPR. If he 
suggests we should do that, I don’t think we will do that. I think we need a program in case of an 
outbreak and I would be prepared to announce such a program. 
 

Kamsack Refinery Report 
 

MR. BERNTSON:  — Question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. I wonder if the minister 
could tell us whether or not he has come across the report that we were asking for the other night in 
estimates, dealing with the study of the refinery property and the consequences of the closure of the 
refinery in the town of Kamsack. 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2725 

HON. MR. VICKAR:  — Well, Mr. Speaker, I made the statement during estimates that I would bring 
any documentation that we may have during estimates and I’m prepared to do so. 
 
MR. BERNTSON:  — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. If the minister has the report, I wonder if he 
wouldn’t consider sending it over before orders of the day so that we can get through your estimates 
with some expedience instead of playing this silly little game that you insist on playing and causing 
delays in carrying out the functions of this House. 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR:  — Mr. Speaker, the documentation that the hon. member was looking for was 
asked for during the estimates and I said that I would table it during the estimates. I don’t know whether 
I’m bringing the right ones or not, but I’m bringing everything we have and I will be prepared to lay it 
on the table during estimates. 
 

Advertisements by Personal Services 
 
MR. KATZMAN:  — Question to the Minister of Labor. Mr. Minister, on April 28, you received a 
letter from Manpower Temporary Services referring to ads that are being placed for placement services 
in Saskatchewan by personal services. That type of service is illegal under Saskatchewan law. What 
have you done to inform these people that they are breaking the laws of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER:  — In answer to the hon. member’s question, I received a number of 
communications from the same source over the last number of months related to advertisements in a 
Saskatoon newspaper, I believe, in which a certain agency purports to be a personnel agency or an 
employment agency. The act is explicit in that The Employment Agencies Act provides that there shall 
not be a direct charge to an employee by any agency or any body which purports to find employment for 
these employees. The application of the act is awkward, I presume, because it becomes a very real 
problem of adjudicating who indeed is the employer. A properly functioning agency, apparently, is one 
which employs people and sends them out to yet another employer. That employer pays the agency, 
which is essentially the employer for these purposes, while the contracting agency provides the 
unemployment insurance, Canada Pension and other deductions. 
 
Accordingly, the strict enforcement of the act is one which has been attempted by the department. I 
believe, at this point in time, there has not been, to our knowledge, a violation. Quite frankly, I have 
some real concerns and feelings about so-called employment agencies; if the choice were mine, I would 
outlaw them all. The choice is obviously not mine, and some difficulties arise in a very major way in the 
application of the law. But, as far as I am aware, at this time we have not discovered that there has been 
a violation of The Employment Agencies Act. That is subject to investigations which are being 
conducted or inquiries that are being undertaken at this time as a result of the latest information provided 
to us. 
 

Investigation of Albertino’s Enterprises Ltd 
 
MR. LANE:  — A question to the Attorney General. A statement of defence was filed by SGI and one 
of the grounds for defence in an action brought against SGI by Albertino’s Enterprises Ltd. Was that the 
plaintiff had a criminal background. I wonder if the Attorney General, in light of the facts that SGI and 
the government possessed, commenced any investigation or caused any investigation to be made into the 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2726 

operations of that company and the individuals concerned? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, the department, to the best of my knowledge caused no 
investigations to be conducted. And, as the hon. member would know, no investigations in that regard 
normally take place. If there are investigations involving this company or any other company, they 
would of necessity flow from either a citizen’s complaint or from investigation by the RCM Police or 
appropriate policing agencies. That is the way the procedure has taken place. I don’t know whether there 
has or has not been such an investigation. It is not my practice or policy to check into police files on 
various matters. 
 
MR. LANE:  — In light of the statement of fact alleged by Saskatchewan Government Insurance in its 
statement of defence, was the Department of the Attorney General aware of the allegations of criminal 
background of the plaintiff corporation, or those controlling the corporation? If so, why was that 
information not passed on to SGI? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, to the best of my knowledge the department was not aware. 
I want to say that there may or may not have been a report in the prosecutorial branch; I don’t know. I 
just simply don’t have that information. I indicated to the hon. member before, and I repeat again, the 
policy since I’ve been Attorney General has been very simple. 
 
Prosecutorial decisions are taken exclusively by the chief prosecutor of the department on the advice of 
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. Now, the hon. members opposite, I gather, are alleging that 
everybody knew about this company except SGI (including the opposition). Why didn’t the hon. 
member bring it to the attention of the RCM Police if he had this information? If the hon. member has 
information, I ask him: when was the last time you spoke to the assistant commissioner of the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police about it? 
 
MR. LANE:  — I wonder if the Attorney General can advise this Assembly why the RCM Police, 
criminal investigation division, was advising those involved in real estate in the city of Regina, 
approximately two years ago, as to the activities of this particular corporation? And, can you advise us 
why, given the advice by the RCM Police to those involved in real estate, the Department of the 
Attorney General either was not aware of it, as he has just indicated, or if he was aware, why did he not 
advise Saskatchewan Government Insurance? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, members of the Department of the Attorney General may 
or may not have been aware  — I don’t know, in the broadest sense of the word “aware”. That is surely 
not what the hon. member is getting at. The hon. member, uses the word “aware,” in the sense of our 
function as the Department of the Attorney General to launch some form of prosecutorial action against 
an individual, a group of individuals or a company. Whether they were aware or not, I don’t know. All I 
know (at least I believe this to be the case; I should check the records to make sure that I’m absolutely 
solid on my facts) is that no charges have been laid by the Department of the Attorney General. Any 
charge which would be laid would be determined by the RCMP. The RCMP would prepare such 
information, forward it to the Department of the Attorney General, and decisions to charge would or 
would not be made. Whatever and whomever the RCMP was advising, obviously (I’d like to check my 
facts to be absolutely sure) it has not resulted in a criminal charge. In that sense, there was no “awaring”. 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2727 

I want to indicate to the hon. member that I take the point of view that the Department of the Attorney 
General is a unique department in government. It stands as a member of cabinet but separate from 
cabinet. It’s our job to administer criminal justice against everybody to whom it may apply. It’s not our 
job to be alerting SGI or any of our colleagues about the aspects of the law. It’s their job to follow the 
law. Our job is, on the advice of police and proper complainants, to prosecute where necessary. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 89  — An Act to amend The Marriage Act 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES:  — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Marriage Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 90  — An Act to amend The Department of the Environment Act 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN:  — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Department of 
the Environment Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 91  — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act (No. 2) 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, I move that a bill to amend The Provincial Court Act (No. 
2) be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 92  — An Act to amend The Intestate Succession Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, I move that a bill to amend The Intestate Succession Act be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 93  — An Act to amend The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, I move that a bill to amend The Surface Rights Acquisition 
and Compensation Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Bills Referred to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Before orders of the day, I wonder if I might, by leave of the Assembly, 
introduce four motions dealing with Bills 75 to 78 inclusive. These are social services bills which, I’m 
advised by my colleague, have been agreed to by their critic to go to the non-controversial bills 
committee. 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2728 

I move, seconded by the Minister of Labor, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 75  — An Act to amend The Family Services Act, be 
discharged and the bill referred to the non-controversial bills committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labor, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 76  — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Assistance 
Act, be discharged and the bill referred to the non-controversial bills committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labor, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second That the order for second reading of Bill No. 77  — An Act to amend The 
Rehabilitation Act, be discharged and the bill referred to the non-controversial bills committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Finally, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Labor, by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 78  — An Act to amend The Housing and Special-care 
Homes Act, be discharged and the bill referred to the non-controversial bills committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 60  — An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY:  — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I rise to speak on Bill No. 60. 
 
Hon. members will recall that during the debate of the agriculture estimates, the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley and I had a discussion concerning the agricultural research program. I indicated at that 
time that the program would be dealt with in greater detail during the debate of Bill 60, and that we’d 
have an opportunity for fuller discussion at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Department of Agriculture Act before us differ 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2729 

from the previous act in that they provide specific authority for the Minister of Agriculture to enter into 
agreements with another body  — another department or agency of the federal or provincial government, 
or with the university  — for the purpose of furthering agricultural research, testing, demonstration and 
production. In the budget of March 5, our government announced a five-year, $25 million commitment 
to agricultural research sponsored by the province. The program will be called the farm lab program. 
Never before has the province embarked in such a large way upon direct funding for agricultural 
research. Never before has there been such a systematic attempt to have research undertaken on farms 
across the depth and breadth of this province to answer the production questions that farmers face. 
 
The farm lab program will begin this year with an assured five-year funding commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Wheat Board has been telling us over the last several seasons that we have an 
opportunity to sell 50 per cent more grain on world markets by 1985 if we can grow and transport that 
grain. With investments and commitments of investment by federal and provincial governments, 
farmer-owned elevator companies and railways, and with the appointment of a public body to 
co-ordinate grain movement, we have begun to develop confidence in our transportation system. Much, 
of course, remains to be done in that system, but 4,000 new hopper cars which will come into the system 
in 1981 will help, and we know what we can do if we put our minds to it and co-operate, because we 
look at the experience of the last crop-year. 
 
With some basis for confidence in the transportation system, farmers can turn their minds to the question 
of producing 50 per cent more grain - producing it in a way that does not leave the soil to blow away 
when we get a dry year as we have this year and we get some winds as we have had this spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a normal year in Saskatchewan, the average yield per acre of wheat across the province 
is 25 bushels to the acre. There’s no doubt that farmers know how to increase their yield to 27 or 28 
bushels to the acre and maybe 30 bushels to the acre. They will say that they’re not farming as well as 
they know how to already. 
 
In 1976, a year when we got lots of rain and lots of rain at the right time, we had a record crop. The 
provincial average that year was 31.13 bushels to the acre on wheat  — the highest ever. The question is: 
how are we to increase that yield to 37, 38 or 40 bushels an acre on a consistent basis? The university 
professors and the scientists say that there is no problem. I suspect that if farmers would say, they would 
agree that if we got the kind of rainfall that we talked about during our estimates  — two inches on May 
1, two inches on the May 24 and then two inches on that nice June day  — we would have no problem. 
 
The professors say it can be done and they say: “We know how to do it. It’s only a matter of the 
farmer’s changing how he farms.” Of course, Mr. Speaker, the farmer in that kind of a situation is fairly 
sceptical, and rightly so, because I seem to notice that even the university professors have been backing 
off this spring. Where last year we head them saying that there should be a law against 
summerfallowing, this year we hear them saying: “Well, now boys, you had better be careful about 
planting that stubble.” 
 
When we ask the scientists for some specific answers on salinity, they say: “Well, there are many things 
we don’t know yet,” and there’s no real blanket answer. Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, the farmer is out 
there; he’s the one who has to make the hard decisions and 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2730 

the one who has to make the whole thing work. 
 
Clearly there are two things that need to be done. One, there needs to be basic research done on 
questions the farmers are asking for answers on; two, there need to be different things tried  — 
combinations of things for each soil zone and each climatic zone in the province. If the farmers think 
that they make sense, they can find out what works in the real situation and not just what is theory. 
 
Each year, farm lab will outline a specific set of priorities in practical agricultural research that will be 
the emphasis for that year. The government will sign an annual contract with the university to undertake 
the research work. Some of the work will be undertaken in the university labs, in the university facilities, 
because some of it is at that stage. But a great deal of work will consist of the scientists’ working with 
the interested farmer to learn something more about production. The university will communicate with 
the farmer through a series of research committees set up throughout the province. Twelve regional 
committees will be established, made up of producers. The regional farm lab committees will invite 
interested farmers to let their interest be know; the committee will match interested farms with projects 
that fit within the priorities established for that year. 
 
The agricultural representative, the scientist and the farmer will sit down, design the details of work to 
be done for a particular field or, in the case of animals, for a particular herd. An agreement will be 
drawn up with the farmer, signs will be posted, and the work will begin. 
 
In addition to funds provided directly to the university to buy the time and skill of scientists for lab and 
field work, each regional farm lab committee will have an allocation of funds available to it. These 
funds will be used to help defray some of the research costs related to specific farm projects. 
 
The local agricultural representative will serve as secretary to the regional farm lab committees. The ag. 
rep. will co-ordinate the visits of the scientists with the farmers. The ag. rep. will visit the farms and help 
take a weed count or a plant count, if that is necessary. In short, the ag. rep. will act as the staff 
co-ordinator at the local level for projects approved by the regional farm lab committee. 
 
Each project will be identified with a sign. Farmers will be welcome to visit to take a look at what is 
happening. Field days will be organized. The emphasis of the farm lab program will be the production 
questions relating to crops, but there will be work done in the livestock area, because the livestock 
industry is an essential part of the farm scene in the province. 
 
Over the five years of the program, we see farm lab projects under way in virtually every municipality in 
the province. Mr. Speaker, we propose that the priorities for the farm lab program in 1981 be as follows 
(and these priorities will be reflected in the contract signed between the Minister of Agriculture and the 
president of the University of Saskatchewan): 
 
Dryland crop rotation. This would be the largest program or at least the program with the largest number 
of projects across the province, both in the first year and in the subsequent years. 
 
Farmers might want to continue their present practice which might be crop, crop, 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2731 

summerfallow; or might be crop, summerfallow, but look at different cultivation methods. In some 
areas, farmers might want to try longer rotations. This might be rapeseed, wheat, barley, sweet clover 
and summerfallow; or it might be wheat, rapeseed, pulse crop, wheat, barley and summerfallow, 
whatever is decided and whatever fits the area. Each area of the province will be different. What works 
in one soil zone will not necessarily work in another. What works in one climatic zone will not 
necessarily work in another. 
 
How can we more successfully conserve the moisture that we receive in order to allow us to extend the 
rotation? How can we catch what snow does come in the winter? How can we handle the trash or avoid 
losing it all to run-off in the spring? Do we need special machines to do this? If so, what are they? 
 
What combinations of fertilizers are most effective? Can we cut down the amount of fertilizer required, 
especially nitrogen, by using particular varieties of particular crops in a particular order? How do we 
account for the different fertilizer requirements of different parts of the field? Of the chemical fertilizers 
we use, how much is being absorbed by the plant and how much is being wasted? 
 
What about weed control? How much weed control can we achieve simply by rotating the kinds of 
crops? How much do we still need to accomplish through the use of chemicals? 
 
Some farmers will be interested in looking at all of these things together, willing to work closely with 
the scientist to determine the effects which changes in one of the areas have on another area. Some 
farmer swill be more interested in one particular aspect of the rotation questions, and will only want to 
pursue that. Some may just want to try out different ways of conserving moisture to see what that does 
to his particular yield. Some may be interested in exploring different patterns of cereals, oilseeds, and 
legumes in rotations. Some may be interested in trying different methods of weed control on crops 
which they are already growing, different timings of tillage or chemical applications or in determining 
effects on yield and cost and even residue that is left in the soil. 
 
The number of projects which could be undertaken in the rotation area is almost unlimited. Certainly, 
there is room for virtually every farmer who is interested. With projects that are well-marked by signs 
indicating what is being tried in that particular field. I can see us driving by and observing with a good 
deal of interest whether what is being experimented with is really working or not. If he is close to where 
I live and his conditions are reasonably the same, I might even try it. Some afternoon, we’ll get 
organized. We’ll all go out together in the community to look at it, drink coffee, talk about it and figure 
out what won’t do on our own places. 
 
I can see the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley and me, some spring morning, not appearing in the 
legislature for question period, because as we drive into Regina from our respective communities, we 
stop to look at a research project. I think that opportunity is an important opportunity. 
 
Tillage practices. Tillage practices could well be included as part of the rotation program. But it has 
become such a major issue that they are worth spending a good deal of time and energy investigating 
separately. Surely, we should not be in a situation in 1981 where the ditches are full of topsoil after one 
day’s blow. Is there something wrong with the timing of our tillage practices? Or is there something 
wrong with our 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2732 

equipment or perhaps the way the farmers are using it? You know, Mr. Speaker, I see the double disc, 
the machine that was put in the fence corner as a result of the experience of drought and wind in the 
’30s, on machine lots and in farmers’ fields. I thought we ran that into the fence corner, along with the 
two- and three-furrow plow and along with the old one-way and moved to the cultivator and the rod 
weeder. Sure, use the discer, but only use it for seeding if you are going to use a disc implement at all. 
 
What happened to that experience? What happened to it? Was it a wrong experience and why are we 
going back to the use of some of that equipment that we threw away, back there in the ’30s and ’40s? we 
will do well to invest in research by Saskatchewan manufacturers. And goodness knows, Mr. Speaker, 
we have some of the best short-line machinery brains in this country  — probably on the North 
American continent  — here in Saskatchewan. Ask them to do research on equipment that is specifically 
suited to today’s Saskatchewan conditions, because it is dry far more than it’s wet. In tillage, as in all 
other aspects of production, the needs in the South and the North and the East and the West are different. 
 
Soil salinity, Mr. Speaker, every rural member in this Assembly could name pieces of land in their own 
constituencies or perhaps even acres on their own farm which have gone to alkali and are producing 
much less than they used to, if they are producing at all. What will grow on these patches? Not only 
what will grow but also what will restore them to their former fertility? The university tells us that they 
want to do some work in determining what different kinds of salinity there are and how far the water 
moves, how fast and why. They tell us they want to record specific information on fields before and 
after certain crops are tried. Farmers are happy to make their field available for the scientist to measure 
salt levels of depth levels or whatever. But mostly the farmer just wants to know what he can do with the 
piece to make it productive again. 
 
The 1981-82 contract will provide significant funds for salinity research  — both for scientists to assist 
farmers in applying the best information available to date on how to handle saline spots and for 
monitoring the results and determining better answers. 
 
Plant breeding has been the key to major increase in productivity on the prairies over the years. Mr. 
Speaker, the federal government has traditionally been responsible for plant breeding through its federal 
research stations. A sophisticated system exists to protect the purity of the varieties available to the 
farmer in Canada. But, Mr. Speaker, the federal government currently has a bill before the House of 
Commons to turn plant breeding in Canada over to private enterprise. The federal government says its 
new legislation will provide for more money spent on plant variety research in Canada; it will provide 
better access to foreign varieties for Canadian farmers. As the federal Minister of Agriculture says, “The 
federal agricultural research stations will soon be making money because of all the royalties collected on 
plant breeders’ rights.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say, in this Assembly, that the day agricultural research becomes a money-making 
proposition will be a said day for Canadian agriculture, for the Canadian farm economy, and in fact, for 
the Canadian economy. 
 
The members opposite may shake their heads. But I remind them and all the members of this Assembly 
that the Clark government also planned to introduce plant breeders’ rights legislation in the House of 
Commons. There are two aspects of the problem of plant breeders’ rights legislation now before the 
House of Commons. Firstly, plant 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2733 

breeding is a long and costly process. It has a high risk, and private enterprise, looking at making a 
dollar, will simply not stick with it long enough to make the breakthrough. 
 
Secondly, plant breeding, under this bill, could become a monopoly over which the farmer would have 
no control. Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a speech delivered to a seminar in the agricultural 
economics department of the University of Saskatchewan by the former director of the federal 
agricultural research station in Saskatoon  — a man with more than 30 years of research, a man with an 
international reputation in research and plant breeding, Dr. Ross Greenshields. 
 
I am going to table his speech for all hon. members. I want to quote from the speech by Dr. 
Greenshields. He is referring to the legislation that is before the House of Commons. 
 

There is considerable talk about more varieties being available. More varieties have always been 
available; but in western Canada, with its Arctic climate and short growing season, we have had to 
develop our own varieties. At any given time, not more than about 10 varieties of cereals and 
oilseeds cover over 90 per cent of the crop acreage in western Canada, and 99 per cent is produced 
in the institutions on the Prairies. 
 
We don’t need more varieties. It isn’t quantity but quality that we need. Behind quality is often some 
long-term expensive research. In my opinion, no company would have been prepared to put the 
number of scientists on the project and to do the in-depth research over a long period of time, to 
achieve Canola rapeseed. 
 
Remember that a bill like C-32 could change the basis of our whole system of plant improvement in 
Canada. This might not happen overnight. But if public institutions are essentially forced out, our 
farmer swill end up at the mercy of the private companies and they will give us what they wish, not 
necessarily what we should have, and not what we want. This must not be allowed to happen. 
 
Remember the experience with the monopoly of the line elevators in the early 1900s that resulted in 
the formation of the wheat pool. The line companies had a monopoly  — a monopoly that was only 
broken by the farmers forming co-operatives. A private plant breeders’ monopoly would be much 
more difficult to break because it would be enshrined in legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, plant breeding is an essential service to the farmers, and can only operate in the farmers’ 
interests over the long period, if it is operating as a public utility. I say in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, if 
the federal government is abdicating it’s role in public plant breeding, then this province has only the 
choice to enter the field in a significant way. This program will start us down that road. 
 
Animal research. As Saskatchewan and all of Canada struggle to maintain a beef industry which is 
competitive in the international situation and as we face a growing world demand for protein for human 
consumption, the livestock industry may look away from the traditional wheat and barley to feed cattle. 
It may, as well, work to development animals which we produce as effectively and efficiently as 
possible. This means that we work on both the animal and the forage to match the lower cost feeds with 
a digestive tract which can handle them. We work on the nutritional content of 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2734 

various feeds, the digestibility, how to make them attractive, and determine what adjustments can be 
made. Additionally, work is required on the effect on the health of cattle and pigs of the trace minerals 
and vitamins which are either present or lacking in the water or feed in different parts of the province. 
 
These kinds of studies will be included in this year’s animal agricultural contract with the university. A 
great deal of work will be done in laboratories but, where possible, work will be done on the farms. 
 
Production and cost studies. One of the difficulties which often arises in research work is translating 
something which may have been economic to do in the laboratory or in a small-test situation to the real 
world of the field and the farm. The costs of any practice must be carefully recorded and calculated, as 
they will have a major bearing on its general use. Our contract with the university will include provision 
for cost studies on the projects undertaken in the field. 
 
Toxicology and biotechnology. These two areas are restricted to lab work. Toxicology performs an 
important service in determining residues in soils and plants from the use of chemicals. Biotechnology 
works in the biology area rather than the chemical area of controlling pests such as grasshoppers. It 
addresses that issue  — the issue which was raised by the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley this 
afternoon. A product currently used to control tent caterpillars may be able to be extended to control 
other crop pests, if it’s pursued. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the projects which will be the priorities for research in the 1981-82 farm lab 
program. I report to this Assembly that we have formed a farm lab advisory committee. It consists of 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the National Farmers’ Union, the Saskatchewan 
Stockgrowers’ Association and the Western Canada Cow-Calf Association, as well as membership from 
direct producers. The committee has met to review the concept of the program. The committee will be 
the provincial body advising on annual program priorities in the farm lab program  — priorities which 
will, in turn, become the priorities in the contract with the university. The farm lab committee will keep 
a close eye on whether the program is really doing what we intend it to do at the farm level, and will 
advise us if changes are necessary. 
 
At the local level, the regional farm lab committees will consist of representation from the existing 
agricultural district boards and the regional councils, as well as individual farmers. These committees 
will invite farmer participation. They will approve projects and the locations of those projects within 
their given regions. The projects approved will fall within the approved provincial priorities, but the mix 
and the emphasis from region to region will almost certainly be different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farm lab is an important program of agriculture in the ’80s, probably the most 
important program in the budget this year. It is a program for the University of Saskatchewan and the 
scientists and the expertise which they have, and they are excited by it. It is a program which is going to 
require a lot of work by our agricultural representatives  — work which they really haven’t been 
involved in as directly as they will be involved in this program. Imagine the challenge of the ag. rep. to 
get the expert on the farm and the expert at the university sitting down together to resolve and to answer 
some of the questions which are moving about the agricultural community with respect to productivity. 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2735 

But most important, Mr. Speaker, it is a program for Saskatchewan farmers, for their expertise. There is 
no question that Saskatchewan farmers are experts. They have a reputation as being the most efficient 
and the most productive of any farmers or any business group in this country. Certainly, farmers have 
increased their productivity over the years more than any other business. Additionally, Mr. Speaker, 
farmers take risks that urban people simply would not tolerate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Jonathan Swift said in Gulliver’s Travels: 
 

Whoever could make two ears of corn and two blades of grass grow upon a spot of ground, where 
only one grew before, deserves better of mankind and do a more essential service to this country 
than the whole race of politicians put together. 

 
I am proud to move second reading of Bill No. 60. 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the Minister of Agriculture bring forth his 
plans on bill No. 60, as he said he would under agriculture estimates. I don’t know whether I would go 
back to Gulliver’s Travels to start on our debate, or to the 1930s and the devastation which the minister 
so often reflects on in his speeches. 
 
I would point out that I think it has been a long time coming. I think the farmers of Saskatchewan have 
been wanting research for some time and I would wonder why the government opposite, which has been 
in power through the decade of the ’70s, has waited 10 years to bring in this very needed program for 
Saskatchewan agriculture. So I would say, it is here now; it is what we want; thank goodness, it finally 
got here. I think that is what the farmers of Saskatchewan would say. 
 
The thing which concerns me in regard to this (and I want to make it very plain at the outset of my 
remarks) is that we, on this side of the House, favor agriculture research. We have called for more 
research to be done in many fields in this province. Certainly, research and development, as my 
colleague says, is the concept which we stand for. Certainly, in a province in which agriculture is the 
backbone of our economic activity, I say it is about time that the government in power did come along 
with a research and development program. 
 
I think the concept of research and development is supported by both sides of the House, and I believe it 
is supported by farmers in Saskatchewan. What concerns me, to a certain degree, is the implementation 
of these projects. As I listened to the minister, it seemed to me that he was talking about the university; 
that is the area with the agricultural expertise, the theoretical knowledge that can be linked with the 
practical application on the family farm. That, to me, seems to be a worth-while objective, if that is what 
we are heading toward without impediment, restriction or control by government agencies. There is the 
crux of the problem which worries me in this type of program. 
 
I listened to the minister talk about cultivation and cultivation practices. Maybe we’re using certain 
types of machinery that are not best suited to the drought conditions that we are in today, Mr. Speaker. I 
accept what he says. He has been in agriculture longer than I have; he lived in the ’30s. Maybe that is 
correct. I don’t dispute that. 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2736 

He talked about soil salinity. I think anyone out there in Saskatchewan who has this problem on his 
farmland would agree that this is a worth-while objective  — to solve the problems of soil salinity. He 
then went on to talk about plant breeders’ rights, as I understand, and then on to animal breeding 
research. At that point I began to sit here and wonder where the control factor would come in because I 
know the government opposite has a bill in called The Natural Products Marketing Act which, if 
enforced, could restrict what is grown and distributed in this province. 
 
Now, if it is to improve the varieties of grains out there, if that comes from the grass roots with producer 
control  — that type of research  — I don’t see too much wrong with it. But what if this is a design 
whereby one is to qualify for these grants. I don’t know how much money an individual can have; the 
minister said $25 million over five years, I think. The agricultural estimates seem to discover about $2 
million for this year. It was hidden around in different places, and there may be more. I would ask, then, 
if the minister in his closing remarks would indicate what the expenditure may be for this coming year in 
this new research. 
 
Getting back to this problem of the projects selected, he pointed out that there would be boards 
developed. I forget the name of them. The regional farm life committee  — I think that’s what he called 
it. I have another question: were these elected or appointed boards? When you start appointing boards by 
governments in power, sometimes you get different objectives from what is really intended by the 
legislation. I wonder why we have to have these extra boards, Mr. Minister, because as I understand it (I 
think you made reference to them) each R.M. now has the power to have an agricultural representative 
or an agricultural district board. It would seem that these are people appointed by the R.M.; they are 
choices of the local electorate and these are the people who should probably administer these start-up 
grants or these research projects, rather than bringing in a whole new board. 
 
I hope that the desire and concern here is to improve the varieties of plans and animals that we have. I 
question the animals. I think that Agribition here in Regina indicates that we in Saskatchewan and in 
western Canada have probably some of the most superior breeding stock in the world. That superior 
breeding stock in beef and dairy cattle was developed by the good old means of private enterprise. By 
risking your dollar to go out and buy the best bull and get the best semen that you can have to produce 
the best offspring that are going to bring you the biggest dollar when you sell them. That’s the way we 
came to be the leader in livestock in Canada, I believe. I think Agribition supports what I say. We’re the 
leader in livestock in the world in many cases, because we have some of the best stock here. 
 
Now, I would agree that you can’t rest on your laurels; you always want to be improving. We want to be 
getting the maximum production that we possibly can out of our agricultural activities. But I say, good 
old private enterprise has certainly produced it in the animals, and that wasn’t with any special advisory 
committee or any special research grant. However, I will agree that there are projects that need research. 
 
There was one thing that I jotted down as I was listening to you. It always amazed me in all my years of 
teaching. When I worked with students at science fairs, I tried to get them to do this topic. I throw it out 
to you, and I think you hinted something about it too. We live in this country where (this year it was a 
little different) there’s a great amount of snow. I don’t think there is anyone in Saskatchewan (I don’t 
know if there is anyone at the university) who understand the way snow drifts. There is a whole study 
out there on snow, and the controlling of snow, that could be a source of moisture. There would 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2737 

be one project that would be very valuable to undertake, because we’ve lived in this country all our lives 
and we don’t understand it at all. 
 
You went on about your farm lab and its advisory committee. I think there may be merit in a farm lab. 
Again, there is a special committee being set up. as I say, I would like you to tell us how these 
committees are going to be established. You mentioned certain farm groups that you have had 
representation from and discussion with. I would think that in the main, Mr. Minister, the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people on this side of the House do not in any way, shape or form go against the 
concept of research and development  — worthy objectives. But the thing that I want to see, and the 
proof in the pudding, is going to be true, independent, locally developed research projects. I would be 
very hurt to see a situation where a farmer couldn’t undertake a project because some bureaucrat who is 
administering the program said it’s not really what you want. I would hate to see a farmer limited. I 
think you said there could be a farmer in each municipality. There are a lot of good ideas out there. A lot 
of these can be developed by research and development, but let’s let it be true and independent research  
— the type of research that we see in universities where it isn’t being manipulated by some bureaucratic 
organization which may have some political end. 
 
Just on ending, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this to the minister. I don’t know if your signs are designed 
yet or not  — the signs you are going to put up at each one of these plots. I agree with you; I’ll drop in 
and have a cup of coffee and talk about these things. I think that’s worth while. But if you are designing 
these signs, I would say this; this would be a break with tradition  — let’s highlight the project, let’s put: 
“Joe Black, Project to Improve Rapeseed,” big letters; and down in the bottom  — “Sponsored by the 
Government of Saskatchewan,” and then you say what they’re doing. Let’s give credit where credit is 
good on these signs, and focus on those farmers, innovators, developers, men that are really the 
backbone of agriculture. 
 
MR. BANDA:  — Well, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t intend to get into this debate until I heard the new 
agriculture critic proposing how he’s going to collect snow, and whatever, in southern Saskatchewan. I 
hope that the member, in his studies to collect snow, will remember that the snow comes from above, 
and we have to have a little snow in order to collect some for moisture in Saskatchewan. 
 
But it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that the member criticizes the government for not bringing in 
more research moneys earlier. I want to remind the members opposite that it’s because of the good 
planning of the members on this side of the house who have planned the resource revenues, and the 
activity in the resource area, that have brought more moneys to the people of Saskatchewan. Because of 
that, we are able to do many of the things that we should be doing out in rural Saskatchewan, and this is 
no exception . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, if the member will listen (I know he doesn’t like 
being reminded of this). 
 
Members continually criticize us for getting into potash, into oil. If members would just realize that 
those revenues coming forth are providing programs like beef stabilization and research. It would be 
interesting to know Mr. Speaker, how members opposite would bring in these programs when they are 
totally against millions of dollars in resource revenues coming to Saskatchewan, when they would 
sooner give it to the multinational corporations . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, since 
members opposite don’t want to hear what I want to say today, I’ll prepare a few more remarks to get 
back at the remarks the member opposite made. So, I beg leave to 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2738 

adjourn debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No, 85  — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of 

The Jury Act, 1981 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise to move second reading of The 
Jury Consequential Amendment Act, 1981. the provisions of this bill contain amendments to various 
statutes required if The Jury Act, 1981, a bill presently before this House is enacted. 
 
The Jury Act, now before this House, directs that all but a few classifications of persons, who are those 
engaged in the administration of justice, shall be eligible to serve on juries. Others will be permitted to 
apply for relief from jury services in certain circumstances. Previously, members of a number of 
professional associations and organizations were automatically excluded from jury service by virtue of 
The Jury Act, or the specific professional society act. Sections 2 to 5 and section 7 of this bill remove 
these automatic exemptions. 
 
Section 6 of the bill makes amendments to The Queen’s Bench Act consequential upon the removal of 
certain jury provisions from that act to The Jury Act, and allows the Lieutenant-Governor in Council to 
set the fees payable to jurors as provided by the proposed jury act bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Jury Consequential Amendment Act, 1981. 
 
MR. ANDREW:  — Mr. Speaker, the critic is preoccupied at this point in time, and I think he has a few 
things to say. I don’t see any problem with the legislation presented but, so he has an opportunity to 
speak on this matter, I would beg leave to adjourn debate on this question. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 87  — An Act to amend The Unified Family Court Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Unified 
Family Court Act. This amendment will increase the scope of the unified family court by permitting it to 
exercise the jurisdiction of the court under The Attachment of Debts Act and The Dependants’ Relief 
Act. 
 
In many instances, matters before the unified family court also involve matter sunder these two acts, and 
I think it is appropriate to enlarge the jurisdiction of the court in this manner. I do not need to remind 
members of the success of this special experimental project in the city of Saskatoon. It has proved to be 
a very popular court which handles family law matters in an efficient and sensible way. I am pleased 
that this court will be set up in Regina in 1982-1983. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to Amend The Unified Family Court Act. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK:  — Mr. Speaker, the amendments to that particular act have more 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2739 

ramifications than are indicated in the bill. Certainly, it could be possible that the whole unified family 
court act has to be looked at. It’s not so long since it was brought in, and I think that it’s fair to say that 
now that we have been through a few examples in court, it has raised enough questions in the minds of 
the people who have had to deal with that particular court that there could be some very constructive 
amendments which could be proposed in the House. It might be appropriately placed before the House 
at this particular time. In light of that and in light of the fact that we are taking a look at some 
amendments which we may introduce, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy that 
Bill No. 59  — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that this bill has regional consequences that one 
has to look at. I think in some areas of the province, where there is adequate habitat for wildlife, perhaps 
the movement to sell leased land to people wanting to purchase it is the correct way to go. 
 
In the southwest corner of the province, where there are a lot of leases, probably many of the people 
would want to purchase the leased land and should be given the opportunity to do so. 
 
So, I don’t think we can oppose the concept of purchasing leased land, but there are a few concerns I 
want to express. These pertain more to the southeast portion of the province. There, some of the Crown 
lands which may be up for purchase as a result of this bill are areas where the native habitat is still in 
place. I think we have to take a serious look at this. If we destroy all the native habitat in the southeast 
portion of this province, we are going to lose the wildlife and it will be very difficult for us to ever bring 
it back for successive generations. 
 
We have to take a serious look at this situation. I think where there are very marginal Crown lands, 
where the ability to turn them into productive grain-growing areas is very marginal and questionable, 
that it might be wise to retain some areas as Crown land to provide a habitat for wildlife. 
 
We have to realize that if people are going to purchase these lands, they’re not going to purchase them, t 
today’s prices and high interest costs, to run stock on. The profit factor isn’t there is southeastern 
Saskatchewan to do this. So if this land is purchased, it’s going to be purchased with the view to 
breaking it up, clearing the bush and draining it. That will result in a vast depopulation of the flora and 
fauna which is already being depleted because so much private land is being cleared of bush and drained 
of sloughs. 
 
You will all realize that I urged the Minister of Agriculture the other day to use his good offices to try to 
bring about reforestation, the planting of windbreaks, and things of that nature, in southeastern 
Saskatchewan because of this very fear of the native vegetation 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2740 

and brush being taken off this land. So, I would just say in debate on this bill that the basic concept of 
people being able to buy Crown lands I do not oppose, but I do suggest to the Government of 
Saskatchewan that there is a need to seriously assess this situation in southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
I understand in the North (from my colleagues in the North) there is ample habitat and there probably 
always will be ample habitat. Therefore, it isn’t quite as serious a problem there. But in the areas which 
my colleague for Moosomin and my colleague for Souris-Cannington, and I represent, if the bush cover 
is all taken out and all of the sloughs drained, we could be in a serious situation in terms of wildlife 
which I enjoy so much. I want that wildlife to be around for my children and succeeding generations to 
enjoy. 
 
The other thing which I want to draw to the attention of the Assembly (and the minister can probably 
clarify this) is the regulation of having to give up Crown lands at 65 years of age. It says: 
 

. . . lease provincial lands to an individual or individuals for a term not exceeding the lesser of 47 
years, or the last day of the year in which the lessee, or the oldest lessee (where there is more than 
one individual lessee), attains the age of 65 years. 

 
Now, in our provincial parks which are Crown lands, there are people who have cottages who lease 
those lands to have their cottages on, and I certainly hope it isn’t the intent of the government opposite 
that after 65 years of age you can’t lease any Crown land. I hope there is something which says cottages 
are exempt from this. I think that would be a terrible thing, and I think it is probably an oversight if that 
is the situation. 
 
I want to point out a bit more about the problem which exists in southeastern Saskatchewan. I’d like to 
read from a letter from the Saskatchewan Natural History Society, an organization involved in 
protecting the flora and fauna that we enjoy in southeastern Saskatchewan. It says: 
 

Bill No. 59, if passed and implemented, could cause significant changes to the face of Saskatchewan. 
In referring to the Department of Agriculture’s annual report of 1978, grazing leases consist of 7,000 
parcels of land containing over five million acres. In addition, there were 800 hay leases. 
 
Getting back to the rapid loss of natural habitat in southern Saskatchewan, only 25 per cent of the 
land in southern Saskatchewan remains in native vegetation and much of it is heavily grazed. 

 
That’s from the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources report “Saskatchewan Game Bird 
Management Objectives and Strategies for the ’80s” of June, 1980. 
 

It is estimated that 40 per cent of the original wetland habitat on the prairies has been lost. 
 
The source, again, is the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources report. 
 
Another DTRR report estimated that between the years 1965 and 1975, we lost 6 million acres of native 
habitat in southern Saskatchewan. Another estimate states that 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2741 

we continue to lose natural habitat at a rate of 20 acres per hour, or three quarter sections per day. 
 

In light of these alarming statistics, we urge the Government of Saskatchewan to retain its provincial 
lands which are leased for haying and grazing under provincial ownership. Important but vanishing 
native habitat can be maintained, while at the same time provide a valuable and often compatible 
service to the public in the form of haying and grazing leases. 
 
The loss of these natural lands will have a significant effect on our dwindling wildlife resources. 
Unfortunately, once we lose wildlife habitat, it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to restore it. 
 
We must save a major portion of the remaining 25 per cent of native habitat in southern 
Saskatchewan, if we hope to retain our unique natural heritage, which includes birds, plants and 
animals. We are obligated to preserve significant amounts of our natural heritage for future 
generations. 

 
That is just a little bit from a letter from the people in the Saskatchewan Natural History Society. Mr. 
Minister, I hope the government opposite will take these concerns into consideration when making lease 
lands available for purchase. I would reiterate that the most marginal lands, the ones there is opportunity 
to make into profitable agricultural and economic units, perhaps would be best held by the Crown to 
provide this natural habitat which is fast dwindling and very scarce in that part of the province. 
 
MR. PREBBLE:  — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to speak briefly on this bill. I want to 
say that, while I don’t often agree with the members opposite. I think the member opposite raises a 
legitimate concern on this point. I don’t want to repeat remarks made by him because I thought he put it 
quite well. 
 
I think there are two points which we might consider as a government that could come in conjunction 
with the introduction of this bill. The one thing we could do that would make the bill much more 
workable is to add a section that would allow the wildlife branch of the Department of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources to veto the sale of any particular piece of Crown land if it thought that its value 
for natural habitat was extremely high and that it ought to be preserved. I think provision should be 
made for that in the bill. 
 
The second thing we could do, which would not necessarily have to be part of the bill at all but should 
be a budget item, is establish a program whereby some sort of tax break or financial incentives are 
provided to rural municipalities for each mile of shelterbelt planted in that R.M. I think that kind of 
program would be very well received by the farmers of Saskatchewan. I also think that kind of program 
is in the long-term ecological interest of the province of Saskatchewan. I hope that the minister and the 
cabinet would seriously look at introducing those programs in conjunction with this bill. Thank you very 
much. 
 
MR. ANDREW:  — Several members on this side of the House wish to have input into this debate. Mr. 
Speaker, for that reason, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2742 

Tchorzewski that Bill No. 74  — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Mr. Speaker, I will not take very much time speaking on the amendment to The 
Income Tax Act; however, I do want to make a few comments. 
 
The main purpose of this amendment is to decrease the personal tax rate in Saskatchewan from 53 per 
cent to 52 per cent for this year, and subsequently to 51 per cent. The government opposite has always 
prided itself on and bragged about the credits and benefits of their plan and program. I did some rather 
interesting calculations recently, and I have come up with some revealing figures that surprised me, but 
will not surprise the minister. The credits, I believe, called the Saskatchewan basic credit, or the 
Saskatchewan income tax reduction and the calculation of Saskatchewan mortgage interest tax credit . . . 
Just to give you an example of what I mean, I looked at some returns of individuals who allowed me to 
do so. The government members opposite have always indicated that these plans and programs are to 
assist those who need them most. 
 
First of all, let me say that the poverty level in Regina and Saskatoon, I am advised, is about $5,300 per 
year. I don’t think anyone will argue with me, and I’m sure that the Minister of Finance will admit, that 
by today’s standards, an income of $10,000 per year is not something that one is going to get very 
wealthy on. I took a look at a tax return of an individual who had earned a gross income last year of 
$9,800. The Saskatchewan tax reductions plan of $160 is supposed to be of benefit to a person like that. 
The minister should know that calculating it like that, the individual only benefited by $50. the gross 
income was $9,800. Deducting from that the employment expenses of 3 per cent, which amounted to 
$294 and left $9,506, deducting (and I used an approximate figure here) unemployment insurance and 
Canada Pension Plan of $250, and deducting the basic exemption, the standard deduction allowance, left 
a taxable income of $6,266. The federal tax payable on that amount was $792 and the Saskatchewan tax 
payable was $475.70. When you look at the arguments the government has used, they say, “Well, that’s 
$475 but we have a $160 credit that comes off that.” The fact is it doesn’t. the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that 
this individual only had a $50 credit because of the method of calculation. 
 
I would ask the minister this question: how many people in the province of Saskatchewan would really 
benefit from the full $160 that you show in your tax form? I dare say that there wouldn’t be too many, 
with the exception of those 150,000 people who live on the poverty line in Saskatchewan. I am sure that 
most of those would not pay anything at all, but that’s the poverty level. But when we get to that level of 
$9,800 or $10,000  — or even use $9,000  — there is no $160 available to these people. 
 
I want to give a couple more examples, and then carry on with the balance of my remarks. Another 
individual would earn $12,000  — that is $1,000 a month. I am talking about a single individual earning 
$12,000 a year in Saskatchewan today. Again, Mr. Speaker, one is not going to get very rich or put aside 
very much money. A person earning $1,000 a month today (gross income less the deductions), having to 
rent an apartment and buy his furniture, food, and clothes, operating an automobile (by today’s 
standards, I think, one is allowed that) and buying the licence, paying the high cost of insurance in 
Saskatchewan and the high cost of gasoline tax, is almost, in my books, living at the poverty line . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I am sure if I was earning that, I would have to quit smoking, Mr. Member 
for Regina Rosemont. You could afford it; I 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2743 

could not, at $1,000 a month. 
 
When one looks at the calculation again, on that individual earning $12,000 a year or $1,000 a month, 
the $160 does not apply to that person at all. Not one cent of that $160 credit is applicable to that 
individual. As a matter of fact, according to my calculations, the saw-off on this figure would be 
somewhere around $11,500, substantially less than $1,000 a month. However, that is for a single person. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you would think that, by today’s standards, a married person, raising two children, 
attempting to own a home, and with all the expenses, would need a minimum of $1,500 a month to live 
on. That is what I would say it is by today’s standards. I would like the minister to disagree with that 
assessment  — that an individual, married with two children would need $1,500 a month to live on. 
Assuming those two children were born before the year 1963, that would give them the full benefit of 
the $990. that is giving you full advantage, Mr. Minister, in the calculation; otherwise, it would be $500 
and some credit. So I am giving you the full benefit of the credit. It is $990, so for two it is $1,980. That 
person, again, Mr. Speaker, does not qualify for the credit of $160. 
 
One would not have to go to $18,000. One would only have to go to somewhere in the range of $16,000, 
before that person would not qualify for the credit of $160 a year. What are we attempting to do with 
these kinds of figures, Mr. Minister? Why not recognize the needs, by today’s standards, of these people 
and change your formula so that the credit applies to those people who live on the very bare minimum? 
 
I’ll move on to the next benevolent gift that the Government of Saskatchewan prides itself on including 
in its calculation of taxes in Saskatchewan, and that is the mortgage interest tax credit. That’s a very 
interesting one. I’m going to talk about the same person, who had an income of $18,000 and a taxable 
income of $9,675. 
 
His tax credit for mortgage interest would amount to only $156.50, not $250 as claimed, advertised and 
expounded by the government. However, an interesting note to make here is that, if that person could 
afford to buy the house, he would receive a $156.50 return in a year. I don’t think anyone will argue 
with me when I say that a person earning $18,000 gross a year, with two children and a wife, owning an 
automobile and needing food and clothing, could not afford to buy the house. 
 
If we move into the higher income bracket, then it becomes a minimum. I’m not sure where that level 
becomes a minimum  — probably around $21,000 or $22,000. in that area, it doesn’t matter because the 
minimum is $100, not $250. in other words, the person who is in the $20,000-a-year bracket may benefit 
from the $100 mortgage interest tax credit, but he cannot, first of all, afford to buy the house. 
 
The person earning $60,000 or $100,000 would still receive the same $100, but he can afford to buy the 
house. I don’t know whether that makes very much sense or how you are going to encourage the 
purchasing or building of homes with that kind of a formula. 
 
The biggest announcement of the budget was that the government was reducing income tax. No mention 
was made of the fact that they had originally raised it to 58 per cent. They were quite proud of the fact 
that they lowered it from 58 per cent to 53 per cent, and now, to 52 per cent. 
 
There are always a certain number of people who are removed from the tax roll. 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2744 

Unfortunately, I noticed that the minister had omitted that figure this year in his budget, so I don’t know 
how many people are excluded or added to the tax roll. It is interesting that they could reduce the tax by 
1 per cent (I’m speaking of individual income tax) and yet increase the revenue to the government by 
$43 million. That has to be some kind of magic. Probably, as I said in reference to a Crown corporation 
of this government which is expert at this, it is “creative bookkeeping.” 
 
Needless to say, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan (the individuals) were not blessed with a 1 per cent 
reduction in income tax payable, but rather, received approximately a 15 per cent increase in total taxes 
paid to the government this year. How did they do that? How do they reduce 1 per cent and then 
increase their revenue by $43 million, or something in excess of 13 or 14 per cent. That’s very 
interesting! I’ll tell you how it was done. They took away the 1 per cent and then they added 2 per cent 
to the surtax. Well, I suppose for people who can afford it, no one is going to argue; they are the ones 
who will have to pay. So anyone who has a tax payable in Saskatchewan of $4,000 will be nailed with 
another 12 per cent now, because of the 2 per cent increase. 
 
But I wonder why the minister omitted to index that figure? Would the minister not agree that an 
individual in that income bracket is a middle-income earner? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I 
would call that middle. But no indexing was done in that area. That’s where the additional revenue 
comes from, certainly not from the added employment in the province, as we have seen from other 
statistics the government has provided us, and certainly not because they reduced 1 per cent, because 
that’s really taking away. So that’s the only other place that I can see where the money would come 
from. There are a lot of people today in this country, in this province, earning in the $35,000, $40,000 or 
$50,000 bracket, which is really not considered high income. A large percentage of government 
employees are in that range, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a bill that unfortunately has a double-edged sword in it, because it reduces taxes by 
1 per cent  — as little as that means to the average individual. If I recall the figures correctly, it’s going 
to make a difference of about $15 this year for the average individual. To vote against that bill would be 
wrong simply because you are not attempting to lower the taxes to the individual. To vote in favor of it 
is really a joke  — no, no, we are going to support it, Mr. Speaker  — support a bill that is in fact a joke. 
It is simply ridiculous to be able to come out with a bill like this that would give a 1 per cent reduction, 
amounting to $15 a year, to the average individual. And yet, the government will collect some $40 
million more, well over 13 or 14 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the creative bookkeeping of this government is going to take another government some 
time to clean up and straighten around. I will say this in the fact that we are supporting the bill, we are 
supporting it only because it adds a little bit (yes, it’s a joke, there’s no question about it) to the 
individual’s net income. But it could have added, if the minister had used a bit of common sense and a 
little compassion for the taxpayers of this province, ten times that much. But he couldn’t see that as 
being the possible thing to do. 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI:  — Mr. Speaker, I will not take a great deal of time in responding to the 
member opposite. I just want to say one thing. I want to commend him, first of all, for responding in this 
adjourned debate as quickly as he has done this afternoon. We introduced the bill last week, and he 
obviously was ready to respond. That is particularly significant when we have seen, in the order paper 
under adjourned debates, a whole list of legislation which has been on the order paper for weeks upon 
weeks, and members opposite have just stood them and adjourned them. 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2745 

Mr. Speaker, I think that really does not say a great deal for the productivity of the opposition and their 
preparedness to do any work on the legislation here before us. The member opposite has not done that 
with this particular piece of legislation and I thank him, because I think the business of the House should 
go on. 
 
One the other hand, I would have to say that hearing the critic of finance speak to these amendments to 
The Income Tax Act left me at a loss to understand the logic that was being applied. As a matter of fact, 
I have to really wonder where the logic was. When we introduced this bill in second readings the other 
day, he gave me to understand that he was not going to be selective in some of the examples he used and 
that he was going to give a general critique of the legislation. I want to remind him that he made that 
commitment and I express my disappointment that he id not carry it out. 
 
He talks about people in Saskatchewan who are low-income earners. Well, I also want to talk about 
them for a while. I want to compare what we are doing in this province with what the opposition 
members are proposing we do. 
 
They constantly say, “You have to have an across-the-board tax cut.” Well, Mr. Speaker, that sounds 
good and it sounds simple, and it’s the kind of thing that people might be attracted to if they don’t stop 
and think. But the people of Saskatchewan do stop and think, so they’re not attracted to it. What will an 
across-the-board tax cut do? It would benefit predominantly only those people who have large incomes. 
It would do nothing for those people the member for Regina South has just spoken about. An 
across-the-board tax cut simply is on a percentage basis and the higher your income, the higher your 
benefits. 
 
We make our tax system in Saskatchewan a lot more progressive than that. We have provided an 
across-the-board tax cut of 2 per cent this year, but at the same time we have increased the surcharge on 
high incomes. Even though we have increased that surcharge, as the member mentioned, from 10 per 
cent to 12 per cent, everyone in the province under this tax cut is going to get a tax reduction. People 
whose taxable income is $33,000 are still going to get a tax reduction, so everybody is benefiting. I 
don’t understand the logic that the member opposite is trying to use. 
 
We have done more than that and we announced it in the budget, Mr. Speaker. There are people in this 
province who earn low wages, as there are in any society. If all that was ever done was simply the 
provision of a tax cut, those people would never be assisted. The member doesn’t mention that in this 
province we have a family income plan which was very substantially increased in this budget to help 
those kinds of people. so we have once again balanced the effect of what we’re doing. 
 
It is really mystifying to me that every time there is an increase in the minimum wage, the first people to 
complain about it are the Conservative members of this House. The first people to complain about the 
minimum wage, which provides an increase to people who earn low incomes, is described by the 
members opposite as being atrocious, as if, somehow, it’s going to destroy business in Saskatchewan. 
On the other hand, the members then get up in this house and plead on behalf of those people. the 
rhetoric is nice, Mr. Speaker, but it is what is done that really matters. 
 
The member opposite mentioned the mortgage interest tax credit in Saskatchewan. I have already, on 
previous occasions, talked about our mortgage interest tax credit which returns about $12 million to 
Saskatchewan home-owners who are paying 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2746 

mortgages. The Conservatives have come up with their proposal, which would provide a return of only 
$3 million. There is no doubt about it, the program which we have in place is a lot better than theirs. As 
a matter of fact, it was thought that the Saskatchewan mortgage interest tax credit was such a good 
program that the former Conservative government of Canada, led by Mr. Clark, was prepared to copy it 
and implement it across Canada. It’s funny how things change all of a sudden. They took so long to 
implement any kind of a decent program that the people of Canada decided that they should turf them 
out because it could possibly never happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate again, as I did in my initial remarks the other day, that we now have, 
with these amendments to The Income Tax Act, the fourth lowest provincial income tax rate in Canada. 
If we consider only that, then we have to say that it’s only the fourth lowest income tax rate provincially. 
You have to consider, in all honesty, the effective tax which people have to pay. The effective tax which 
people in Saskatchewan have to pay is among the lowest in Canada. For low-income people, it is the 
lowest in Canada, in spite of the fact that there is a lower rate in Ontario, Alberta and British Columbia. 
What is the reason for that? It’s because they have hidden taxes  — not quite hidden, but they don’t call 
them taxes. We don’t have a health premium which families have to pay. In those other three provinces, 
there is a health premium. As a matter of fact, as I indicated the other day, if the Conservative 
Government of Ontario showed any signs of being progressive, its taxation system would do away with 
the health premium of $448 per family every year, and collect it through the progressive income tax 
system. The income tax rate in Ontario would be 56 per cent  — a full five percentage points higher than 
what it is in Saskatchewan. So, the effective tax in Saskatchewan is lower than it is throughout the rest 
of this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are further examples I could give. You can take the example of the retail sales tax for 
the provinces which do have such a tax. Saskatchewan has the lowest retail sales tax in Canada. British 
Columbia, having just recently increased it, has a retail sales tax of 6 per cent; Ontario has one of 7 per 
cent; Quebec has one of 8 per cent and New Brunswick has one at 8 per cent, while Saskatchewan has 
its sales tax at 5 per cent. 
 
It doesn’t matter how the members opposite cut it, the people of Saskatchewan are benefiting a great 
deal from the good management and the resource development policies of this government, which have 
provided, in the last 10 years, reductions in the amount of taxation they have to pay, as well as a very 
substantial increase in the services which they get though the many new programs being introduced. 
 
Let me deal with one more point which the member mentioned, because I think it deserves correction. 
He said that we are reducing our income tax rate by 1 per cent. It’s 1 per cent for this year, but in the full 
year it will be 2 per cent. It is written in the legislation as 1 per cent because of the fact that it’s being 
implemented on July 1. then he says that he can’t understand why, having reduced the income tax rate, 
there is an increase in the revenue which will come to the province from personal income tax. The 
reason there is that increase in the revenue from the income tax is that the province is prosperous. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI:  — That’s simply why; that’s a good sign. That shows you, Mr. 
Speaker, and should show the member for Regina South that there are higher wages that people are 
earning and it also shows that there are more people who are earning 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2747 

wages. That’s why there is an increase in the total revenue from the income tax system even though the 
rate of personal income tax in Saskatchewan is being reduced. 
 
Probably, I will have more to say on this when we get into committee of the whole. The member may 
ask some questions and therefore I shall conclude my remarks and welcome the fact that the members 
opposite will support the bill, even though they think it’s a joke. It’s a strange rationale for supporting 
the bill, but nevertheless I’m glad it’s going to be unanimous. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Hammersmith 
that Bill No. 62  — An Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act be 
now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 57  — An Act respecting the Urban Municipal Administrators’ Association of 
Saskatchewan 

 
Sections 1 to 14 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 15 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 16 to 27 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 28 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 29 to 42 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 43 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 44 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 68  — An Act to amend The Securities Act 
 
Sections 1 to 3 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 69  — An Act respecting Trust and Loan Corporations 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Section 2 as amended agreed. 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2748 

Sections 3 to 32 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 33 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 34 to 57 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 63  — An Act to amend The Wills Act 
 
Sections 1 to 5 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 6 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 7 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 55  — An Act to amend The Executions Act 
 
Sections 1 to 6 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 67  — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Superannuation Act 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — I wasn’t here the other day when the bill was presented. Therefore, I have a few 
questions which I want to discuss with the minister in regard to this act. We could do it either under 
education estimates or here. Since this bill deals with superannuation, I think this would be the 
appropriate time to discuss it. 
 
My concern, Mr. Minister, is about the 10-year lock-in clause. I understand it comes into effect at the 
end of June this year of somewhere around that time. I have had concerns expressed to me by a number 
of teachers in the field who look at perhaps leaving the profession somewhere after 10 years. As the 
legislation stands now, if they do not withdraw their funds by June of this year, then they are locked in 
until age 65. that money is theirs; it’s money they contributed. Therefore, their concern is that they could 
investigate sources where they could invest that money to get a greater return than they could 
accumulate if it were left in the fund under age 65. 
 
Another area of concern about the lock-in for the teachers is that it seems unfair, if they are no longer in 
the teaching profession, it is their money which they have contributed and they would like to have that 
money. I don’t really see the need for the lock-in. for the teachers in the teaching profession  — fine and 
dandy; their money stays there until they quit or retire. But these individuals who chose to get out after 
that period of time are really forfeiting that money. They can’t put their hands on it until they reach the 
age of 65. what is that money going to buy for them at age 65? If they had it for that period of time after 
they left teaching, they could probably invest that in businesses or whatever. They could get a better 
return for their investment. 
 
I would just like to hear your comments on that aspect of the automatic lock-in. 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2749 

HON. MR. McARTHUR:  — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member, as I understand it, is raising the 
question of a lock-in provision with respect to the contributions made by teachers under the plan. I 
should point two things out to the hon. member. First of all, lock-in provisions are a very, very common 
feature of all pension plans. In fact, I am not aware of pension plans which do not have lock-in features. 
The discussions which are taking place in the pension field today, with respect to lock-in provisions 
generally, point toward favoring an even shorter period of service before lock-in takes place, that is, 
before the money is held there for pension purposes. The reason for that, as I understand it, is that these 
contributions are a contribution to pension. They are not savings plans; they are pension plans. 
 
Pension plans are set up to provide income security for people when they reach an age at which they will 
enter into retirement, and when you have plans of that sort it is only logical that one should assume that 
the funds will be held there until retirement is reached. Some of the analyses that I have seen of pension 
plans with very long lock-in periods suggest that many, many people who change occupations 
frequently, or even not so frequently - let’s say, three or four times in their lives  — can end up without a 
pension, even through they have contributed to pension plans throughout their lives, simply because the 
lock-in provisions are of such length that the money is not there for them in pension plans when they 
retire. The ultimate aim of any pension arrangement should be shorter lock-in periods and greater 
portability. This is the thrust of many of the proposals that members on this side are making and that 
other people are making with regard to pension reform. 
 
However, I would say to the hon. member that in addition to that, the teachers’ superannuation plan is a 
negotiable plan. It is, therefore, really not for me to defend or criticize the teachers with regard to what 
they may wish to negotiate. If the teachers were to bring forward a proposition with respect to the 
change in the lock-in provisions, that’s something that the trustee-government bargaining committee 
would have to consider. Then we would have to develop a position. I’m not aware at this time of any 
propositions that have been made during the course of bargaining with respect to changes in the lock-in 
provisions. I would be very interested to know where the hon. member is coming from with regard to his 
proposals, because if he is presuming to bargain on behalf of the teachers, I think he is bargaining in the 
work place at the wrong time. 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — Well, I’m certainly not bargaining on behalf of teachers. I’m expressing a concern 
that is out there. Whether it is reaching you or not, I don’t know. I know many of the concerns in 
education seem not to get through the bureaucracy to you. There are a considerable number coming to 
every member in this caucus all the time, and these are coming from teachers. 
 
Certainly, these are a minority of teacher. These are the ones who are quitting teaching and getting out. 
These are fellows who are making room for new teachers to come into the program, into the plan, and 
into the field of teaching. They are the kid of fellows who aren’t afraid to get out and try something else 
in life, to go into business. You are telling them that they haven’t enough brains to use their money. 
“We’re going to lock it in because when you are 70 you will be broke.” That’s what you are trying to tell 
these people. these people are saying, “Those are my dollars. I’m getting out of teaching. I’ve spent 10 
years at it. That’s my money. Let me have that money and let me use it with my intelligence and my 
initiative to build my business, or to do whatever I would like to do.” 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2750 

I don’t like the idea of locking people in sooner and sooner in our society. I think that’s what many of 
you stand for on that side. I know the Minister of Labor would lock everybody in if he had the 
opportunity. Get them from day one, lock them in, hold them there, and keep them subservient to you. 
That’s the kind of philosophy you have. It’s evident every day in this House. Lock them in, suppress 
them, and hold them. That’s your type of thinking. I know that. Maybe the Minister of Education isn’t as 
indoctrinated and ingrained as you are, so we will discus with him and ignore you, if you don’t mind. 
 
So what I’m saying, Mr. Minister of Education, is that this is coming from teachers. There are many 
teachers who will leave the teaching profession sometime with more than 10 years but before the 20th 
year  — somewhere in that period of time. These fellows are expressing to me that they feel their money 
is being held and they would like that to be removed so that they could use those dollars they have 
contributed in the way they would like to use them. Then it would not be locked in. It isn’t 
discriminating against the people who aren’t teaching. The people who stay in teaching  — fine and 
dandy, no problem. 
 
I want to see a good fund for teachers. I agree with your bill, and I’m not opposing the most beneficial 
superannuation plan we can have for teachers. They deserve it. I think if you look in every paper you 
will find out about teacher burnout, and about the stress on teachers and so on. There’s no disputing that. 
But I just want to draw it to your attention. I do not want to negotiate their package. I think you are 
aware of that. If you haven’t heard of it, then you haven’t been listening, because it is out there. I think 
some of the teachers on the other side, if they are honest, will know that their colleagues are concerned 
about this also. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR:  — Mr. Chairman, I will only reiterate perhaps, in a summary form, what I 
have said already. The hon. member is saying two interesting things. 
 
Firstly, his view on pensions is interesting. I think that that has become clear and am not surprised by 
that. I certainly do not agree with his general view of pensions as he has been putting it forward. I think 
it is essentially destructive to the notion of pensions. 
 
Let me deal specifically with this question. The hon. member says that my bureaucracy prevents me 
from hearing. The superannuation provisions with respect to The Teachers’ Superannuation Act are 
negotiable items. The bureaucracy he must be criticizing is the bureaucracy, if you like, of the teachers’ 
federation. It is that system (which I do not think has trouble hearing; I think it hears very well what 
teachers are saying) which must bring these matters to my attention. I am not saying that I haven’t heard 
teachers say that. I am just not able (not because of bureaucracy) to step in and make those changes. If I 
were to do that, I would be doing exactly what the hon. member was criticizing the hon. member for 
Moose Jaw for what he purportedly does (which the hon. member for Moose Jaw does not do, but which 
the hon. member was claiming)  — stepping in and doing something arbitrarily. I do not intend to do 
that. I will only respond to these concerns if they are handled through the collective bargaining process, 
which is where they belong. I think the collective bargaining process is a good one. I don’t accept the 
attack which the hon. member is making on the collective bargaining process with respect to the 
teachers’ activity. I think the teachers, when the 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2751 

time comes to raise this question, will raise it if they feel that it is in their interest to do so. I don’t think 
it would be at all appropriate for me to arbitrarily step in and change legislation which I have agreed, 
and all members of this side of the House have agreed, will only be changed on the basis of negotiation 
through the collective bargaining process. 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — I am interested to hear what you have been telling me, Mr. Minister. A few minutes 
ago, you said, “Where are you getting these things from?” obviously, you haven’t heard of them. You 
just told me that it has to come through the teachers’ federation. I am not against the bargaining or the 
teachers’ federation. I am against the Minister of Education who says, “The only way a concern of a 
teacher out there is Podunk, Saskatchewan, can get to you is through the teachers’ federation.” That is 
what you believe. You say, “I don’t bring in change; I listen to the teachers’ federation.” 
 
I say that you don’t listen to anyone. You bring in change on the ward system. You don’t listen to the 
trustees. You stand in this House and say, “I don’t interfere; I don’t bring in change without it coming 
through these channels.” Baloney! You bring in changes whenever you want. I am very interested to 
hear that there is no way for a teacher in Saskatchewan to express his concerns to the Minister of 
Education other than through the teachers’ federation. You say that there isn’t a bureaucracy which is 
keeping these grass roots teachers from you. I say that there must be if that is the only avenue, Mr. 
Minister, by which one can reach you. You just admitted it in this House not two minutes ago. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY:  — Mr. Chairman, I just want to say a few words on this matter. As one who 
withdrew his pension contributions a number of years ago (I can recall I was very happy when I was 
able to do that) and who also had to repay a little while ago. I feel that that 10-year lock-in deal is a good 
provision. This is because the only people who are now happy are the people at the banks and the credit 
unions where I had to go to borrow the money to repay. 
 
The member for Indian Head-Wolseley is suggesting that they be allowed up to possibly 20 years. He 
also mentioned teacher burnout. The hon. member will probably not disagree that teacher burnout 
usually occurs after 20 years. So where would you set the number  — at 20, 29, 30, or just where? A 
number of members on this side of the House are teachers and certainly have their ears tuned to the 
teaching profession. There is no doubt that the majority of them want it. Would you want to make 
exceptions and, if so, when, where and how? It just can’t work any other way. I agree that there is a 
certain degree of validity to your concern, but there’s nothing that the hon. minister can do about it. 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — I am very happy to see the member for Saskatoon centre get up as a shield for the 
Minister of Education on behalf of the teachers. I don’t really think he needs that. He’s asking me to say 
what year  — 20, 22, 23? That’s not my job; that’s his job. If he goes out and talks to those teachers, 
he’ll find out what they want. He’s in the position to change legislation; he’s going to do it on the ward 
system, even against the wishes of the people. So don’t tell me he can’t change it in the teachers’ 
superannuation. 
 
I’ll give you a list of the teachers who are concerned, if you want. They’ll soon tell you what they feel to 
be just. It’s not up to me; I’m not negotiating for the teachers. I told them I wouldn’t do that. I’m not 
going to say whether it should be 19, 18 or 15. it’s not my role to do that. Let those teachers do that. But 
let those teachers be able to tell that to 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2752 

the Minister of Education. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR:  — Mr. Chairman, the hon. member is on record (he just said it) as 
supporting this government’s introducing changes to The Teachers’ Superannuation Act and those 
provisions which are negotiable, without those having been bargained. I want to just say to him that I 
think that is wrong and he should regret saying that. I believe that he should not be supporting that kind 
of position, because he simply says that the undertakings we have, with respect to bargaining 
collectively on the provisions of The Superannuation Act and the plan, should not be honoured. I say to 
him that they must be honoured. We have an agreement with the teachers to that effect and I think it 
would destroy collective bargaining if we were to do otherwise. 
 
So I say to the hon. member that he is wrong on that point, regardless of the merits of his argument that 
it should be changed. 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — That’s not correct, Mr. Minister of Education. I’m not going to let you get away 
with that at all. The bargaining at the provincial level is tri-party bargaining. You know that as well as I 
do and as does everyone else in this Chamber. So don’t say that you cannot bring things to that 
bargaining table, the same as anyone else. 
 
Therefore, there are teachers who feel this way. Obviously you didn’t know about this. You didn’t know 
where they came from. I’m telling you that today. So don’t say that you can’t bring items and concerns 
to that bargaining table and that you can’t make changes respecting many things in education in this 
province. 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Sections 2 to 4 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 5 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 6 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 7 to 11 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 81  — An Act to amend The University of Regina Act 
 
Section 1 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — Yesterday I asked a couple of questions regarding this bill, I don’t imagine it would 
be fair to assume that you have had time to look at those. I’ll ask them again. I have a couple of 
questions on these university bills. I see they’re both the same so we’ll deal with one, get the answers 
there, and they will both go. 
 
Under your explanatory notes, number one, it says: 
 

The board shall make an annual report of their transactions to the commission, and through the 
commission to the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, in which shall be set forth in detail the receipts 
and expenditures for the year ending on the preceding 30th day of June and such other 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2753 

particulars as the Lieutenant-Governor in Council or the commission may require. 
 
I notice, if I am correct, that in the new provision that statement “other particulars as the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council or the commission may require” is not in there. I wonder why that was 
dropped out, and what those other things might be that you would require? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR:  — Is the hon. member referring to the repeal of section 68 and the 
replacement of it with the new section 68? 
 
MR. TAYLOR:  — I’m looking at the explanatory notes on Bill No. 81, An Act to amend The 
University of Regina Act  — No. 4. Existing provisions, section 68 now reads  — I’m looking at that 
first paragraph. 
 
Then I look over to the next provision. This last line “other particulars as the Lieutenant-Governor in 
Council or the commission may require.” Is that included in the revised bill? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR:  — Yes, Mr. Chairman, it is. If you look at the new section 68, which is 
section 4 of the amending bill, it is simply a rewording of those sections. You will note that under 
section 4 of the amending bill, becoming section 68(1)(b), it says: 
 

containing any other particulars that the Lieutenant-Governor in Council or the commission may 
require. 

 
MR. TAYLOR:  — That’s fine. Thank you for answering that. My other question is: would this 
coincide with The Tabling of Documents Act? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR:  — Yes, indeed. In fact it makes it consistent with that Act. 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Sections 2 to 4 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 5 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 6 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 73  — An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act 
 
Sections 1 to 3 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 4 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 5 to 8 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 9 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 10 agreed. 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2754 

Section 11 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Mr. Minister, I haven’t studied this bill. It wasn’t mine to study. I want to ask 
you some questions on section 11. does it mean that no one now will be able to take out their funds if 
they resign from the service? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — They will not if they are eligible for an immediate pension. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — If a person has been in the employ of the service for 15 years, is aged 45 and 
wants to leave for another job, will he be able to take it out? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — Yes, he will under those conditions. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Could you explain the conditions which you are putting in? I’m not sure I follow 
it. Who does it apply to? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — It applies to persons of age 60 with 20 years of service, and to those with 35 
years of service or more. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Well, I don’t see that, Mr. Minister. Could you explain this to me? It reads as 
follows: 
 

To prohibit the payment of a refund to an employee who is eligible to receive an immediate 
non-reduced superannuation allowance on termination of employment. Under existing legislation an 
employee can request a refund on termination of employment at any time prior to age 65, regardless 
of pension entitlement. 

 
That’s under existing legislation. Are you removing that from this explanation? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — We do not permit a refund to someone who is entitled to an immediate 
pension. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Well, a person who is 40 years of age is entitled to an immediate pension, is that 
what you’re saying? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — No, a person of that age is not entitled to an immediate pension. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — That’s what I asked you a while ago, and you said . . . (inaudible) . . . That’s 
what I’m asking to you  — a person who has been in the service for 15 years, is 40 years of age, wants 
to leave the service to start a business, or something, will he be able to take out his refund? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — He will be able to take out his pension money, but he will not be permitted 
to take out his pension money if he is 60 years of age, or over, and has 20 or more years of service. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Well, where in that act does it say that? You are saying that, notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary in a superannuation act or any other act, no employee who is entitled to an 
immediate superannuation allowance payable without diminution is entitled to a refund of contributions. 
Where does it spell out the age of 60 with 20 years of service? Where does it spell that out? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — Section 8, subject to subsection (2) states: 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2755 

An employee who has attained the age of 60 years and has served at least 20 years continuously may 
be retired at his option and shall, on retirement, be entitled to a superannuation allowance. No 
employee shall be retired under this section who has not been an employee for at least five years 
continuously, exclusive of teaching service, reckoned as service under sections 20, 21 or 22. 

 
Anyone can take their money out if they have 15 years of service and are 45 years of age. But if he is 60 
years of age, or more, has 20 years of service, or more, and is entitled to an immediate pension, he 
cannot take his money out in a lump sum refund. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Mr. Minister, I will have to take your word for it. I’m glad you have it on record, 
because I don’t interpret that from the clause that you have here or the explanatory note. However, since 
you have it on record, I guess I will accept that. 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — Mr. Chairman, perhaps I could read this note to the member. I think this 
covers it. 
 

This section refers to an employee’s entitlement to a refund of contributions and the requirement to 
apply for a refund before it will be paid. This amendment will prohibit the payment of a refund to an 
employee who terminates employment and is eligible to receive an immediate non-reduced pension. 
 
This is a very minimal lock-in measure, and will apply to employees with 35 years service and to 
employees aged 60, or over, with 20 or more years of service. It does not apply to deferred pensions, 
or to employees aged 55 but under 60 with 30 but less than 35 years of service, or to employees aged 
60 with more than 15 but less than 20 years of service, since their allowance would be subject to a 
reduction. 

 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — I just have one question. How many civil servants will that affect at this point? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — 105 in 1980. we don’t know how many there would be in 1981. it could be 
in that range. 
 
Section 12 agreed. 
 
Section 13 agreed. 
 
Section 14 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Mr. Minister, the amount you’re increasing it by, is that based on indexing or 
based according to the CPI (consumer price index)? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — It’s a flat rate service applied to the individual on the basis of his or her 
years of service. This year, it’s proposed to be $16.50 for each year of service not to exceed 35. If the 
individual has 35 years of service, it amounts to $577.50 or $48.12 per month. Our reason for doing that 
is to protect the people at the bottom of the scale against the inflationary trend. They obviously need it 
more than people at the upper end of the scale. I’ll give you one or two examples to illustrate this. 



 
April 30, 1981 
 

 
2756 

We have people who have pensions of $500 a month. If they have 35 years of service, that increase 
applied to them will give them a 9.62 per cent increase. If they were at $400 per month, that increase 
gives them a 12.03 per cent increase. If they’re at $300 a month, it gives them a 16.04 per cent increase. 
It’s weighted, of course, to protect the people at the bottom or to help them more because they need the 
help. It’s obvious that we have some people pensioned at $2,000 a month. They get the flat rate increase, 
too. The percentage of that increase is not great. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — I suppose I should have asked the question another way. The total amount 
you’re going to be paying out (I’m talking about the supplementary amount  — the increase), what will 
it amount to as a percentage? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — $950,000 is the amount. You mean percentage of total payments? It’s 
roughly $1 million on the basis of $17 million. If you take into account the fact that these increase have 
been going into effect each year. It’s over $5 million in that total amount which is added to supplemental 
payments to assist against inflation. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Your total amount for this year then represents under 6 per cent? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — It’s $950,000 based on a pay-out of roughly $17 million. It’s about 6.3 per 
cent, that’s right. But remember that it’s incorporated each year so that if you take the total $17 million 
payment that includes about $5.25 million in supplemental payments which were not provided in terms 
of the pension, but have been added on an annual basis. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Inflation has been around for quite some time. Your $5 million is not 
impressive, as far as I’m concerned, as a percentage keeping up with CPI or with inflation. 
 
I’m suggesting to you, first of all, that your 6.3 per cent is incorrect. Six per cent of $17 million would 
be $1.2 million (or $1.02 million I think it is), and you are talking some $950,000. therefore, you are 
under 6 per cent  — probably about 5.6 per cent or 5.7 per cent is your total increase. Inflation went up 
12.2 per cent last year. You are only paying out half of the rate of inflation. I’m suggesting to you, Mr. 
Minister, that you are not looking after the people at the bottom end of the scale. You are talking 12 per 
cent or 16 per cent even. The amounts are getting well below (as you well know) the poverty line to 
begin with, so your total increase  — as a percentage of your total package or the total outlay of pension 
funds of $17 million which you talked about  — is less than 6 per cent. I say that these people are falling 
behind, and you are falling behind in not keeping up with the cost of inflation. 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — Mr. Chairman, what the member doesn’t seem to understand is the way we 
weight it. The people at the bottom of the scale, from $500 per month and under, are receiving a great 
deal more than the inflationary rate, and have been each succeeding year. That’s why it is paid in that 
way. For example, we have a person this year who retired on a pension  — sure, it is small  — of under 
$3,000. he will get, on the basis of 35 years, a 24.06 per cent increase in the current year. Admittedly the 
pension is small. That’s why it is weighted that way. In total, it’s 6.3 per cent. The people on the bottom 
of the scale are getting up to 24 per cent; those at the tope of the scale are getting down to 2 and 3 per 
cent. It’s 6.3 per cent computed on the actual sum. 



 
April 30, 1981 

 

2757 

MR. ROUSSEAU:  — Mr. Chairman, $17 million at 6 per cent would be $1.2 million and you are 
talking some $950,000. The minister doesn’t understand that if he kept pace with inflation, his increase 
to the superannuates would be not $954,000, it would be more like $2 million. You look at the bottom of 
the scale and you tried to bring them up to a decent level  — 24 per cent (I believe that’s the figure you 
used) of nothing is still nothing. But if you put out the $2 million, which would be keeping up with 
inflation, they might catch up some day. But not the way you are handling it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN:  — Order, order. I wonder if the member for Regina South and the minister would 
like to turn the lights off when they leave because it’s 5 o’clock, and the rest of us are leaving. Do you 
want to finish this bill now, or shall we leave it over? It’s 5 o’clock. 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS:  — Item number two. Here’s an individual who was pensioned, admittedly a 
long time ago and on a very low pension, whose increases on a percentage basis since they stated nine 
years ago total 169 per cent. Divide that by the nine and you will find that individual has had increases 
way above the inflation rate throughout that period of time. 
 
Section 14 agreed. 
 
Sections 15 to 17 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Western Power Grid
	Overtime Dispute in Correctional Camps
	Increase in Water Pumping Equipment Rental Fees
	Removal of Enclosed Telephone Booths
	Grasshopper Poison
	Kamsack Refinery Report
	Advertisements by Personal Services
	INTRODUCTION OF BILLS
	Bill No. 89  — An Act to amend The Marriage Act
	Bill No. 90  — An Act to amend The Department of the Environment Act
	Bill No. 92  — An Act to amend The Intestate Succession Act
	Bill No. 93  — An Act to amend The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act
	MOTIONS
	Bills Referred to the Non-Controversial Bills Committee
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	GOVERNMENT ORDERS
	SECOND READINGS
	Bill No. 60  — An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act
	HON. MR. ROMANOW:  — Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to rise to move second reading of The Jury Consequential Amendment Act, 1981. the provisions of this bill contain amendments to various statutes required if The Jury Act, 1981, a bill presently befo...
	Bill No. 87  — An Act to amend The Unified Family Court Act
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	SECOND READINGS
	COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE
	Bill No. 57  — An Act respecting the Urban Municipal Administrators’ Association of Saskatchewan
	Bill No. 68  — An Act to amend The Securities Act
	Bill No. 69  — An Act respecting Trust and Loan Corporations
	Bill No. 63  — An Act to amend The Wills Act
	Bill No. 55  — An Act to amend The Executions Act
	Bill No. 67  — An Act to amend The Teachers’ Superannuation Act
	Section 1
	Bill No. 81  — An Act to amend The University of Regina Act
	Section 1
	Bill No. 73  — An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act
	Section 14


