
























































Hansard: April 29, 1981


2677 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 29, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I give notice that on Friday next, I shall move the reading of a bill to amend the 
human rights code. 
 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. NELSON: — Mr. Speaker, it is a great pleasure for me to introduce to you, and through you to the 
House, 65 students from the Sacred Heart Academy in Yorkton, along with two of their teachers, Sister 
Donna, who is the principal, and Sister Valerie, as well as two bus drivers, Mr. Peterson and Mr. 
Westerhaug. 
 
The students have toured the Museum of Natural History, the University of Regina and the Legislative 
Building. They are going to be seeing the RCMP Museum later on this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, I might 
say that this is a school with a spirit that’s greatly respected throughout Yorkton and throughout the 
whole area. Anyone or any group who makes the mistake of not respecting the spirit of that school, 
whether it be in sports or in scholastic achievement, is much the sorrier for it. 
 
I would ask everyone to join with me in welcoming these students to our legislature and I will be very 
pleased to meet with them a little bit later. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. CODY: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure today to have the opportunity 
to introduce to you, and to all members of the Assembly, 20 grade 8 students from the Aberdeen School. 
They are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. They have travelled here today from Aberdeen and are visiting 
various places in the city of Regina, and now the Legislative Buildings. They are accompanied today by 
their teachers, Nick Peters and Mr. Dyck and also parents, Mr. Bussiere and Mr. Fembaleius. 
 
I want to say that it’s a great pleasure to have the students from Aberdeen here today. I know that after 
they have listed to question period, they will know that democracy truly works and hopefully they will 
have enjoyed themselves. I hope the balance of their day in the city of Regina is good and I wish them a 
very safe journey back to their home town of Aberdeen. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I would like to join with the member for Kinistino in welcoming the Aberdeen 
students. Some of them are from my constituency as well as yours. I hope you have a good day. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2678 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce the 
co-ordinator for the Voice of the Handicapped for Saskatchewan, who is seated on the floor of the 
Assembly, Miss Pat Danforth. I am sure all members are well aware that this is the International Year of 
Disabled Persons and that we should all be cognizant of the fact and of the problems that are faced and 
are associated with being handicapped in Canada and in the world today. I think that all members will 
join with me in recognizing the many non-governmental organizations which do that sort of function in 
the province, to make people aware and assist us in doing the job that needs to be done in making 
buildings accessible and that sort of thing, making life easier for those who are handicapped. 
 
So without further ado, I would like to greet Miss Danforth and I am sure all members will join with me 
in attempting to make this year a great success. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SWAN: — I would like to join with the Minister of Social Services in welcoming Miss Danforth 
here to our Chamber today. I believe in this, the year of the handicapped person, we really empathize 
with you and look forward to seeing improvements in the lot of the handicapped in our province. It is 
through work by people such as yourself, that this will come about. We welcome you here, and we hope 
that your project this year has great success. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Royalty Taxation on Oil Wells 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Question to the Minister of Mineral Resources. Mr. Minister, the first definitive 
response to your well servicing assistance program came yesterday with Husky Oil’s announcement that 
it will be shutting in 181 wells on the Saskatchewan side of the Lloydminster field. As well, it 
announced that there will be a further gradual shut-in of more wells in the future, as we go along. The 
reason advanced was not only the national energy program, but also the severe royalty taxation imposed 
by the Government of Saskatchewan. My question . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Yes, I’m interested in the question, too. I think we are getting into a debate 
here. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — My question, Mr. Minister, is this: given yesterday’s announcement of the 
beginning of a further slow-down in what I think is one of the most active and promising oil fields in 
Saskatchewan is the Government of Saskatchewan prepared now to re-evaluate the entire royalty 
program of the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say first of all that I met with the Husky people a 
couple of weeks ago. They indicated to us at that time that this announcement would be forthcoming. I 
want to say that the reason for the shut-down is exactly the reasons we have advanced to the federal 
government. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2679 

With respect to the impact of the national energy program, we’ve indicated to them that many marginal 
wells in the province will be shut in. in 1981, 1982, and 1983 there will be a reduction in the production 
of Saskatchewan oil of some 40 million barrels. I think that this is evidence of the impact of the national 
energy program. Last year at this time, those wells were all in production, and there was no suggestion 
by Husky or any other operator that they weren’t economic. Last year at this time, we had precisely the 
same set of royalties in place that we have now. With respect to the program that was announced last 
Friday, with respect to workovers, they may have some minimal impact in terms of how many of those 
wells are shut in. it should provide some assistance to service operators. I agree with the member that it 
is not and was not designed to meet service operators. I agree with the member that it is not and was not 
designed to meet all of the circumstances caused by the national energy program. I reiterate that the 
announcement by Husky was predicted, in terms of the province, by us, as a result of the national energy 
program — pure and simple, and nothing else. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary question. Mr. Minister, do you not find it significant that the Husky 
announcement is only shut in for those wells on the Saskatchewan side of that field? Do you not also 
find it significant that the position taken by Husky has been very moderate? The statements coming from 
Mr. Blair have been very pro-Canadian, and from a person who wants to see the national energy 
program work. Do you not find those significant? Given that you have known about the shut-in by 
Husky, are you not prepared to look at a re-evaluation of the royalty structure for the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I certainly do find it significant that 
Husky is shutting in, and I have no arguments with the member’s comments with respect to the way in 
which Husky, as a corporate citizen, has carried on its business. It certainly, in my view, has been a good 
corporate citizen in Saskatchewan. 
 
On the other hand, I don’t believe that we in Saskatchewan should necessarily have the same levels of 
royalties as the Government of Alberta. That’s obviously for them to decide. I believe that our level of 
royalties were and are reasonable for the people of the province to levy on the oil resource, which 
belongs to the people of this province, and once produced, we’ll never be able to levy those royalties 
again. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I accept the decision of Husky to close in some of those marginal wells. 
I don’t say I welcome it. I understand the economics and the problems it is facing. While I might not 
agree in every circumstance, I understand the decision it was faced with. It has been our position, and 
continues to be our position, that the problem with respect to the oil industry in this province stems 
directly from the national energy program. Our royalties are the same today as they were one year ago. 
There wasn’t a problem a year ago; there’s a problem today. The only thing that has changed is the 
national energy program. I suggest the member opposite would do more for the province of 
Saskatchewan if he spent his time talking to Marc Lalonde, rather than criticizing this government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Some time ago, when I raised the question with 
regard to production, you indicated and the Minister of Finance indicated that it was all taken into 
consideration in your projections in this year’s budget. Can you advise me if this 40,000 barrel a day 
shut-down by Husky Oil is part of the projections of the budget? Will we see a reduction in the proposed 
$600 million the 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2680 

province receives this year? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I may be mistaken, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t believe that Husky has 
40,000 barrels of production in the province to shut in. they have about, I would think, 1,300 or 1,400 
wells in the province. I believe they are talking about shutting in 130 wells, which is 10 per cent. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — 181. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I am advised by my department it is 130 or 135. Let’s say 180; I’ll 
take the member’s figure. That’s 15 per cent of their wells. They are their least productive wells, so I 
would be extremely surprised if it approached anything like 40,000 barrels a day. Indeed, if you say 180 
wells at an average of 10 barrels a day, it would be 1,800 barrels a day. I think the member is somewhat 
out in his figure. 
 
With respect to my comments on the budget, we attempted to estimate the likely response of the oil 
industry in terms of production and what wells would be shut in, etc., in forecasting for the Minister of 
Finance the level of production and the consequent royalty revenue. We estimated that in 1981-82-83, 
there would be about 40 million barrels less oil produced in the province than would have been 
otherwise produced. I believe (and I cannot say well by well, because I have neither asked about it nor 
looked at it myself) that they have all been taken into account. I would answer the member, in a general 
way, and I believe this is in line with our projections of the level of production for 1981, and, 
consequently, the royalties available to the Minister of Finance. 
 

Kamsack Refinery Report 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. I wonder if 
the minister would indicate to this house whether he has found the report dealing with the Kamsack 
refinery? If he has found it, when will it be brought to the House? 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, if and when we find a report, it will be delivered to the House. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I wonder if the minister would tell us what efforts are being made within his 
department to search out that report today? 
 
HON. MR. VICKAR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to suggest to the hon. member that he take a walk 
over to the Saskatchewan Power Building, and have a look at all the employees who are dressed in their 
overalls and are down in the basement digging up the files in order to accommodate the hon. member 
across the way. 
 

Problems of Kamsack 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. Yesterday, we talked 
about he Kamsack situation and the dark cloud hanging over that town. You claimed earlier that you 
had, in fact, conducted an investigation; you drew that back to an inquiry; and you drew that back to 
having asked a few questions. Now you have said, last night or yesterday, that you had never heard 
directly from the mayor, and you were still waiting for details as to the allegations raised by the citizens 
of Kamsack. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2681 

In fact, Mr. Minister, you received by registered mail, on or about April 8, a copy of a letter that was 
sent to the Premier spelling out in some detail allegations of tax evasion relating to the Eagle 
Developments property and allegations of public lands being sold for $1. Now, Mr. Minister, would you 
please tell us what you need before you will act to remove this cloud of doubt and suspicion from the 
citizens of Kamsack? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, it is really with a great deal of regret and sadness that the hon. 
members opposite have taken he good name of the town of Kamsack in vain and have misused it. They 
have made accusations and allegations about individuals and about a very good community in this 
province. I think that the hon. members owe an apology to the people of Kamsack. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — I know that the people of Kamsack are very concerned about their town, 
their community and individuals being accused by members opposite. I do hope that they will make a 
retraction and an apology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all I have to do is refer to yesterday’s Hansard, where the Leader of the Opposition 
himself acknowledge: 
 

I’m going to take you back to the letter of September 10, 1979, where he set forth the allegations in 
some detail. It is fair to say that your department did conduct an investigation or an inquiry into the 
activities of certain members . . . 

 
The hon. member acknowledges that our officials did have meetings, did seek information and did try to 
assist. We did not establish any third party inquiry. At this stage I am still waiting to hear from the 
mayor to set out his particular allegations to see whether there is sufficient evidence and information for 
us to establish a formal inquiry as he had suggested. In his Telex to me, he talked about investigation 
and, following that, he is talking about a judicial inquiry. I have asked my officials in the department to 
get all the detailed information. As well, in my letter to the mayor, I invited the mayor to set out is some 
detail what particular allegations he wants us to investigate. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I am sure if the minister will dig up the letter of 
April 8 of this year, it does set out some detail. As it relates to your answer just a minute ago, where you 
said Hansard said, “The Leader of the Opposition said it is fair to say . . .” In fact it was a question by 
saying, “Our department did conduct an investigation.” 
 
If that is true, Mr. Minister, and you know that under the legislation existing at that time, you are 
compelled to file a report of any investigation with the mayor of the town, will you tell us where that 
report is? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, you know there are 495 urban communities and governments 
in the province of Saskatchewan. There isn’t perhaps even a month that goes by that in a particular 
community there may be some differences. If the Department of Urban Affairs functioned on the basis 
of setting up judicial inquiries or other inquiries into every allegation, I suppose at any given time we 
could have 50 or 60 inquiries going on. 
 
Let me give you an example. The hon. member for Arm River just last week contacted my 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2682 

deputy minister, saying that in one of the communities which he represents there are some differences 
between the mayor and some citizens. Does that give rise of cause of me to establish an inquiry or an 
investigation? I don’t think so. The people of this province, and in particular our local governments, are 
people who have had a lot of experience in governing themselves. They also have a lot of experience in 
working things out among themselves. What the hon. members opposite are saying is that any time 
there’s a difference of opinion, the province and urban affairs should thrust their will on the people of 
that community. I don’t believe that is our role. We believe there is a time to assist; there is a time to 
advise; but at all cost, if possible, we should not interfere. We should give the people the opportunity to 
work out their own problems. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister tell us, simply: did you, or 
did you not receive the letter addressed to the Premier, with a carbon copy addressed to you, mailed 
April 8, dated April 8 of this month and sent by registered mail to your office? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of that letter, addressed to the Premier, dated 
April 8. I received that letter in my office on April 15. I have never denied it, and I have tried to deal 
with it. I have instructed my officials to make further inquiries to see if there is reason for establishing a 
formal third-party inquiry. As well, I have asked Mayor Mydonick to provide us with any further 
information. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You guys are clucks. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. You’re saying that the 
people of Kamsack will be worrying about what we are doing, Mr. Minister. At coffee row in Kamsack 
this morning, they were saying, “We want an investigation.” I also was told that by two councils, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
I want to take you to your letter where you said that you replied on April 1 to Mr. Mydonick, and then 
you said, “Mr. Speaker, I’m still waiting to hear from Mayor Mydonick.” The papers yesterday said, 
“Smishek wants more specifics.” It’s all over the media in that area. With your permission, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll read one little paragraph. 
 

Urban Affairs Minister Walter Smishek said Tuesday he has not been provided with specifics into 
alleged wrongdoing by Kamsack councillors. Smishek said outside the legislature he had asked the 
Kamsack mayor for specific charges so he can decide whether an inquiry should be set up. 

 
I talked to the mayor this morning. Can you answer this for me? Why would the mayor said to me that 
he sent you a letter with the specifics? You admitted here yesterday that you answered that letter on 
April 8. You finally admitted it. Why are you admitting this now, and why are you saying that there was 
no letter of April 8 when it took three questions from the member for Souris-Cannington to get you to 
say that there was. 
 
Why, Mr. Minister, does the Mayor of Kamsack say that he sent you a registered letter? He has a copy 
of the registration, and he has informed me that it is in the mail to you today — the copy of the 
registration. You have it in your hands, and he spelled out the specifics. Now, answer me, why would 
the mayor of the town say that? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, the records will show that as far as the letter of April 8 from 
the Mayor of Kamsack is concerned, it is just today that the Hon. Leader of the Opposition asked about 
that specific letter. The transcript will show that the mayor 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2683 

has chosen to communicate directly with the Premier. He sent a telegram, which yesterday’s record will 
show. May I also say that I have, since the letter was written on April 8 and received in my office on 
April 15, acknowledged that letter from the mayor. I sent him some information, and I’m awaiting a 
reply to the letter which I sent to the mayor dated April 27, 1981. 
 

Court Action Against SGI 
 
MR. LANE: — A question to the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). 
It turns out, in Crown corporations today, that there were several more court actions against SGI which 
are not set out in the annual report. One of the matters dealt with is the court action against SGI for a 
breach of contract on the proposed sale of the former headquarters. Today in Crown corporations, you 
indicated that the reason for backing out of the transaction was that there were reservations against the 
individuals to whom you were proposing to sell the building. Now you have had time to talk to counsel. 
Are you prepared to tell this Assembly what reservations you had after you had entered into the offer to 
sell the project? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, there is a possible pending litigation. I have no comment. 
 
MR. LANE: — Would the minister not admit that there should in fact be full public disclosure of the 
operations of Crown corporations? I will ask you one more time what relevance your reservations about 
the individuals or the company to whom you are proposing to sell have to do with breaking the proposed 
offer. 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — There is a pending litigation. I have no comment. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Minister, I note that Sask Tel, in its annual report, puts out the court actions that are 
being taken against it. I note, however, that Saskatchewan Government Insurance has made no mention 
of the action in London, England, where it was sued for breach of contract. It makes no mention in its 
annual report of the action for breaching the contract on the sale of the building. I suspect there’ll be no 
mention in the future of the actions by eight individuals against SGI and by the former treasurer against 
SGI. Would the minister be prepared to explain to this Assembly, today, why SGI seems to be exempt 
from make a full disclosure of court actions, while other Crown corporations are required by the same 
auditor to make reference to court actions in their annual reports? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — There is reference in the annual report to the major reinsurance contract that 
was cancelled. 
 
MR. LANE: — There is no reference. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’ll take a new question. Member for Regina South. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. This morning in the replies to our questions on this 
subject, after saying “no comment” about 89 times, you finally agreed to seek legal advice from your 
legal department and advise us. Have you, as yet, sought that legal advice or have you discussed it with 
any of the lawyers from the legal department of SGI or the government? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — I anticipate that material will be available tomorrow morning in 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2684 

Crown corporations. 
 
MR. LANE: — Will that material tomorrow give us the full information on your reason for having 
reservations about dealing with the people to whom you proposed to sell the former headquarters? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — It will be announced in Crown corporations tomorrow. 
 
MR. LANE: — Are you prepared to announce it now? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — It will be announced in Crown corporations tomorrow. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I’ll take a new question. The member for Qu’Appelle. 
 
MR. LANE: — Why will you not table that information today if you have it available and have talked 
to counsel? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — It will be available tomorrow in Crown corporations. 
 
MR. GARNER: — I have a question for the Minister of SGI. Mr. Minister, we’ve had a 48 per cent 
increase in SGI rates in less than two years. We have received numerous letters regarding what you are 
planning to do for the accident-free driver. With the permission of Mr. Speaker, I would like to give you 
a couple of quotes from some of the letters from Imperial. I quote: 
 
“I’ve been driving cars and trucks since 1918 and have never had an accident so far.” “I’ve been driving 
since I was 16 years of age and will be 70 next year.” “I am a returned veteran and have been driving 
since 1937.” 
 
Mr. Minister, when are you and when is this government opposite going to stop penalizing the 
accident-free drivers in Saskatchewan and start to give them a break? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, obviously we’re not penalizing the accident-free drivers. 
Insurance is acceptance of risk and obviously those people help pay for the people who do have 
accidents. That’s what insurance is all about. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, this morning in Crown corporations, it 
was tabled that you spent $717,000 advertising SGI last year, something that you can’t get anywhere 
else. Don’t you think that it is time . . . This socialist philosophy of yours, Mr. Minister, that everyone 
pays the same, regardless of whether they have an accident or not, is not fair to the people of 
Saskatchewan. They’re asking you the questions; it’s time for you to give them an answer. 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker. Of the $700,000 the member refers to, $399,901 was spent on 
the general business, which is not a monopoly. It’s competing with 240 other insurance companies. The 
remaining amount was spent to inform the people of what is happening in The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister(and I don’t know how you can 
explain that to the people of Saskatchewan), your parrot-moving TV commercial cost the people of 
Saskatchewan $52,000 to watch someone drive a car into the back of a van. That’s part of your safety 
program for the people of 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2685 

Saskatchewan. What about cutting some of this advertising money and giving it to the accident-free 
drivers in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, that was part of a safety program. Obviously the member 
doesn’t like it. He told us this morning his nine-year-old son did; his son is much more astute than he is. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Proposed Changes in Apprenticeship Program 
 
MR. SWAN: — A question to the Minister of Labour. My question concerns the Key Lake Board of 
Inquiry’s recommendations in relation to the apprenticeship program. I have had concerns raised by a 
number of contractors who work with apprentice people in their program. They tell me that the 
suggestions put forth by the Key Lake Board of Inquiry that apprentices, when they’re away at the 
academic portion of their training, should still be paid at top labour rate, is going to indeed have a 
serious effect on the operation of the apprenticeship program within Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
What is your position, as minister of Labour, with respect to this proposed change in the apprenticeship 
program? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker, whether I have the hon. member’s question 
clearly. If I don’t answer it in total, I’m sure he’ll present me with a supplementary. 
 
I think, essentially, the apprenticeship program, as it is operating in Saskatchewan and has operated for a 
good period of time, results from workers’ becoming indentured to an employer. They enter into a 
contract specifying certain circumstances, with a first-year apprentice being entitled to X number of 
percentage points of the journeyman’s wage and in the second year a somewhat higher percentage of the 
journeyman’s wage. When the work experience is completed for the first year, then the employee goes 
usually to a Saskatchewan technical institute, either Saskatoon or Moose Jaw or wherever, and gains 
further academic knowledge, and then returns for his second year. If it’s a three-year or four-year 
apprenticeship program, he finally graduates with a journeyman’s certificate, after having completed the 
necessary experience requirements in addition to the academic requirements and after having written the 
examination. 
 
I have attempted to lay out the basic components of the program. Perhaps the member can indicate 
where he believes the soft spots are. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Eighteenth Annual Child Safety Week 
 

HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to inform the House that the 18th annual Child 
Safety Week will be observed this year from May 1 to May 7. This annual event is sponsored nationally 
by the Canada Safety Council and is co-ordinated in this province by the Saskatchewan Safety Council. 
 
I fully support Child Safety Week which serves as a valuable means of reminding parents, teachers and 
supervisors of the significant role they play in preventing 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2686 

accidents among children. 
 
In Saskatchewan, accidents are the leading cause of death in the childhood and teenage years. Canada, 
as a whole, has one of the worst child accident records in the industrialized world. It is imperative, 
therefore, that we do all we can to safeguard our children and teach them to identify and avoid 
hazardous situations. 
 
It is also important for us to remember that hazards do not arise only on our streets and highways, but 
that a high proportion of accidents to children occur within their own homes. 
 
The government will be supporting efforts to reduce accidents among children by establishing a child 
safety committee. We will be inviting representatives from agencies in the fields of housing design, 
traffic, recreation, law enforcement, and the health professions. 
 
The committee should be in operation by the fall. I am optimistic that it will be able to address a wide 
range of issues in the area of child accident prevention. The development of proper safety habits, 
attitudes, knowledge and skills represents the best opportunity for achieving a substantial reduction in 
accidents among children. 
 
Child Safety Week seems to highlight the existing problems and to focus attention on the means for 
improvement. I would like to commend the Saskatchewan Safety Council for their leadership in this 
area. I would urge all adults in this province to do everything possible to protect the safety of our 
Saskatchewan children throughout this year. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I want to offer the support of this side of the House to the statement just 
presented by the Minister of Health. We, of course, support the fine efforts of the Saskatchewan Safety 
Council and the Canada Safety council. We regret the necessity o having to have a child safety week. In 
our view child safety should be a conscious thing every day of the year. 
 
I don’t want to downplay the important of Child Safety Week. It’s just that it’s said, in a sense, that it is 
necessary. 
 

Saskatchewan Hog Assured Returns Program 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce today that the Saskatchewan 
Hog Assured Returns Program will be paying out $1,664,960 to Saskatchewan hog producers for hogs 
marketed in the first quarter of this year. The average payment if $17.90 per cwt. or $29.90 per hog. This 
covers the difference between the support price of $78.71 per cwt. And the weekly pool price received 
by each producer. The average market price for the quarter was $61.39 per cwt. 
 
The continued pay-out reflects increased feed costs as well as interest, building and labour costs, and a 
market price which has declined since the last quarter of 1980. this payment means that SHARP has paid 
out in every quarter of the 1980-81 fiscal year. Payments per hog in each of the quarters has been 
$38.16, $13.96, $12.14 and $29.90. 
 
The total payments for the 12 months ended March 31, 1981 are $4,308,871. The 
 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2687 

total payments to date are $5,218,233. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number of producers in SHARP now stands at 1,747. That is up 707 producers, or 68 
per cent since we implemented improvements to SHARP, January 1, 1981. Most family farms which 
rely on hogs as their main source of income are now in the SHARP program; nearly 60 per cent of the 
hogs are now covered. 
 
With the current payment to producers, the total advance from the government to the SHARP fund now 
stands at $3.7 million. To date, producers have contributed $700,000 in premiums and the government 
has matched this amount. 
 
Price of hogs and cost of production are factors which are very difficult for producers and the 
Government of Saskatchewan to influence. A stabilization program, such as the SHARP program, is 
necessary to provide producers with a greater degree of income security. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I hope I didn’t see any one of the agricultural community over there applauding 
when the minister said, “I am pleased to announce that SHARP paid out $1.6 million.” That seems to 
mean you enjoy whatever it is that is causing the price of hogs to be down below the cost of production. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — I also want to point out to the minister that once you have paid out in this 
program more than you have generated through premiums, that cost in itself becomes inflationary and 
causes an increasing burden, more high-cost inputs, into the very thing we are trying to cure by paying 
out these payments. I am not suggesting for a moment that we should drop SHARP. All I am saying is 
that you boys on that side of the House, in a very significant way, contribute to inflation here in 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I know the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t want to inflame the 
passions of debate here in this Chamber. The rules that govern the statements by ministers are very clear 
with regard to brevity, factualness and specificity. The rules with regard to the answer or the response 
are the same; it must be brief, relevant comment, and a debate cannot take place. Some of the member’s 
comments, I think, would lead to debate. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, to deal with a little specificity (or whatever that was), I would just 
want to join with producers in looking forward to improved hog prices in the future, with the 
government off their backs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 88 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (No. 2) 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I move that An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
(No. 2) be now introduced and read the first time. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2688 

Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act. 
 
HON. MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to introduce second reading of Bill No. 
62, An Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act. 
 
This bill is relatively short and I will likewise be brief and concise. Before I talk about the particular 
amendments I would like to say a few things about the act. 
 
The act empowers the Department of Northern Saskatchewan to assist the commencement, continuation, 
expansion or diversification of any business activity in the district through the provision of loans, grants, 
guarantees or consultative, advisory or professional services. The purpose of the regulations governing 
the provision of such services is to enable residents of the northern administration district to undertake 
business activities that benefit persons in the district, and foster the social and economic development of 
those persons. 
 
The economic development branch is only one of the activities carried out under the act. One other 
activity is the northern housing advance account, and while the northern housing branch is a branch 
within the project management sector of the department, legislative authority for the operation of the 
northern housing advance account is granted under The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Act. 
 
When this act was first passed, both the former construction advance account and the former northern 
housing and development advance account of the Department for Natural Resources were included 
under the new act. This was because The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act was to be 
the main legislative authority relating to the department’s developmental role in the North. It provides 
for the operation of the northern economic development advance account, the northern construction 
advance account, as well as the northern housing advance account. 
 
While the northern housing branch provides services in five major categories, two of these categories are 
financed through the northern housing advance account. These categories are public housing and staff 
housing. The advance account provides a mechanism for carrying the mortgages on public housing, as 
well as a mechanism for amortizing the staff housing, collecting and depositing the rentals on the staff 
housing units, and for providing for the maintenance and upkeep on these units. 
 
With the exception of a couple of housekeeping amendments which I will mention in a moment, the 
essence of this bill is in subsection 4(2) which proposes to increase the statutory limit of the northern 
housing advance account from the present level of $45 million to $65 million. Before dwelling on the 
rationale for this proposal, I would point out for the benefit of those members, who may not be fully 
familiar with the nature of advance accounts, that increasing the statutory level of an advance account 
does not necessarily mean that the dollar value of the increase will be the amount additionally 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2689 

spent this year, or in any other year for that matter. 
 
In reality, the projection of the adjusted limit of the northern housing advance account is to 
accommodate the cash flow requirements for the housing programs of the department to the end of the 
1982-83 fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hon. members will have a full opportunity to question the specific details in connection 
with northern housing programs in terms of what the proposals are for the current year. I believe that 
those specific proposals may be more appropriately handled during the time when the House is 
considering the spending estimates of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan for the 1981-82 fiscal 
year. 
 
For the purposes of the legislation before us, it is essential to recognize that the present level of this 
advance account has not been revised since the 1977 session. One of the important points to bear in 
mind with regard to this current proposal is that in 1977 it was estimated that a total of 850 public 
housing units would be constructed to March 31, 1982. the revised forecast now shows an additional 235 
units will be constructed to March 31, 1983. this increase is projected over one additional year. 
 
Also, as a matter of interest, an additional component under the advance account will be that 46 senior 
citizens’ housing units will be constructed under the federal-provincial agreement. The 1977 projection 
included a 7 per cent inflation factor. The actual inflation rate in the residential construction industry has 
been running at or above 10 per cent during the period 1977 through 1980. 
 
Due to the extensive size of our public housing program in 1978, which was the last year of our initial 
agreement with CMHC (Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation), the program consisted of some 
275 units. There has been a delay in delivering our current three-year agreement with CMHC by six 
months to a year. 
 
In the current fiscal year, an agreement was entered into by the department, CMHC and the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, to construct 30 of the 46 senior citizen housing units in three 
northern communities at an approximate cost of $2 million. This program will be initially financed in its 
entirety by the department, and upon completion and completion of inspections will be shared 75 per 
cent by CMHC, 20 per cent by Sask Housing, leaving 5 per cent to be carried by the department. 
 
In this context, a very important consideration is that the advance account has been carrying the public 
housing units until completion, before CMHC comes forth with its financial share. This considerable 
delay provides an extreme drain on the working capital, pending the final cost settlement and 
inspections. Interest is charged on any interim financing provided by CMHC, thereby increasing the cost 
of houses being constructed. 
 
As a final point on this matter, one additional item was not recognized in the former projection of the 
advance account level requirement, and that was provision for an upfront financing of $7,000 per 
housing unit on contracts with local housing groups, which has speeded up the advance account cash 
flow requirements. It is worth pointing out at this time that over 50 per cent of the department’s public 
housing program is now delivered by local housing groups. 
 
I would like to say a little bit about those local housing groups, Mr. Speaker. A local housing group is an 
organized group of individuals from a community and is formed 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2690 

into a legal entity for the purpose of constructing houses allocated to the community. A local housing 
group is formed with the consent of the local community authority of the local advisory council, as the 
case may be. Since the local council decides which housing lots are available for construction and who, 
ultimately, is allocated a house, the local housing group works closely with the local governments in 
co-ordinating lot allocations and the types of houses required by local individuals. 
 
Once the housing group is formed, with its own set of officers, the group is registered as a non-profit 
organization, either under The Societies Act, or The Non-profit Corporations Act. In any case, the group 
has, as its main objective, the building of houses for people in its own community. It functions as a 
contractor, and at the same time represents the interests of the individual home-owner. During the period 
of construction and up to the final completion of a housing unit, the local housing group represents the 
owner in his dealings with the department. 
 
The point to be recognized is the fact that a local housing group is a non-profit organization and, 
therefore, has no operating capital to start with. Thus the department provides a level of up-front 
financing which I mentioned a moment ago. Otherwise the normal functions of a building contractor 
could not be expected of the local housing group. 
 
To sum up, the northern housing advance account sustains local housing groups and, implicitly, 
locally-based contractors, providing employment and stimulating the economy in northern communities. 
A land assembly scheme addressing higher housing lot prices in northern communities provides for the 
future financial capabilities for those communities to participate in cost-sharing programs such as those 
of upgrading older subdivision, improving lights, landscaping, community services and recreational 
facilities. 
 
Northern contractors through small contracts, using the northern housing advance account, are being 
encouraged to become bonded and to remain in the North. Local housing groups ultimately become the 
beneficiaries of assistance and training that is available through the northern housing branch, with 
respect to financial management of housing construction projects. 
 
To reiterate, the amendment in subsection 4(2) does not provide a carte blanche authority for an 
additional $20 million to the housing program costs for this year. The budgetary expenditures for this 
year are those as provided in the departmental estimates, whereas the advance limit provides the cash 
flow level in respect of the northern housing advance account. 
 
I stated earlier, Mr. Speaker, that the bill also deals with some housekeeping amendments. Section 5 of 
the bill clarifies the authority in respect of any agreements or arrangements that may be entered into 
pursuant to section 26 of the act. The existing provisions of section 26 are out of date, primarily by 
making reference to section 14 of the act which was repealed last year. The other reference, to section 21 
of the act, is removed, and replaced with a more generalized provision. I quote in part: 
 

. . . for the purpose of carrying out any activity, or performing any service within the meaning of this 
act. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan Act, or any other act that may be designated by the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2691 

For continuity purposes, the amendment proposed by section 3 of the bill provides for the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council to designate other acts for the purpose of section 26, which I just 
mentioned. 
 
The only other amendment which is proposed, subsection 4(1) of the bill, replaced the word 
“community” with the word “municipal”. In effect, all this does is clarify the intent that the loan funds 
available for the purpose of housing construction or improvement are not restricted to local community 
authorities, or LCA’s, but are available to councils of all levels of municipal government organization in 
the North. It must be recognized that this amendment does not broaden the authority for the purposes of 
such loans. These existing provisions in clause 21(1)(e) make this point. Every person who meets the 
conditions of the northern housing program criteria is considered as eligible, and this amendment simply 
provides clarity to this fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I briefly dealt with all the proposals of this bill, and I am therefore pleased to move second 
reading of An Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I have very little to say about this. I wonder if the minister would 
entertain just a brief question on it? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — If I may just advise members that the time to ask for a member to respond to a 
question before he take his seat is immediately before the member takes his seat. I’ve already put the 
question on the bill. I’ve given the members a warning. However, for this instance and without setting a 
precedent, I will ask the members if they wish to go back and allow the minister to take a question. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s really not of that much importance. I can leave it till third 
reading. My problem is in section 4(2), Mr. Minister. You indicate that the amount will be changed from 
$45 million to $65 million. The statute, as you say, was last revised in ’78; yet the statute of ’78 says 
$25 million. It’s okay, we can talk about it later anyway. 
 
The essence of the bill, as you say, is to assist business activity in the North, and so on. I have very little 
argument with what it’s trying to do. My experience in talking to some of the local housing groups, — I 
will point out Green Lake as an example — is this problem of cash flow. I don’t know if I am 
interpreting this right, but I would hope that some of this extra money that’s coming from your 
department would then help some of these groups in the cash flow problem that they face. Then the 
private contractors that they deal with will then not have such a long wait before being paid from your 
department. I hope that’s the case. We can talk about it in more detail in third reading. However, I would 
like to peruse some of your comments on the record, and for that reason, Mr. Speaker, I’ll beg leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 86 — An Act to amend the Labour Standards Act. 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — Mr. Speaker, the bill that I am about to ask be given second reading by no 
means represents a major amendment to The Labour Standards Act. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2692 

This doesn’t mean, however, that it’s not a significant amendment. It does, however, address some 
operational problems that have been encountered in the administration of The Labour Standards Act 
which have interfered with the implementation, the true spirit, and the intent of the legislation. 
 
As you are aware, Mr. Speaker, The Labor Standards Act is the basic Saskatchewan labor statute dealing 
with minimum standards of wages, holidays, hours of work, and other working conditions. The rationale 
underlying the legislation, of course, centres on the creation of a working environment favourable to the 
social and economic development of the province, through the provision of fair and reasonable working 
conditions of employment for Saskatchewan workers. 
 
Let me then deal with the first of two amendments to the bill before us, Mr. Speaker, a change in that 
portion of the act dealing with graduated termination of employment. Hon. members will remember that 
this provision enacted last year provides for a period of notice of termination or layoff, which lengthens 
with the length of service, with regular pay in lieu of notice. The notice period extends progressively 
from one week, for employees with more than three months but less than one year of service with an 
employer, up to eight weeks after an employee’s service is more than 10 years. 
 
This amendment brought Saskatchewan’s legislation up to date and made it more consistent with current 
employment practices and with similar legislation in Canada. It was intended to give workers advance 
notice of loss of employment, with some financial security during that notice period, in order to enable 
the worker to adjust to the situation. The rationale for the graduated termination of notice is based on the 
principle that the longer an employee’s attachment to the job, the more adjustment is likely required to 
make an alternative employment arrangement. 
 
This principle is combined with one which extends to the worker some tangible recognition of the value 
of his or her long service to the employer. There is general agreement among workers and employers 
alike that this is a reasonable measure. However, we are naturally anxious that the new provision be 
equitable to both employer and employee. 
 
Section 44 of the act, as it presently worded, Mr. Speaker, may in some instances place an undue 
financial burden on the employer. We propose, in this bill, to remedy that situation. 
 
Let me explain, Mr. Speaker. The problem occurs when a sudden, unpredictable event causes an 
employer to lay off his employees for, let us say, four weeks. Under section 44, the employer must 
provide to a long-service employee up to eight weeks pay in lieu of notice. Accordingly, the employer 
can find himself required to pay to his longer-service employees both wages and layoff notice at the 
same time for several weeks after the four-week layoff ends. 
 
It was intended, Mr. Speaker, to provide that a long-service employee, if he were laid off by virtue of a 
shortage of work for a period of four weeks, should be paid for that four weeks, but certainly it should 
not extend to the point of the full eight weeks, in the event that the shortage of work did not extend that 
full period of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this double-pay situation was not intended to be the effect of the section, and I’m sure 
there is widespread agreement that it’s not appropriate to impose this hardship on the employer. 
Consequently, the amendment will correct the difficulty by 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2693 

specifying that the employer is obliged to make payment in lieu of notice only for the actual period of 
layoff, which extends for under eight weeks. 
 
Another problem with the wording of the notice of termination portion of the act centres on the issue of 
just cause, as it applies to layoff. The legislation currently in place appears to leave room for the 
argument that there may be just cause for a layoff as well as a discharge, thereby relieving the employer 
of an obligation to provide notice. There has never been any intention to recognize the concept of just 
cause in the context of a layoff. No such argument was possible until the wording of the relevant section 
was changed in the 1980 amendment to the act. The present bill will correct that problem by 
reconfirming in clear language that just cause is relevant only in the event of discharge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to the amendments for the graduated notice of termination provisions, the 
second area of change reflected in this bill relates to section 56, dealing with protection of wages owned 
to an employee or to an employer, or by an employer to an employee. This section stipulates that such 
wages are considered to be held in trust by the employer and the employer’s other creditors have no 
right to claim against the wages held. 
 
Some difficulty has been experienced in implementing this principle on the basis of a number of 
superior court decisions in Canada expressing reservations about legislation as drafted. In a number of 
instances, the court has found that wages owing did not take priority over all other debts of an employer. 
To remedy the problem, an amendment is proposed which makes more specific the circumstances under 
which wages receive priority. The amendment strengthens and clarifies priority to be given to wage 
claimants. In accomplishing this, the amendment, in recognition of the position taken by the courts, 
spells out the exceptions t the general rule of wage precedents. These exceptions cover certain situations 
involving sellers of real or personal property to the employer and lenders who provide purchase money 
to permit the employer to acquire real or personal property. 
 
The amendment strengthens the priority position of wage earners while, at the same time, it recognizes 
that certain claimants must take priority over wage earners in order to allow employers to obtain new 
collateral and the financing necessary for new collateral in order to give the employer a chance to 
increase his assets. 
 
With the few specific exceptions outlined in the amended section 56, Mr. Speaker, it is our expectation 
that we will have a workable piece of legislation which will guarantee, in the majority of cases, that 
workers will receive wages owed to them by an employer in financial difficulty before any other claims 
on the employer’s assets can be made. 
 
These then, Mr. Speaker, are the amendments to The Labor Standards Act incorporated in the bill which 
is before us. As I have indicated, they are not earth-shaking in their impact, but they are important and 
necessary to ensure that The Labor Standards Act operates in practice as it was intended to do in 
principle. Needless to say, the government will continue to monitor closely the administration and the 
application of the legislation in the future to make certain that it continues to meet society’s generally 
accepted labor standard objectives in light of changing working environment since the 1980s. I move 
second reading of this bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, before the member takes his seat, may I ask a question? 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2694 

MR. SPEAKER: — Will the member take a question? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — Yes, by all means. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I assume when you say “except for certain situations,” you are referring to page 
3, a mortgage, real property, and that area, where they are used as collateral to start a business — am I 
correct? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — That’s right. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I will tell the minister that I will not be adjourning. I realize he is 
correcting something which was passed in this House a short while ago. I was not in favor of the bill 
when it was passed because of the length of periods of notice and so forth. But it is now law and we are 
correcting it so it is more efficient. Therefore, I will not delay it in the House. 
 
May I suggest to the minister that while he is bringing in changes to The Labor Standards Act he should 
look at The Public Service Act, section 50, and should bring in an amendment under The Labor 
Standards Act to apply with it. That particular section of The Public Service Act should be brought into 
The Labor Standards Act, as well, which indicates: 
 

That no person shall be, in any manner, compelled to take part in any political undertaking or to 
make any contributions to any political party or to be in any manner threatened or dismissed for 
refusing to take part in any political undertaking. 

 
Mr. Minister, what is happening in labor unions today is that people are being forced to support political 
parties in which they do not believe. Saskatchewan human rights do not allow that. It is an infringement 
of their rights. They are required to pay amounts of money out of their dues to a political party, whether 
they are opposed to that party or not. If you are against it on religious grounds you don’t have to pay to a 
political fund through a union check-off. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Minister, that it is about time that labor standards recognized the problem. You have 
given public service employees the ability to refuse to have check-offs to political parties if they are 
against it and they cannot be disciplined for it. Therefore I suggest to the minister that he consider 
bringing in an additional amendment to labor standards to allow everyone in the private area the same 
rights that the public service has under section 50 of The Public Service Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I said earlier, I realize you are correcting something that wasn’t exactly right when we 
passed it last time in the House; therefore I will not delay debate on this any further. 
 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words in response to the remarks made 
by the member for Rosthern. I want to point out to him that it’s not as easy as he claims it is. There are 
various groups of people in the province belonging to various organizations. I take, for example, the 
doctors and teachers. 
 
Teachers in Saskatchewan are obliged to pay a portion of their salaries to the STF (Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation). We do determine indirectly how this money is 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2695 

spent. What really happens is that we have an executive which makes that decision. They could spend 
the money on anything. I suppose they could even make (Heaven forbid!) a donation to the Tory Party if 
they wanted to. What we would simply do then is remove that executive by getting to the various 
councillors. The councillors would then in turn remove that executive. So there are far reaching 
implications in what the hon. members says. It’s very easy to say, “It should be this way.” But there are 
implications of which, I am sure, he is not aware. 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — I don’t intend to prolong the debate unnecessarily. I think the hon. member 
for Rosthern makes utterances which he obviously knows are inaccurate. There is nothing new or 
profound about that set of circumstances because he does it on a regular basis. He knows full well that 
the option rests with the individual to withdraw from paying that 5 cent assessment to the political 
organization. He knows full well that the option rests with the individual employee. For him to suggest 
at this stage that somehow or other The Labor Standards Act should be amended in order to provide for 
some far-reaching implications that have nothing to do with labor standards indicates clearly that he 
doesn’t know nor does he attempt to understand the purpose of The Labor Standards Act. 
 
The Labor Standards Act is devised for a very specific purpose. From day one The Labor Standards Act 
has been devised for the purpose of laying out a minimum standard of hours of work, holidays with pay, 
statutory holiday provisions and minimum wage requirements. That is the purpose of the act — to lay 
down minimum standards below which employees in the province of Saskatchewan shall not be 
remunerated. This is the intent of the thing. The intent is not to provide for other features that can be best 
dealt with by other pieces of legislation and other provincial statutes. I think, reading the act as it applies 
in Saskatchewan and as it applies in the other 10 jurisdictions, that it would lead most people to 
conclude that The Labor Standards Act should not be used for the purpose that the hon. member 
suggests. A careful reading of the act would bring anybody to that kind of logical conclusion. 
 
I think most members will accept that that is the reality of the situation, and that the suggestion which is 
made is remote from any of the matters that the labor standards provisions deal with in any of the other 
jurisdictions or in the federal sphere of activity. Accordingly, I would hope that the House would see fit 
to give second reading to this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Rolfes that Bill 
No. 80 — An Act respecting The Medical Profession be now read a second time. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my seatmate, who is detained at this moment, I think we 
would let this bill proceed to the next stage. He pointed out that he has some serious reservations 
pertaining to section 32 of the bill, and that there are 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2696 

some other areas where he has minor concerns, but we will discuss those in the next phase. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. McArthur that 
Bill No. 81 — An Act to amend The University of Regina Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — There are a few questions I would like to ask pertaining to this bill. Section 68 now 
reads as follows: 
 

The board shall make an annual report of their transactions to the commission, and through the 
commission to the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, in which shall be set forth in detail, the receipts 
and expenditures for the year ending on the preceding 30th day of June, and such other particulars as 
the Lieutenant-Governor in Council or the commission may require. 

 
My concern with what is implied by “other particulars as the Lieutenant-Governor in Council or the 
commission may require.” I see that in the new provision that is not included in the bill. I would think 
this is probably an important consideration. I would ask if there could be some enlargement on the other 
types of provisions and so on that may have been or may be requested of the universities commission by 
the cabinet. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — I don’t really think it is safe for me to answer the member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley with respect to this issue. Perhaps the best time to deal with it would be in committee of 
the whole, when the minister, of course, will be here. If he stood up to answer it, which would be the 
case, we would have to go to committee of the whole anyway. So, I think that our best bet is to move the 
bill to committee of the whole, where the hon. member can discuss the matter with the minister 
responsible. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at he next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. McArthur that 
Bill No. 82 — An Act to amend The University of Saskatchewan Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 
 

MINERAL RESOURCES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — We are dealing with the estimates of the Department of Mineral Resources and I 
would ask the minister to introduce his officials. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2697 

HON. MR. COWLEY: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Seated beside me is Keith Laxdal, who is the 
acting deputy minister of mineral resources; behind him is Janice Rathwell, director of personnel and 
administration; behind me is Ron Sully, director of policy planning and research; and seated over there 
is Doug Gillard, director of the petroleum and natural gas branch. 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I want to first pursue, Mr. Minister, the question with regard to the proposal to 
build in Saskatchewan, at fairly large capital expenditure, a heavy oil upgrader. I know that SaskOil is a 
member of that consortium, but I think probably your department, as well, has a material interest in the 
construction of the upgrader. 
 
The first question I would ask you, Mr. Minister, is about job creation. Would the minister be able to 
give me an idea of the number of people (depending on the size, of course) involved in the construction 
phase and, second, in the operating phase, once the construction is completed? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — The construction phase is always difficult, but I would expect at peak 
construction (depending on the size) from 1,000 to 1,500 people. we don’t have anything precise. It is 
sort of man-years for this size and man-years for that size at this stage — at the operating level, from the 
30,000 barrel size, 150 to 250 people up to the larger size of perhaps 400 people. now those are pretty 
rough-and-ready. It depends a little on which of the two kinds of technology and how much you 
automate it and so on, but that’s our best estimate at this point. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — All right, I wish then to ask a question as it relates to the proposal for feeder stock. 
I understand that when you made the press release of the study being conducted by the five-company 
consortia, you indicated that for feeder stock you were banking on existing production or heavy oil that 
was in place now or being produced now by the conventional methods. Is that still the view of the 
consortia, that in fact the oil will be the conventional heavy oil production which we have now on 
stream? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I think that was the base we started from. The studies, I may say, are not 
complete with respect to the possible and potential locations of feed stock, but even just looking at the 
existing production we would be dependent upon enhanced recovery. Obviously there are other 
questions, such as the possibility of using Cold Lake, Alberta, for a feed stock, or southwestern 
Saskatchewan — the Swift Current area. So, the studies are broader than that. I think initially the 
discussions and the decisions were based on existing production taking into account the likely results of 
enhanced recovery. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I’ll come back to that later on, Mr. Minister, with regard to location and that type 
of thing. I think the announcement yesterday (and I am sure you will agree) is a fairly serious blow for 
Saskatchewan oil production, when you see Husky Oil . . . Husky Oil (as you know) and Mr. Blair (as 
you know), have always been a pretty firm believer in the Canadianization program. Mr. Blair has been 
one of the few people in the oil industry who is prepared to ride the storm out with regard to the national 
energy program, etc. Now, even Mr. Blair’s company, Husky, is saying, “No, we can no longer take this 
situation; we have to start rolling back our production as well.” I think the earlier statements by Mr. 
Blair would indicate that the cuts are going to be more severe 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2698 

for Saskatchewan than the 180 wells which are shut in now, or being proposed to be shut in. I think they 
have already started to be shut in. 
 
Does the minister not feel any obligation on the part of the Saskatchewan government to make some 
moves in that field so that we can retain that oil industry and retain at least some production, and so that 
we are not chasing out one of the best oil companies that has been in the Lloydminster field for a long 
time? Husky Oil has been patient with the development of heavy oil; it has been patient, hoping that the 
price was going to go up; it has been patient, hoping that perhaps the price will rise so that we can have 
more enhanced recovery so that we can build an upgrader in their area. 
 
Isn’t it time, Mr. Minister, that the Government of Saskatchewan really sat down and looked at the 
question of Saskatchewan oil royalties, which are higher than Alberta’s. They are higher and therefore 
the national energy program has a more severe impact on the province of Saskatchewan. Isn’t it time, 
Mr. Minister, that you had a look at that? You told the industry that we are prepared to make some 
moves so that we can keep it here, that we are prepared to be a friend of the oil industry, especially 
companies like Husky which have been good corporate citizens for this province. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — All I can say is that I am not going to enter into a debate about whether or 
not Husky is a good corporate citizen. I think I answered that in question period. I think the member 
should realize that on these wells our royalties are already very low because they are marginal wells. I 
am told by my officials that if we removed all of our royalties, those wells would still be uneconomic. 
So the member can see obviously where the basic problem is with respect to these marginal wells. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — All right. Mr. Minister, the annual report of Husky Oil comments on the national 
energy program (as you are aware, Husky Oil has production both in the province of Saskatchewan and 
the province of Alberta) and basically says this: 
 

Primary production for many of the heavy oil wells under existing royalty structures in 
Saskatchewan, combined with the federal tax and pricing, cannot recover basic costs. Other wells are 
not generating sufficient cash flow to support the routine maintenance requirements. 

 
Mr. Minister, my question to you is basically this. Much of the oil produced on the Alberta side by 
Husky is not all that different from the oil being produced on the Saskatchewan side. There are still a lot 
of marginal wells on the Alberta side, but those are not being shut in. the reason they are not being shut 
in, I think, Is set out here in the annual report of Husky, that is, that it is not only the national energy 
policy but the severe royalty taxation being imposed by the Government of Saskatchewan which has 
caused almost the entire field to become uneconomical. So I think your answer, Mr. Minister, that you 
couldn’t do anything with the royalties, would not seem to stand up with the statement of Mr. Blair in 
the annual report. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, all I can answer is that on these very low productivity wells, we 
believe the economics would suggest in Alberta similar action to what is being taken in Saskatchewan, 
and that Husky would act accordingly there, as well. Now, I don’t know what their circumstances are 
(how many wells they have, etc.), but the economics would not be (how should I say it) wildly different 
in Alberta for these wells producing two to four barrels per day which we are talking about here, which 
are very low producers. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2699 

MR. ANDREW: — The statement by the spokesman for Husky Oil yesterday in fact called for the 
province of Saskatchewan to reassess the royalties and said that if the province of Saskatchewan would 
reassess the royalties, then Husky would look at pursuing further the development of heavy oil in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, you indicated in question period, I believe, that you had met with and discussed the whole 
question with Husky Oil. Did Husky in fact tell you that there would be further cuts coming and that 
they would be unable to make it go because of the high royalty levels imposed by your government on 
that particular field? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I don’t think there was any indication. I was just trying to recall the 
discussion at the meeting. Certainly, this announcement indicated that it was forthcoming but not as 
precisely as the other announcement. There was no indication that there would necessarily be following 
any further similar type of announcements. That is not to say that there won’t be further wells that may 
be deemed to be economical for one reason or another, but not on an announcement of this size (in terms 
of the numbers of wells), although the impact could be similar in terms of the number of barrels over 
time. 
 
I would agree with the member that Husky has been doing a lot of work (and so have some other 
producers in Saskatchewan) in the past few months. That is based more on, I guess, hope or good faith 
or whatever, that the issues would be resolved in the near future, and they have been proceeding. 
 
There is no question that every time we meet with any oil company, they argue that our royalties should 
be lower. I suspect the same is true in Alberta. 
 
I would be surprised if an oil company didn’t say, “Look, we don’t have the necessary net-back. We 
don’t really care who makes the room — whether it’s the federal or provincial government — but 
somebody should.” It is not of particular interest to the oil company where the taxation comes from. It’s 
simply interested in the total at the bottom of the barrel, if you like. 
 
Certainly, we explained our position to Husky. I don’t want to put words in its mouth by saying that it 
agreed with us. I don’t think that was the case, but I think it at least understood our position, whether or 
not it agreed with it with respect to royalties. I don’t disagree, as I said in question period and as I said 
before to the members opposite. 
 
Obviously, one solution to the current problem (it might not be a long-lasting solution) would be to 
simply reduce our royalties by an amount equal to the national energy program. No one can argue that 
that wouldn’t take us back to where we were in September 1980. that is a fact. With some of the 
marginal wells we might have some problems. We will leave that aside; that’s a detail. 
 
I don’t believe that is either prudent or a good negotiating stand for the province, nor is it an appropriate 
or right thing for us to do. We have argued that while our royalties are higher than those in Alberta in 
most cases, in 1980 we were having an extremely good year in the oil industry. We weren’t hearing 
arguments from most of the producers that their net-backs were insufficient to carry on their businesses 
— not that we don’t always have arguments that the net-backs should be greater. What changed was the 
national energy program. That’s where, I believe, the fault lies. That’s where, I believe, the change 
should be made. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2700 

MR. ANDREW: — I take it, Mr. Minister, that in Husky’s announcement yesterday, and in your 
discussions with Husky, they also announced that not only were they shutting in 181 wells (and more to 
come), but that they were cutting back on their drilling program by 15 per cent. Is that the information 
you received from Husky as well? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Yes. We’ve been indicating since shortly after the national energy program 
was announced that we expected the level of drilling in Saskatchewan to decrease by about 50 per cent. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Have you not only dealt with Husky but with Murphy Oil and the other producers 
in the Lloydminster field? What have they called for? Are they saying things similar to what Husky is 
saying — that the royalty structure in Saskatchewan is too high when it is superimposed on by the 
national energy program? Have they made substantial cuts in their production? Have they shut down or 
curtailed much of their exploration or development of wells in the Lloydminster area? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I met with some of the companies but not all of them. I am advised that the 
only company which has shut in production as a matter of policy is Mobil in southeastern Saskatchewan, 
and now Husky. Other companies have shut in wells as they were sanded in, needed to be worked over 
or whatever, on a random basis. 
 
With respect to the representations on the net-backs, I think that all of the companies are consistent in 
saying that the current taxing regime, plus the national energy program, is too high. I don’t think we 
substantially disagree with that. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I take it that you are simply telling us, Mr. Minister, that you are going to leave the 
matter in the hands of Mr. Leitch and Mr. Lalonde, who will make the decision. They are the people 
who are negotiating the pricing agreement. You are sitting on the outside. Yu are going to see what they 
are going to negotiate for you. Basically, you are not going to be involved in that at all. You are simply 
going to ride out the storm. You are not prepared to make any re-evaluation of your royalty structure, 
you’re simply going to sit, ride out the storm, and let the chips fall where they may. Could that be 
basically summing up the policy of your department with regard to this present crisis? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I think that’s your interpretation of it. What I want to say is that we’re 
not prepared to capitulate to the federal government and make room with respect to royalties for the 
national energy program. We are not prepared to do that. 
 
We are continually meeting with federal officials on a reasonably regular basis; I indicated that I met 
with Lalonde twice. I haven’t bothered holding press conference before and after the meetings, although 
obviously there seems to be some indication from the members questions afterward that it might be 
desirable to indicate that we are carrying on our discussions. We don’t intend to totally sit on the 
outside. Obviously, the crunch of the problem if you like, seems to be the question of pricing. 
 
That is viewed by the federal government as primarily, although not exclusively, a problem with respect 
to Alberta; that’s where they have been directing their attention. British Columbia has at least as large a 
concern as we do; theirs is in respect to natural gas. So, I assume and believe that B.C. is carrying on its 
discussions with the federal government as well. I don’t think we are sitting on the sidelines waiting for 
something to 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2701 

happen, but obviously, there is not likely to be a broad, general resolution to the problem unless there is 
some accord between Alberta and the federal government. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, if I can briefly intrude into this debate, I would like to comment 
from some distance. I see complete insanity with the entire oil or mineral resource process in the entire 
country. I acknowledge that about 80 per cent of the action is in Alberta. But how can we call it a 
rational policy when we are talking about keeping oil companies from closing or shutting down some 
producing wells instead of discussing what we have to do to get them out to find more oil? 
 
It constantly amazes me that from Ottawa through to wherever else in this country, in the fact of the 
deregulation of the oil industry in the United States, which is probably the single most significant factor 
to happen to the oil industry in Saskatchewan on an exploration basis, we can continue to nitpick as we 
have between Edmonton and Ottawa, and between Regina and Ottawa. We all know that the moment 
President Reagen announced that the industry was deregulated in the United States, the bulk of the 
drilling rigs were dismantled as quickly as the bolts could be taken out of them. And they headed for the 
49th parallel. 
 
It is a matter of some concern to some Americans — namely the number of Canadian companies now 
actively exploring for oil in the United States. It’s ironic that the reverse situation has been a source of 
some concern to some Canadians at different times. But in Canada we have to acknowledge the 
American action. The Americans are determined to find all the oil which they have within the confines 
of their country for an obvious reason: to reduce their dependency on foreign oil. 
 
The same prediction, although the time frame is a little later, is also true for Canada. Ultimately we are 
going to be dependent on foreign sources. Whether you like President Reagen or not is of no 
consequence, but none the less he deregulated the industry, and he said, “All right, go out and find all 
the oil that you can.” 
 
For goodness sakes, at a time when we should be doing everything to encourage exploration in Canada, 
preferably by Canadian companies (but not necessarily), why in goodness are we debating on April 29 
how we can keep some wells in production? That’s where I think things have gone out of whack. We’ve 
always supported this government’s position that the provinces should control their natural resources. 
We have differed with you as to the means used to exercise this control. But there has never been any 
disagreement between your side and our side as to whether or not the provinces should control their 
natural resources exclusively. We support you in that position, and I think it’s fair to say that we always 
have. 
 
I accept the minister’s comments when he says, “Why should we cut our royalties down to nothing in 
order to comply with the national energy board?” I accept that. But perhaps it’s time that this 
government got in line with the province of Alberta, and in a very veiled way told them in central 
Canada, “If you’d rather go and pay the Saudi’s $40 or $45 a barrel, go and do it.” Maybe that’s what it 
takes to simply shut the industry down — if that’s what it takes to tell the federal government that we 
believe we should control our own resources. We’ve had 113 years of inequity from central Canada. 
Now, some forces in central Canada see paying higher energy prices as a threat to their industrial 
empire. With the support of central Canada, the Prime Minister, through Petro-Can, is now moving to 
nationalize the oil industry in an indirect fashion. I don’t think you support that even though you support 
the process of nationalization. I don’t really think you support nationalization by the use of Petro-Can. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2702 

Now, the hypothetical situation that I have just gone through may be deemed, and rightly so, very 
radical. But as the minister in charge of about 15 to 20 per cent of the oil industry, how long can you sit 
back and allow this ludicrous situation to exist (for the Americans have deregulated their industry), and 
allow the illusion to persist that somehow our people are beyond that? Unless you close off that 49th 
parallel, our Canadian companies (and for that matter the American companies with their exploration 
rigs) are heading south as quickly as they can get a lease to drill on. How can you sit there and ignore 
this basic fact of life? How can we sit there and ignore the fact that we have a depleting resource of 
which there is lots more at different places or greater depths. What are we doing? We’re talking today 
about shutting down some wells. 
 
So, I guess, Mr. Minister, the basic question that I’ve taken so long to get to is: how long can we sit 
here? Whether we are in Alberta or Saskatchewan, how long can we sit there without facing up to 
reality? We have to go and find some more oil; we have to start drilling; we have to acknowledge that 
the Americans have deregulated their industry, and unless we lock the other companies in here, they are 
heading south where they can get back to doing what they do best: finding oil. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think with some of the member’s comments I have 
some sympathy, and with some of them more than just some sympathy — in terms of sitting here in 
Canada and watching what should be going on in terms of not searching out new energy resources and 
more oil and natural gas as a result, basically, of governments. You can lay the blame more or less at 
whichever level of government you want. You obviously know where I stand on that one with my 
particular biases. 
 
I don’t necessarily agree, obviously, that we need to follow precisely President Reagan’s pattern with 
respect to deregulation. I don’t think that’s what the member was arguing. But obviously there are 
numerous things that could be done in Canada in terms of higher prices and different kinds of net-backs 
and incentives, which could bring about similar results in Canada to being seen in the United States 
now, as a result of some of the changes they’ve made. 
 
I only point out to the member that with respect to price, we as a province have no control. The federal 
government has established by legislation what the prices are. With respect to exports outside of the 
country, i.e. into the United States, we have no control. The federal government, through the National 
Energy Board, controls those. In terms of affecting net-backs to the producers, given the fact that the 
federal government makes this decision about price, and this decision about how much they’re going to 
take, all that is left to us is to decide to take less so that the companies can have more, if you like. 
 
If we were in a position to affect both price and our take from a barrel of oil, obviously we would have a 
great deal more flexibility, as a province, to deal with the circumstances. 
 
The member speaks about shutting and production. In Alberta, they have shut in 160,000 barrels a day. 
I’ve been saying that we don’t have a policy of shutting in oil wells in Saskatchewan, but as the member 
for Kindersley pointed out with respect to Husky’s announcement yesterday, we have a similar policy in 
place in Saskatchewan and we didn’t have to do anything. We just let the national energy program take 
effect 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2703 

and we are having, and will have, a similar level of cutbacks as Alberta has. The thing that always 
frustrates me is that we sit here with the national energy program, which is resulting in $20 a barrel oil 
in Saskatchewan being shut in and replaced by $40 a barrel oil from Mexico or Venezuela. Canada is 
paying twice as much (Canadian consumers) directly or indirectly. The province is not getting the return 
it would have out of that $20 a barrel oil. We have the balance of payments problem that comes from 
spending $40 outside of the country instead of spending $20 inside. On the surface, it doesn’t seem to be 
a terribly rational policy. I think that’s what the member was saying. 
 
I guess our frustration in dealing with this is that we don’t have all of the levers in our control to be able 
to make the kinds of decisions that would result in the level of activity which I think we all feel is 
necessary. Even when one gets down to discussing things such as heavy oil upgraders, obviously two of 
the very critical elements there are the price we are prepared to pay for the upgraded oil that comes out 
the other end. Consequently, what is the difference? Is it enough to make an upgrader feasible? 
 
Now, there were some tentative positions taken by the federal government on that in the budget of last 
October, but circumstances and conditions are changing, and I don’t think any prudent investor is going 
to build a $1 billion upgrader without knowing the answers to those two questions. Those have to be 
resolved before we can proceed with the construction of an upgrader, unless the federal government is 
going to do it itself. I guess it doesn’t need to know the answer to the questions, but it is not likely to get 
the oil out of the ground by itself. It obviously can sell it, because it can decide to pay world price for it 
if it wants to. 
 
Those are some pretty critical questions that we need to resolve rapidly if we are to have that oil in place 
for the late 1980s in Canada. It should be more of a concern to people in central and eastern Canada than 
to people in western Canada, when you look at our production, even in Saskatchewan. In terms of being 
self-sufficient (if we can view ourselves as an island), we don’t have an imminent problem. That is not 
to say that we won’t have a problem later on. 
 
We produce about twice as much crude oil as we consume in the province, so if we want to treat 
ourselves as an island, we’re self-sufficient. We’re not self-sufficient in refining and son on, but in terms 
of crude oil production, we are. That certainly isn’t true of Canada, and it seems to me that the problem 
we have in getting this argument home to Canadians is that right now, the federal government is able to 
supplement or to exchange declines in production in Alberta and Saskatchewan with offshore oil from 
Mexico or Venezuela. It is a matter of price which they spread around; it gets lost. It is all in litres now, 
and most of us don’t know how much we are paying per gallon anyway. All you know is how much 
your tank costs to fill up. 
 
It isn’t until some time in the future when something happens in Saudi Arabia (or you pick a country) 
and the oil is cut off, the supply isn’t there, that Canadians are going to realize the opportunity we 
missed in 1980, 1981 and 1982 to make ourselves either self-sufficient or closer to it. It will only happen 
when the oil actually isn’t there and you are lining up at the pumps to get your 7.3 litres for the week. I 
think that’s what most frustrates me. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I don’t find very much to disagree with in your comments. I really 
can’t accept the analogy that we have no choice in Saskatchewan but to sit back and either like it or 
lump it. There certainly has to be an alternative course 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2704 

of action to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t think anybody liked the federal budget as it pertained to the oil industry in western 
Canada. The other little item which was contained in the federal policy, the statutory role or the very 
near statutory role that Petro-Canada was given in future oil development in this country, as much as 
anything, has stifled oil exploration in Canada and western Canada. I would like you to make your 
position clear on behalf of your department and your government. Do you support (in light of the 
situation, in light of the repercussions) the action of the Prime Minister and the role which he intends 
Petro-Canada to play in future oil development in this country and in western Canada? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I have said before publicly, so I can hardly say anything different here 
(and I wouldn’t want to), that our government has supported the concept of Canadianization of the oil 
industry, whether it be through Petro-Canada or through some other vehicle. I have no particular 
quarrels, and I don’t believe our government does, with Petro-Canada having an increasing role in the 
oil industry in Canada. Whether or not they make good deals in buying Petrofina and that is — I don’t 
want to say “a detail,” because that suggest it is not important — an item for discussion and debate. 
Members can express their opinions if they so wish on that. 
 
With respect to the provisions which allow Petro-Canada to back in on certain Canada lands in the North 
and so on, our government, when we established SaskOil, decided not to do that. It went into the market 
place as other people did on Saskatchewan lands. The only exception there would be the program where 
the partners are Gulf, Petro-Canada and us. 
 
I must admit to not being fully aware of all of the implications of that in terms of Canada lands. I 
haven’t spent a lot of time learning what’s going on in the Arctic and offshore in terms of those kinds of 
things. I know that is the general policy, I think basically our government has been supportive of the 
idea and the concept of Canadianization, and supportive of the idea of an increasing role for Petro-Can. 
As to the vehicles or the way in which they get there, I think that has to be examined case by case to 
decide whether you like it or don’t like it. That’s our position. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I am sure that you have been in circles where there is a hot tip 
going around. You want to invest in an oil well; they’ll give you some data that they have hit here and 
they have missed there. Do you want to invest in it? You’ll hear a guy say, “Sure, I’m good for this, or 
good for that.” The money gets raised. You know the fully thing now is that the oil well or the gas well 
used to be in northern Alberta or used in the Yukon or northern B.C. I’m sure you are aware of this, and 
you know what I am saying is true. You know where that oil well is now? It’s in Oklahoma or it’s in 
Colorado or it’s in some place like that, but never in Canada. 
 
In other words, in Canada the day of the wildcatter — maybe the wildcatter has long since gone, but 
whoever his replacement is (that guy who runs out and goes drilling for oil, hoping to make his million 
dollars), there’s no place for that guy in Canada. That guy will risk everything to go out and find some 
oil to make his fortune. That guy or that small company or that small operation is going elsewhere. 
Would the minister agree that the federal government’s philosophy, demanding that Petro-Canada take 
such a significant role, has had a devastating effect on exploration in this country? 
 
As far as the Canadianization goes, I don’t think you’re going to get much debate from 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2705 

anybody. Everybody would love everything to be all Canadian but, as the minister knows, that isn’t 
possible; nor is it realistic, as the minister also knows. 
 
But getting away from the Canadianization thing (and let’s leave that as a separate issue), I would like 
the minister to be a trifle more specific as to his approval or disapproval of the Prime Minister’s action 
in demanding that Petro-Canada play a role in future oil development in this country, that it be a 
requirement that Petro-Canada be involved. Let’s leave the Canadianization out of it because, as the 
minister knows, this is a separate issue and it doesn’t have to be tied into it. 
 
Let’s deal with the concept of Petro-Can. I don’t want to get into the overall debate as to whether we 
need a Petro-Can. What I am asking you to take a position on is Petro-Can’s position as recently put out 
under the terms of the federal budget, and Petro-Canada’s required role in future oil development. Never 
mind whether we need a Petro-Canada; that’s a separate issue. But do we need it in the role that Prime 
Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau has designated it has to take in future developments? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I have a couple of comments. First of all, the member talked about the role 
of the wildcatter or whatever you want to call him in western Canada and about his absence. I don’t 
argue that there are fewer of them; that there are none I suspect is stretching it a little. But there are 
considerably fewer than there were a year or two ago. I would lay the blame for that at the doorstep of 
the national energy program and the PGRT (petroleum and gas resource tax) rather than Petro-Canada, 
because as I understand it, the requirement the federal government has laid down with respect to 
Petro-Canada’s being involved in all activities in the industry extends only to Canada lands, which 
basically doesn’t apply to Alberta, Saskatchewan and B.C. It’s to the territories and offshore. 
 
So that may be a circumstance there. The developments up there are of hundreds of millions of dollars 
and aren’t the kind of things (I don’t know about the member for Thunder Creek) that I get offered a 
piece of. Maybe for a $100,000 well in Saskatchewan or a $0.5 million well, somebody might say 
there’s a hot tip, but as for a $217 million hole they’re drilling in the Beaufort Sea, no one has ever 
offered me a piece of it — at least at a price that I could consider. 
 
So that may, indeed, be true in terms of larger companies on the Canada lands, but I think the problem in 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, and B.C. is basically the PGRT, which is part of the national energy program, 
and not Petro-Canada’s role. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Let’s go back to the Petro-Can question, Mr. Minister, and the stated view of the 
national government, which is to the effect that we must keep the consumer price of oil low, so that it 
doesn’t impact on inflation and for various other reasons. That’s its stated policy, and without getting 
into the specifics with regard to the way the shares were purchased of Petrofina, do you support the idea 
of the government takeover of Petrofina? And using that takeover, or paying for it, by partaking apart of 
that small margin that the federal government has left for the consumer to pay for gasoline in this 
province? Would it not make more sense to you, Mr. Minister, that instead of putting that cost onto the 
consumer, the federal government would allow that to be financed through Petro-Can and use that extra 
increase to go into the industry to give the industry some stimulus to go and explore for more oil or to 
keep production going? Would that not make more sense to you as the way the federal government 
should have handled Petrofina? In other words, are you in support, or against, the concept to Petro-Can 
passing on the cost of the purchase of Petrofina to the consumers of this country? 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2706 

HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, first of all, as I understand it, the Petro-Canada takeover of Petrofina 
is being financed, basically, by a tax at the pumps, as opposed to taking something out of what the 
producers get for a barrel of oil. Now that in a sense is a semantic argument, because if you didn’t take 
the money for Petro-Canada, you could give a higher price for a barrel of oil. So, it’s the same 
difference. 
 
I don’t think I have any conceptual problem with the federal government acquiring a national oil 
company by a tax on consumers, the argument being that if there is benefit to have a national oil 
company (which I believe there is), it should be paid for by the consumers who are going to benefit from 
it in the future. So it is a matter of whether you finance in one way or another. I don’t have any 
particular problems with that. I think, frankly, they should be doing both. There should be a higher 
net-back to the producers. If this is the chosen way (tow which I have no particular objections) to 
finance an acquisition like Petrofina, that should be part of it. There are some other parts of some of the 
add-ons that I do have some concern with, such as letting the production events take place which results 
in lower production in western Canada and then putting an add-on at the pumps to pay for higher 
imported crude oil. I think that is not a very sensible policy to be following. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate the nature of the negotiations, but I would like to ask you 
a question relating to the present negotiations between Ottawa and Alberta. I take it that the main part of 
that negotiation or bargaining is with regard to whether or not the price of crude oil should increase. 
Could the minister advise the Assembly as to the parameters of that negotiation without giving out, 
necessarily, where each position stands. 
 
Obviously at the one end would be the federal government saying, I suppose, in their ultimate position, 
“We propose to increase the price of crude oil, but not to more than the figure set out in the national 
energy program.” The province of Alberta may be saying, “We need more money.” Could the minister 
advise us, to his knowledge, what the parameters of that discussion are? Are we talking about an extra 
dollar or two dollars a barrel this year? What type of figures are we talking about with regard to those 
negotiations? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I can’t be precise because I wasn’t there, obviously. But I am not 
aware of any hard numbers being discussed at all. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Could you, then, advise me as to what price you think the federal government must 
increase the price of crude oil to, over the next three to four years, to put the industry back on the tracks 
and get it moving again? What is the Government of Saskatchewan’s position as to what that increase 
must or should be? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I think it’s difficult to answer the member to be precise. First of all, we have 
not been precise with respect to saying, “Here’s the pricing regime we want.” You need to talk about 
what kind of prices we want for new oil, tertiary recovery, enhanced recovery and existing conventional 
oil recovery, in order to allow the federal government — if it wants some share of the pie — to take it 
without affecting either the net-back to producers, providing them with enough to carry one with 
exploration, or the net-back to the province so that it gets a greater share of the income than Ottawa 
does. So it’s tied, really, with what Ottawa is prepared to do with things such as the PGRT (petroleum 
and gas revenue tax). Obviously, if the PGRT is going to remain in place, under any regime, then we 
need a higher price than if it’s not in place, so that the needs 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2707 

of the province and the producers can be satisfied. But it needs to be a higher price than was announced 
in the national energy program, without any question. And we need higher prices, I believe, (although I 
don’t yet know the magnitude of them) for the enhanced recovery necessary for the feed stock, upgrader 
and the product coming out the other end. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — What you are talking about is a blended price which is, I think, probably a reality in 
today’s oil pricing. Let’s go to the question of tertiary recovery in the heavy oil fields of Saskatchewan. 
What type of price, from your figures, is necessary for tertiary recovery? I appreciate that it is at an 
experimental stage now. But what type of price is necessary in order to spur the development and 
research necessary to proceed with the tertiary projects? What type of money is needed for that? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — In excess of $30 a barrel. May I say that when we talk to companies, they 
obviously have different points of view. It depends on your taxing regimes and so on. But I think any 
likely outcome of the discussions is going to necessitate $30 a barrel or more for that kind of recovery. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — When you say $30 a barrel you are looking at the existing taxing schemes where 
the federal government has its take, and the provincial government has its take? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Has some take. It might turn out to be $35 a barrel, and this is a fictitious 
number. There is nothing to back it up, particularly. It might turn out to be $35 a barrel with the existing 
regime, or $30 a barrel with some adjustments of the existing tax regimes at the federal and provincial 
level. Or it could be $40 a barrel if you had higher provincial or federal tax regimes. So that’s the 
problem with talking about price. It’s tied also with what you do with the tax regimes. All I’m saying is 
that I think, no matter how optimistic you are about the great ability of the parties to sit down and 
negotiate and work it out, you are talking at a minimum of $30 a barrel, and likely higher. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — All right. Could you give me any figures, and I appreciate that they would be at this 
point experimental and hard to put into hard economics, as to the lifting cost for tertiary recovery oil, 
let’s say, in the Aberfeldy field in Lloydminster or the one that SaskOil is participating in Meota? Any 
idea what the lifting costs are going to be there? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I am just talking now about the operating costs. Now they are talking about 
return on capital and all that sort of stuff. I am told that some of the pilot projects run over $15 a barrel. 
But they are pilot projects. So there are not the economics of scale there. The best advice I can get here 
(which is probably as good as there is in the country) is $5 to $10 a barrel — take a range in there. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — $5 to $10? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — It is $5 to $10 a barrel, somewhere in there. It will vary from field to field 
and from circumstance to circumstance. In other words, the pilot projects may be relatively high but you 
can get them down to $5 to $10 a barrel, it is today’s dollar so you can escalate that up. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — All right, I take it them, as I understand the national energy program dealing with 
heavy oil, it laid out a price of $30 a barrel. Is that sufficient, in your 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2708 

department’s view, or does it have to be higher than that as set out in the national energy program? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I guess our current view is that it will have to be somewhat higher, given the 
existence of the PGRT and the fact that the PGRT is at 8 per cent now but is destined to go higher, if one 
can believe the federal budget. So there are just too many unknowns, if you like, to be very precise about 
the number. But I think our general comment would be that we are not certain, at all, that the $30 is 
adequate. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I believe in one of your press statements recently, dealing with the upgrader 
question, you indicated that it would add an additional $10 a barrel cost. Is that what you indicated in the 
statement? I don’t have it with me. Is that what you indicated the extra cost of the enhanced process of 
an upgrader would add to that barrel of oil? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Again, I think the studies on that are very preliminary. I don’t recall saying 
$10, but I am advised that the conventional wisdom (and I won’t put it any higher than that in terms of 
level of precision) is $8 to $10 a barrel. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The question I have is with regard to the location of the upgrader (if I could come 
back to that question). A statement made yesterday, I believe, on Lloydminster television and in the 
North Battleford newspaper by the member for Redberry, was that the government was opposed to 
placing or locating the upgrader in Lloydminster because to do so, the benefits and the jobs would 
accrue to the people of Alberta and not Saskatchewan, and that as result, the government would be 
looking at locating the upgrader in a more central part of the province of Saskatchewan. I wonder if that 
is the member speaking for himself or whether that is the view of the department or of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, that, in fact, the upgrader should not be located at Lloydminster because the benefits 
would accrue to the people of Alberta and, in particular, the people working on it would probably 
choose to live in Alberta with a more favourable taxing system, etc. Is that the position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — The Government of Saskatchewan hasn’t taken any position with respect to 
the location of the refinery, except to say that we want all the options looked at. Obviously, if I were the 
member for North Battleford (wherever he is) trying to get the refinery in North Battleford, I would 
mount all of those kinds of arguments to say why the province should locate a refinery in a particular 
location. I suppose that is something that we will have to consider, but I would think the major 
considerations are these: where it makes the most sense to have it, where the most economic place to put 
it is and where the best place is in terms of source of supply in order to get the maximum level of 
upgrading. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Let’s go to the question of infrastructure. I believe your figures showed that, at a 
maximum, 400 permanent jobs were created from the upgrader after the construction phase. When you 
talk about infrastructure, you are talking about the ability to phase those 400 people into the job market 
in a given community and the spinoff effects of that throughout the local economy. Is that what you’re 
concerned about with infrastructure — schools, hospitals and those types of things? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Yes, I think that’s true. We’re also concerned with the ability to cope with 
the impact of the construction phase, where you may have 1,000 to 1,500 people. There are very 
different kinds of things which you have to cope with. You don’t 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2709 

have to build 1,500 new homes to have 1,500 people working on construction, but it does have an 
impact on the community. So you obviously need to take a look at those. As I said, it’s a factor, but if 
you look at some of the projects which have been carried out in northern Alberta, such as the tar sands 
project, you see that there’s nothing which can’t be done. There certainly weren’t great big communities 
there with lots of infrastructure ready to do it. I don’t think that precludes anybody or any particular 
location, but it’s one of the factors I think you need to consider. That’s all I have to say in terms of the 
location. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Let me go to the supply question. You indicated that you had to consider the 
production in the Swift Current or the southwest field. Is that actively being considered as the feeder 
stock for the proposed upgrader? Is that part of the consortium looking at that supply as part of the 
proposal for the upgrader? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — All we’ve said is, “Look at it.” We haven’t said that it has to be in it. We 
just said, “Here it is. Does it make any sense?” we’re looking for an assured market for southwestern 
crude. That’s an attraction to the whole province. If it doesn’t make sense, it obviously won’t go in. we 
want the consortium to at least take a look at it. We’ve asked them to do that to see whether it makes any 
sense or not and to find out what impact it would have. Maybe it doesn’t make sense, but it think we 
should at least have them consider it. 
 
I’d like to point out that we’re not likely to build a dozen upgraders. I’d like to think we would but, 
realistically, we may build one large one and perhaps another one. That will be some time down the 
road. If we build a smaller-sized one and then maybe another one, two or three may come along a little 
more quickly. It’s the kind of thing which we’re not going to do very often in this province. We’d just 
like to have a broad look at what might go into it and what might come out of it, to try to maximize our 
opportunities. 
 
I think you can be reasonably confident that the consortium (obviously, it will have different interests, 
but it will also have a similar interest in making the thing work) is going to say so. I suppose they’ll say, 
“if you insist on it, it’ll cost so much.” We haven’t asked or approached them in a way where we’re 
insisting on it. We simply said, “Take a look at it, because it’s an area of concern to us as a province in 
terms of finding an assured market for this oil.” 
 
MR. ANDREW: — All right. Last year, in mineral resources estimates, the minister then responsible 
for that department indicated that the conventional wisdom was that once the feeder stock for an 
upgrader was established (and that was the big concern that they had then, that they had enough supply 
to put into the proposed upgrader), what they were looking at was a 100,000 barrels a day upgrader at a 
cost of approximately $1 billion. I believe your press statement announcing the formation of the 
consortium used the same figure of $1 billion but had downgraded the size fairly substantially into the 
area of 30,000 to 50,000 barrels a day. My first question is; has the cost for the construction gone up that 
much? In other words, to build a 50,000 barrel a day upgrader, you are almost looking at the cost that 
you could have built one for 100,000 barrels a day last year. And what are you looking at, as the size of 
the upgrader? Are you basically homing in on the area of 50,000 barrels, or are you still contemplating 
100,000 barrels? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — The figures are really just orders of magnitude, and they don’t necessarily 
— no one has done the engineering, etc. to get a very precise figure. The order of size would be from 
30,000 to 100,000 barrels that they are looking at. It 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2710 

depends on which person you talk to you as to what will be the most likely outcome, frankly. The 
studies are just being completed. I believe, on the feed stock for the upgrader, its possible potential and 
all of that. And that will obviously have a major bearing on the size of it. I think (and this is a very 
general comment) there is some more support (is that the right word?), more inclination on the part of 
some people to whom I talked, to look at a smaller size rather than starting out with a larger size — that 
sort of thing. But it is still very preliminary because they are really just nicely getting started )the 
consortium) with the studies, although there was a lot of background work that they fed in. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — All right. The other question that comes up very often is the need to be close to a 
supply of water. To your knowledge, how much of a water supply is necessary for the construction of 
the upgrader itself, as opposed to the increase in the population for a given community? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — The best answer that I can get is a significant volume, and it depends on the 
process, and until you’ve chosen that, it is really difficult to be precise. But I’ll undertake to give some 
orders of magnitude to the member in the next two days or three days. I don’t know how difficult that 
will be; whether it’s 1,000 gallons a day, or a million gallons a day — you know, those kind of nice 
round numbers that we are talking about. I’m told it’s critical, or quite important to the process. It 
depends on which process as to how much. It’s a fair amount of water; but some figures are in barrels 
and some are in cubic metres, so we just aren’t sure of the numbers. So I’ll give that to you. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I understand Underwood McLellan is doing a feasibility study of the towns in west 
central Saskatchewan. That includes: Biggar, North Battleford, Unity, Wilkie, Macklin, and Kindersley. 
I don’t think it included Lloydminster. Obviously, they have to assess (that is one of things as I 
understand it in talking to the people in the various towns who are looking at this) the question of water. 
 
I wonder if those communities could have some kind of indication as to the amount of water that is 
needed and whether or not they are really viable in this whole operation. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — As I say, we are trying to get an assessment of what is there. Obviously, we 
know a fair amount to begin with. That is the reason for that study. No one has finally decided on what 
the process will be or what the size will be. That obviously has a big impact in terms of how much water 
is needed. It is difficult to be precise at this point in time. 
 
I will do my best to get some orders of magnitude in terms of water vis-à-vis one process or another and 
vis-à-vis different sizes to the member. We (we not being necessarily the department but the consortium) 
are at too early a stage to say, “It’s going to take 1.37 million gallons of water a day.” Or that sort of 
thing. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The question arising out of that is that Underwood McLellan is doing that study, as 
I understand it, for Petro-Can. Has the Government of Saskatchewan commissioned any studies of a 
similar nature? What is the nature of your studies with regard to the whole program? In other words, 
what is the area of the proposal which you have specifically delegated to either your department or 
SaskOil? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I believe (in fact I’m sure) that SaskOil is involved in that study. We have 
an informal committee of the department, SaskOil, the Department of Finance, and CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), which will 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2711 

attempt to co-ordinate what is going on there. 
 
I could be more precise in my answer to the member’s question with respect to those studies when 
SaskOil comes before the Crown corporations committee. I would have the people there who are 
directly involved with them, if that would be okay. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, let me go back to the water. What process are you looking at? For 
1,000 gallons a day to one million gallons a day, what type of process is your department looking at? 
Surely you must have a figure a little closer on this. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I want to be precise. The department isn’t looking at any process. The 
consortium is looking at the processes. Presumably when they have decided on which process or 
processes they are going to use, they will approach the government with them and we will take a look at 
them. There is no point in us duplicating their study. 
 
The two basic processes you can go to, as I understand it, is a carbon extraction process, where you take 
out the stuff that is too heavy (that’s a great oversimplification; you can see why I’m not an engineer), or 
a hydrogen addition process. Probably using natural gas you would add the hydrogen which would make 
the oil lighter. 
 
Again, I think the process most commonly in use is the carbon extraction process. The frontier 
technology, if you like, (to the extent there is some) is the hydrogen addition process. The most 
enthusiastic people I meet and talk to are the hydrogen addition people these days. The 1,000 to one 
million gallons a day was not a real figure. I said I’d get the number for you. We don’t have anything 
precise enough to give you. I’ll undertake to get that for you in the next couple of days. We don’t have it 
with us. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — At what stage, Mr. Minister, is the technology for this upgrader? I’ve heard 
comments that a fair amount of R&D (research and development) is presently being done in California 
with regard to the upgrader process. Is the technology in place now? Is there more work that has to be 
done on it? What kind of a target are you looking at for that question? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — The quick answer to that is we believe the technology is in place, but it has 
always been applied on a smaller scale. The technical people, I am advised, are confident they can apply 
it to a larger scale and it will work. That is the frontier part of it, if you like — taking it from a small 
scale operation to a larger one. They are reasonably confident that it can be applied. There will be a fair 
amount of designing, etc., in terms of getting to the larger plant, but not a new process per se. the short 
answer is that we believe the technology is in place, and it needs to be adapted. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, what communications have you received from the towns of, for 
example, Kindersley, Luseland, Unity, North Battleford? What communications has your department 
had with them? What requests have you had from those towns in regard to this upgrader plant? We are 
talking about a $1 billion project — 400 jobs, 1,500 people for construction. They must be concerned 
about it. I am just wondering what communication you have had with these different towns? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I didn’t want to get into the discussion a long time ago about location, 
but I keep getting asked the question. As a result of that, I have one or two letters. I had a question from 
the member for Regina Victoria, which the members 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2712 

may have noticed. I haven’t seen it yet, but yesterday one of my staff showed me a handful of letters ( I 
would guess a dozen) which came in the first of the week, Monday or Tuesday. I happened to be in 
Biggar on Monday, and the mayor happened to catch me and said, “Gee what about this upgrader?” I 
received a letter from him; I am sure it’s about the upgrader. I don’t know all the communities that have 
written to me. There have been at least one dozen communities which have expressed an interest either 
by letter or in some other way. There could be more than that, because I have not seen today’s mail. 
They are busy writing in. 
 
I am responding to these letters saying the study is under way. I am forwarding a copy of their letters, 
where it is appropriate, to the consortium, saying, “Here are some people who are interested.” I let it go 
at that. We are a fair ways, I believe, from even having the consortium identify what they believe are the 
likely sites, much less saying which one they prefer or asking us whether or not we have an opinion. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, one or two other quick questions on that. Approximately what time 
(with the communication you have had with the consortium) are you away from making that decision on 
location? And in regard to my other question, Mr. Minister, I believe people in the west central area are 
concerned about the location, because they are sitting there where all the oil is. I can see where mayors 
and R.M.s would all be quite concerned about a plant being built in Regina, when the oil is there. By 
your own admission, the economical place to put it would be somewhere in that west central area. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I will answer your second question first. I didn’t say it was the most 
economical area. I don’t know that. Obviously, the studies, etc., have to be done on water, people, feed 
stock and size before someone can say that. I said by the conventional wisdom, it will be in the 
Northwest. I think the two members sitting together over there and I have a small affinity for 
northwestern Saskatchewan. 
 
I think we just have to wait for those studies to come in, probably some time this fall. I have difficulty 
being precise. If we’re really lucky it could be the end of August and if we’re unlucky it could be 
January of ’82. I don’t know, but the fall is the best guess I can give you. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — There is another area where I would like some clarification, Mr. Minister. Several 
members from that side of the Assembly have indicated that they are opposed to the export by producers 
in Canada (north Saskatchewan) of natural gas to the United States. Are you opposed to the export of 
any natural gas to the United States? Obviously there are benefits from it with regard to balance of 
payments, with regard to a fairly good supply of natural gas in this country and an opportunity to open 
up further exploration of natural gas. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — As a matter of policy, we don’t export gas out of Saskatchewan so we don’t 
have a direct concern (we have some very major indirect concerns). Our basic policy as a province has 
been that there should not be exports to the United States unless we were satisfied with respect to 
security of supply for Canada. We basically are in agreement with the process the National Energy 
Board goes through — not always, but in general terms. So in general terms I think our position would 
be that the National Energy Board’s decisions with respect to the export of natural gas are generally 
acceptable to us. 
 
I just want to make one other comment on the upgrader, which I forgot to make when I 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2713 

was on my feet before. I think one of the things we have to keep in mind is that for every dollar invested 
in an upgrader we’re likely to have three or four dollars invested in terms of recovery, which is going to 
be a lot more manpower-intensive and spread out, so we shouldn’t neglect the spinoff effects of that 
upgrader as well, which are going to have a very wide and broad application in northwestern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I was amused by your answer to the last question as it pertained to 
natural gas exports to the United States. If I understand your answer correctly, it was roughly, “Well, we 
really don’t approve of it, because it’s in Alberta.” Did I understand you correctly? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — No, what I said was that our position on the export of natural gas is that we 
should not export natural gas from Canada until we are satisfied that our short-term and reasonable 
long-term requirements are met, and that we’re basically satisfied with the process that the National 
Energy Board goes through and therefore we have no objections to the removal permits from Canada 
that they have agreed to. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Taking that analogy a step further (certainly nobody would ever dispute the 
infinite wisdom of the National energy Board — heaven forbid!), the province of Saskatchewan exports 
60 per cent of its crude oil t the United States. Certainly I don’t think we would be bringing in oil from 
Venezuela or Mexico or Saudi Arabia or wherever else Pierre Elliott can line, if we were totally 
self-sufficient. Obviously, we are not. So, consequently, by what perverse logic can you rationalize that 
you can go along with the National Energy Board and the restrictions that it puts on natural gas exports 
to the United States when, in fact, you’re doing exactly what the National Energy Board disapproves of 
as far as the province of Alberta is concerned? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, all exports of crude oil from Saskatchewan to the United States are 
approved by the National Energy Board as well. We’ve never made it a condition, nor have we argued, 
that our oil should necessarily be exported to the U.S. It’s a fact because of the way the oil industry was 
established that our oil found its market in the Midwest, and eastern Canada obtained oil from offshore 
because that’s the way the logistics worked out. We’d be more than happy to market all of our oil in 
Canada if the market were there for it and, presumably, if we had the same fiscal arrangements we have 
with respect to exported oil. The reason we export our oil is because that’s where the market is for that 
particular type of crude oil that we have — the heavy oil and the medium-gravity sour crude from 
southwestern Saskatchewan. It has gown up that way. The refineries are there to process it, etc. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — So in other words you are in effect saying, “We’ll sell to whoever will pay us 
for it. We don’t care who it is, we’ll sell it to whoever will accept it.” All right. Fair enough. I don’t 
argue with that. But then how can you go along with the National Energy Board and its position to 
Alberta with regard to natural gas? Because the National Energy Board, despite its infinite wisdom, has 
had a nasty habit in the past two to three years of just socking it to anything in western Canada. So, 
because it doesn’t affect you, and because it’s inhibiting Alberta, and because — as far as the people 
across the way are concerned — it’s anti-American, which has always delighted most of you over there, 
you agree with the National Energy Board. But then when we get back into Saskatchewan, of course, the 
answer is, “Well the market place has dictated that we are going to send our sour crude down to 
Minneapolis to be refined for use in the midwestern states.” 
 
Is it fair to assess your position, Mr. Minister, as something that we have become 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2714 

accustomed to in this province, political expediency? It is politically expedient to ship our crude to the 
United States under the auspices of the national energy board right now because it’s convenient. But, as 
I indicated earlier, it’s not all right to agree with the national energy board because it’s dealing with 
Alberta, and because in some way you are interfering with a Conservation government. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — I’ve never been accused of being politically expedient before. Well, I think 
the circumstances are somewhat different in the sense that we are both importing and exporting oil. I 
guess from the Canadian point of view, whether we sell 40,000 barrels a day at $40 to the U.S. and buy 
40,000 barrels a day from Venezuela, the next effect is nil in terms of the balance of payments and in 
terms of what happens to the producers. With respect to natural gas it’s different, because it’s a question 
of our exporting it. The alternative, of course, is to shut in the fields that are now marketing to the U.S. 
and wait until a Canadian market develops. That’s the other alternative that we, as a province, have open 
to us. We have not taken the position as a province that we insist on that export market being available. 
In other words, we will be agreeable to marketing all of that oil in Canada if the market is there and the 
national energy board can find it for us, etc. we can work our the attendant fiscal regimes in light of the 
agreements that we now have with them. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — I think what I find the most difficult to rationalize out of this particular situation 
is that you find it very acceptable for the national energy board to take the position with Alberta, and 
you find it easy to go along with them. You are shipping the oil to the United States. I have no quarrel 
with your sending oil to the United States, certainly not, nor do I have any quarrel with Alberta’s 
shipping natural gas. Down the road isn’t there something a bit fearsome in the attitude of the national 
energy board? The National Energy Board’s function in the past two to three years (maybe longer than 
that) has been to put the shaft to the province of Alberta and to be an impediment to the development of 
the oil industry in Alberta. Because you are not big enough right now and your oil is already going there, 
the national Energy Board hasn’t interfered with you for precisely the reasons which you have outlined, 
there is no market for your oil in Canada. There are, apparently, no plants which can receive it. In other 
words, it is a great deal simpler to ship that sour crude to Minneapolis and allow it to be processed. 
 
Well, I want to ask the minister if he is not just a little bit concerned with the overall control that the 
National Energy Board has of western resources. I want to ask the minister how long he and his 
department are going to take the passive position that it is between the National Energy Board and 
Alberta and we are simply going along for the ride and we will come out on top. Well, we are going to 
come out with whoever comes on top. It is an untenable position. 
 
I want to ask the minister, has his department ever had discussions with the corresponding department in 
Alberta to explore the concept of a joint position against the National Energy Board? I think one has to 
be naïve as a newborn baby to suggest that the National Energy Board isn’t part and parcel of central 
Canada. The national Energy Board functions solely and exclusively for the benefit of central Canada 
and almost in diametric opposition to what is in the overall best interests of western Canada, particularly 
the resource producing provinces. If you haven’t had such discussions with the province of Alberta, I 
really wonder why, because it is our understanding that overtures have been extended by Alberta for 
some sort of an informal discussion. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2715 

I want to ask the minister if he has ever considered perhaps the ultimate weapon (and I say 
“considered”). That is, if things become so untenable with Pierre Elliott, have you ever considered the 
ultimate weapon, which is a total shutdown of our resource production, should that become necessary? I 
agree with the minister that there is something terribly out of balance when they don’t want to pay $20 a 
barrel or they grumble about $20 a barrel or $25 a barrel in central Canada. Then they send Pierre Elliott 
all over the Middle East trying to buy the stuff at $40 or whatever price he could buy it for from the 
Saudis, or the Mexicans, or the Venezuelans. 
 
So I guess I have given you several questions in there, but I guess the most important one is: have you 
ever considered the opposability of a total shutdown or something related to that? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, have we ever considered it? I guess when Alberta announced their 
cutbacks, obviously, we considered it in the sense that we thought about it. I, as an individual, have 
thought about that, but only thought about it. We have never done any studies and there has never been 
any formal consideration by the government of that as a policy. I can’t say nobody has ever thought it, if 
you know what I mean. No one has ever formally gone through it and considered it. 
 
With respect to Alberta, we have, from time to time, made joint or quasi-joint presentations on the level 
of the export tax on heavy oil, for example. We made a joint statement just before Christmas with the 
minister from Alberta and the minister from British Columbia on the national energy program. I think it 
is fair to say that my officials are in quite close contact with officials in Alberta concerning day-to-day 
activities in the oil industry, concerning their relationship with the federal government and the national 
energy program. 
 
I met with Mr. Leitch two or three days before he met with Mr. Lalonde. I spoke with him a day or two 
after he met with him. I think, where we have common interests, we tend to try and work our common 
positions. That doesn’t always happen, but I think the relationships have been reasonably good in the 
four or five months that I have been directly involved as Minister of Mineral Resources. 
 
We have some rough figures on the water thing here, if you’re interested. The answer I got is that the 
water requirements are roughly equal t the size of the plant. A 50,000 barrel per day plant would require 
about 50,000 barrels of water a day; a 100,000 barrel per day plant would require 100,000 a day. These 
are 35-gallon barrels — not the 45-gallon ones you have on the farm. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Minister, I would like to go back to the problems with the federal 
government right now, and the surprising inactivity on the part of your government. About eight or 10 
months ago, your government apparently thought Pierre Elliott was trustworthy enough to try to 
negotiate a constitutional package with him. You apparently thought that Pierre Elliott could be believed 
to the point that something could be hammered out. In fact, you believed that to the extent . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The Minister of the Environment says “never.” You believed it to the point that you 
became the western extension of the Liberal Party. Let me tell you that there are people who used to 
belong to the Liberal Party there who, I’m sure, recoil in horror wherever they are. 
 
You trusted Pierre Elliott enough to literally hop into bed with him. You would do 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2716 

anything that Pierre Elliott wanted you to do. The New Democratic Party was there and you were their 
willing and able lackey. What happened to the good old days when the NDP used to hate the Liberals? 
Whatever happened to those good old-fashioned days when the Liberals and the NDP used to have 
something to disagree about? 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is this: why was Pierre Elliott Trudeau so wonderful? You found out he was a 
shark; then you found out he was going to cut your throat in negotiations. You learned that less with 
Pierre Elliott; you learned that you couldn’t trust him in constitutional matters. You knew that his only 
interest was in central Canada. Then came perhaps the worst weapon he’s used on you yet — the 
National Energy Board. 
 
You’re content to sit back and trust that National Energy Board, which doesn’t have infinite wisdom. It 
has stupidity, because it’s ruined the oil industry. It has allowed the oil industry to vacate this country 
and to go south and to the Middle East. Goodness knows where it has gone. It has gone everywhere but 
Canada to look for oil. Under the guise of Canadianization it has allowed, encouraged and shoved 
Canadian companies across the 49th parallel and into Saudi Arabia — anywhere but Canada. 
 
Do you call that infinite wisdom? I think it’s stupidity. Yet a few moments ago you were saying, “Well, 
because the National Energy Board has said this, we go along with it. We’re sort of in agreement with 
it.” You couldn’t trust Pierre Elliott a few months ago and now you’re telling us you trust his biggest 
weapon against us — the National Energy Board. Would the minister agree that that’s a bit of a 
contradiction? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — First of all, I think the member has the National Energy Board and the 
national energy program a trifle mixed there. I certainly don’t always agree with the National Energy 
Board. In January of this year, it substantially increased the export tax on crude oil and effectively shut 
off the market for southwestern Saskatchewan. This is only one example of where we’ve had some 
difference s of opinion with the National Energy Board. However, with all its powers I don’t think that 
it, alone, is quite responsible for all the problems the member attributes to it; the Prime Minister may be, 
but not necessarily the National Energy Board. 
 
All I said with respect to natural gas was that in that particular circumstance, whether it was by luck or 
good management, they happened to arrive at a formula which we were in general agreement with. 
Now, it may be that in order circumstances we may not agree with them. They are the body that lays 
down the rules etc., and we didn’t have a lot to quarrel about, as a government, with respect to what they 
did. 
 
The member talked about the constitution and our attempt to work out some kind of accord with the 
federal government. I think we are continually urged by members opposite, with respect to the national 
energy program, to negotiate with the federal government to get this impasse resolved. I know now, 
having listed to the member opposite talking about the sharks down there slitting your throat, and all the 
problems you have with them, that he is going to have a great deal more patience with us an dour 
inability, at the preset time, to get a negotiated settlement with the federal government, because I now 
understand that he fully realizes the difficulties in dealing with Pierre Elliott Trudeau and the group of 
people he has gathered around him down there to advise him with respect to oil policy. So, I expect that 
we won’t have much more by the way of discussion on these estimates on this issue. We seem to have 
come to some common ground there. 



 
April 29, 1981 

 
2717 

The member referred to us as having become the western extension of the Liberal Party. Well, I don’t 
know about his constituency, but in mine there isn’t much left of the Liberal party to be an extension of. 
There’s not much point in our busily attacking Liberals when there aren’t any left. So we have directed 
our attention to another small group that we hope to do our best to reduce to the same size as the Liberal 
Party in the near future. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that we’re not likely to get finished today and . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — One more question. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — One more question? Okay, I would hate to not give you the opportunity to 
ask one more question. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Just a very short concise one. Would the minister agree that had the old policy 
which was offered to the oil producing provinces by the Clark government prevailed, we would not be in 
the situation we are presently in, in the western Canadian oil producing provinces? In other words, did 
the minister (and I already know the answer, because you did) agree with the policy of the Clark 
government as it related to oil production in western Canada? I already know that you did. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, one question — one answer. I agree with the member 
that had we had the Clark oil policy in place, we would have different circumstances in the oil industry 
in Saskatchewan today. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	NOTICE OF MOTION
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Royalty Taxation on Oil Wells
	Kamsack Refinery Report
	Problems of Kamsack
	Court Action Against SGI
	Proposed Changes in Apprenticeship Program
	MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS
	Eighteenth Annual Child Safety Week
	Saskatchewan Hog Assured Returns Program
	INTRODUCTION OF BILLS
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	GOVERNMENT ORDERS
	SECOND READINGS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	SECOND READINGS
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW
	MINERAL RESOURCES
	Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23
	Item 1

