






















































Hansard: March 30, 1981


1527 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session  

 Nineteenth Legislature 
 

Monday, March 30, 1981. 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
Mr. Chapman: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure today to introduce through you to 
the Assembly 27 grades 5 and 6 students from Torquay Public School. They are here today in the 
Speaker's gallery and are accompanied by their teacher, Ruby Steinke; chaperones, Richard Holzer, 
Myrna Manley; and their bus driver, Jerome Stepp. I want to welcome the students here. I hope they 
have an informative afternoon in the legislature, an enjoyable visit to Regina and a safe journey home. I 
will be joining you following the question period. I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with 
me in welcoming grades 5 and 6 from the Torquay Public School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Congratulations re Curling Championship 
 
Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to call the attention of the Assembly the fact that the Albert 
Leippi rink of Balgonie, over the weekend, won the Saskatchewan High School Boys' Curling 
Championship. Albert is from the Davin area, but most of the rink's home club is in the Kronau Curling 
Club, which I'm sure all hon. members are familiar with. It's becoming, l believe, the home of junior 
curling in the province of Saskatchewan. This small community, Mr. Speaker, has shown leadership, a 
tremendous amount of interest and excellent curling. I'm sure all hon. members will wish to join with me 
in congratulating the Albert Leippi rink of Balgonie. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Position on National Energy Program 
 

Mr. Andrew: — My question is to the Minister of Mineral Resources. Mr. Minister, on Saturday in the 
Saskatoon media there was a report of a statement you made at a meeting in Fairy Glen, Saskatchewan. 
The basis of that statement was that Saskatchewan has no plans to follow the province of Alberta in 
challenging the national energy program in court and, further, that your government will pursue the 
negotiation route and sees that as the manner of bringing about change rather than going through the 
courts. Does that fairly represent the position of the Government of Saskatchewan? If it does, how do 
you square that with the statement of the Attorney General last Monday in this Assembly? When he was 
asked if the province would join the Alberta court challenge to the supreme court, his answer was: I 
fully suspect that if it goes to the Supreme Court, the province of Saskatchewan will intervene on the 
side of Alberta and, further, that in all likelihood we will be standing with Alberta in this 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1528 

particular case. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cowley: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the hon. member that I spoke in Fairy Glen 
on Friday evening. I do not recall even discussing whether or not we would go to court, either in the 
course of the speech or in the question period afterward. Certainly I can't imagine why I would have said 
we wouldn't be going to court when I think in all likelihood we will be going to court. In any event, we 
expect to sue whatever legal avenues are open to us with respect to the national energy program and, to 
the best of my knowledge, I made no statements which even suggested that we would not be going to 
court, although I did say that we were going to attempt to negotiate changes with the federal 
government. I certainly didn't suggest (I do not believe anyway) that we were not going to follow the 
legal avenues as well. 
 
Mr. Andrew: — Supplementary to the minister, Mr. Speaker. Could you give the Assembly a definitive 
statement as to whether or not it is the intention of the Government of Saskatchewan to intervene on the 
side of Alberta in the pending supreme court case with regard to the Alberta case, and whether it is still 
the position of the Government of Saskatchewan to challenge the national energy program as it relates to 
taxation of both SPC and SaskOil. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cowley: — With respect to the Alberta court and the supreme court, I frankly don't know. I 
would take the advice of my colleague, the Attorney General, on that, and I believe he responded as best 
he could the other day by saying that in all likelihood we would intervene in the supreme court on the 
side of Alberta. With respect to the taxation of SaskOil and SPC, I expect there will be litigation in that 
area. We haven't reached any final decisions there and, again, I will be looking to my colleague, the 
Attorney General, and to whatever legal advice he can get us with respect to timing and the manner of 
intervening in a legal sense. 
 
Mr. Andrew: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you saying, Mr. Minister, that the Government 
of Saskatchewan has not yet decided whether or not to challenge the national energy program as it 
relates to SaskOil and as it relates to taxation on Sask Power Corporation — you haven't made that 
decision yet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cowley: — Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is that the government's policy will be announced 
in due course. I didn't say whether or not we had made any decisions; I simply said we hadn't made any 
announcements. 
 

Legislation on Conflict of Interest in Public Service 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, I note from press reports that 
legislation is going to be introduced in this Assembly pertaining to conflict of interest in the public 
service. If I may be permitted a comment, this is legislation which is long overdue. Mr. Premier, would 
you inform this Assembly whether this legislation will include Crown corporations and the employees of 
such? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have not seen the press reports. As far as I am aware, no 
legislation is proposed to be placed before this Assembly at this session dealing with conflict of interest 
in the public service. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question to the Premier. For the Premier's edification, I believe all 
news media are carrying the story that conflict of interest 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1529 

legislation for public servants, effective April 1, will be dealt with in this session. I assumed that bill 
would be dropped today. My question to you, or to whichever minister is involved in this, is: does it 
pertain to Crown corporation employees also? I suppose an additional question might be: who dropped 
the story? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I advise the hon. member that the question period is to deal with matters within 
the knowledge of the Government of Saskatchewan, and may I further advise him that with respect to 
who dropped the story, that is not within the knowledge of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — A supplementary question to the Minister of Finance. Since I understand the Minister 
of Finance is in some way related to this story, could he perhaps inform the Premier what is going on in 
the Premier's government with respect to conflict of interest legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I am no more aware of this story than the Premier has 
indicated he is. Certainly we have not indicated to the press or anyone else (I certainly have not) that 
there is going to be legislation dealing with conflict of interest in the public service. When I see the story 
I will be able to follow up on it, but up until now I have not seen it. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — A question to the Minister of Finance. Would the Minister of Finance inform this 
Assembly whether there is going to be a change in rules within existing legislation, and if so would he 
kindly expand on and inform this Assembly whether changes affecting Crown corporation employees 
will be included? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I am glad to inform the member that we are considering 
changing some of the criteria and the guidelines that apply to the public service with regard to conflict of 
interest. we will very soon be making an announcement of what the changes are, and I will be glad at 
that time to let the member know exactly what they're going to be. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — A question to the Minister of Finance. For about the fifth time, would somebody over 
there tell us whether Crown corporation employees are going to be included in these changes which, 
according to the report, go into effect April 1, which is tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — My regrets to the member that I didn't finish the answer to his question. If I 
had, I would have said that when we announce the new guidelines, it will then be indicated to what 
extent they will apply, to whom they will apply, and what they are going to be. Until I make that 
announcement and because I have to make sure all of the decisions are in order, I really cannot 
comment. 
 

Statement made by Dr. Diana Ralph re Nursing Home Staffing 
 
Mrs. Duncan: — My question is to the Minister of Social Services. A University of Regina 
psychologist, Dr. Diana Ralph, stated on an open-line program this morning that this government is 
more interested in using drugs as a means of controlling nursing home residents than providing adequate 
funding for adequate staffing. Mr. Minister, I feel that these are very, very serious charges. As Minister 
of Social Services, would you hold an immediate inquiry into these allegations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I didn't have the opportunity to listen to the program which the 
member for Maple Creek indicates. But I would just like to say that 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1530 

the medications which are given to patients or residents of a nursing home are given with some authority 
by the people who run the nursing homes. I think it would be improper for me at this time to comment 
on one individual home or another where drugs are given out and whether there is too much or too little. 
I think it is also unfortunate that the member for Maple Creek would make such a sweeping statement 
that would condemn all of the nursing homes in Saskatchewan. No, I will not go into a formal 
investigation of that policy. 
 
Mrs. Duncan: — You answered a lot of questions I didn't ask you, Mr. Minister. I was not condemning 
the nursing homes in Saskatchewan. Some very serious allegations were made this morning and I asked 
you if you would hold an inquiry into the charges. I think you are aware of what drugs a nursing home 
can have on hand and I don't think it covers mood modifying drugs. I don't think it covers much more 
than patent drugs. I am sure you are also aware that your attitude is rather flippant. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my attitude, I am afraid, is not flippant on this matter because 
it is a very important and critical matter. We do have a policy in the department that we review our 
policy toward nursing homes on a regular basis and, as we go along, we will be reviewing that part of it. 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Could you explain then your policy on this when there is an actual case of a nursing 
home being cut back by 4.5 employees although the number of patients remains the same and,. actually, 
the care for the level of patients increases? Some of them are evaluated at level 4 and they are actually 
level 6. So how can you justify cutting back staff when you have the same number of people in there and 
as their condition deteriorates they require more staff? Would you answer that for me please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure if the member for Indian Head-Wolseley is 
talking about the nursing home in his area, the one which we have had a discussion on in the past. 
Should he be, the cutbacks which have been made and the temporary staff brought into that nursing 
home have not affected to any extent the services that they are receiving, in fact, quite the contrary. The 
ratio of patients to staff, in that particular institutions, is higher than the provincial average. 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, what is happening is that the temporary staff 
is not being brought in to fill full-time positions when those employees are on sick leave. Therefore, 
anyway you look at it, if they are not brining in that employee on that floor, the care for those 
individuals must be decreasing. Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, in the ongoing policy of attempting to run a very efficient 
operation in our department, we review on an constant basis the number of staff who are involved in 
in-care and I must inform the member again that the ratio in that particular institution is higher than the 
average in the province. I would like to say at the same time that when you compare our policy and our 
nursing homes to other provinces and you look at the Alberta situation where the Edmonton Journal 
carried a complete condemnation of the nursing home care in Alberta, I think you will see that our 
policy and our nursing home care in Saskatchewan is second to one in the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Training for Volunteer Firefighters 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1531 

Mr. Taylor: — A question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, for some time the volunteer firefighters of this 
province have been approaching the Department of Labour for increased training in the field of 
volunteer firefighting in this province. I have here a letter signed by an E.C. Allin, the chairman of the 
volunteer training program of the Fire Chiefs' Association of Saskatchewan. That committee consists of 
fire chiefs of Biggar, Nipawin, Estevan, Lanigan, Broadview, and Saskatoon. They wrote to you about 
one month ago requesting a meeting with you to discuss their concerns because they have tried in past 
years to get extra help through the Department of Labour and have been turned down flat. My question 
to you, Mr. Premier is: what action have you taken to their letter and what recommendations have you 
made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that I asked my colleague, the Minister of Labour, who 
has the responsibility for dealing with this matter on behalf of the government to respond on behalf of 
the government to the letter. I will have acknowledged the letter and my colleague, the Minister of 
Labour, will undoubtedly be in touch with the group. I do not recall seeing the letter which he will have 
written to the group in reply. It may have crossed my desk; I do not recall seeing it. 
 
Mr. Taylor: — Supplementary question, Mr. Premier. Obviously this group feels certain frustrations in 
being stonewalled by the Minister of Labour. That is why they wanted to meet with you. Do you realize, 
Mr. Premier, that out there in Saskatchewan today these are volunteer people? They are having to deal 
with dangerous chemical spills, they are having to deal with new technologies in fire-fighting. They are 
requesting help in being better trained to do the job. I would just like to indicate to you, Mr. Premier, 
that I hold here three books from the province of Manitoba — three manuals. Are you aware that 
Manitoba, British Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario have fire-fighting colleges to which these volunteers 
can go to be better trained? Would you not agree, Mr. Premier, that there is certainly a need in this 
province today to improve the level of training of volunteer firefighters throughout the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly want to underline what the hon. member for Indian 
Head-Wolseley has said with respect to the important role which volunteer firefighters perform in our 
province in the many smaller communities which they serve. In virtually all of these smaller 
communities they are the sole fire-fighting force available in order to provide protection for the citizens. 
Yes, I agree that they perform a very valuable service and I further agree that their role becomes more 
difficult as new chemicals are brought into play, as new methods for fighting fires become available. I 
agree in general terms with him that steps should be taken to assist them to improve their training. 
whether or not such steps involve a college or other training facility, I cannot now comment on. I expect 
my colleague, the Minister of Labour, who as I say has responsibility for this service on behalf of the 
government, would be able to make a fuller response when he is available for response in the House. 
 

EMO Aid for Chemical Spills 
 
Mr. Katzman: — A question to the minister responsible for EMO (emergency measures organization). 
In the past short while there have been two railway derailments in the town of Dalmeny. The second one 
we had just a short while ago had cars that had fortunately just been emptied of chemicals that are very 
hazardous and dangerous. Could you inform this House what the EMO has available in situations like 
that to assist the local fire department who had to take their lives in their hands to be on standby for the 
chemicals that were involved in these trains? 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1532 

Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the provincial EMO is basically a co-ordinating agency. We do 
provide assistance in training people. We used to also provide funding to local EMOs. That has been the 
role of the provincial organization. I can inform the hon. member that at the present time the Department 
of Urban Affairs is reviewing the role of the EMO. We do have an internal study in progress, which is 
largely the result of problems that have been experienced with chemicals being transported throughout 
this country. 
 
I might also inform the hon. member that this week the officials at the national level are meeting in 
Ottawa, and a meeting of ministers responsible for emergency measures is being planned and convened 
by Mr. Pinard, the federal minister responsible. That meeting will be taking place in the early part of 
May; I have been invited and plan to attend, because there are some new areas which all of us need to 
examine. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Minister, you have not indicated if your department, or urban affairs, or whoever, 
is prepared to assist with these dangerous chemicals that are involved on the track. We have now had 
two accidents in one community. We are going to have more and more of them around this province. Is 
there no part of your government that can assist these people in handling dangerous chemicals, which 
could be spilled in an area? We could see another Mississauga. 
 
Hon. Mr. Smishek: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member may not be aware that the Department of the 
Environment is an agency which also has certain responsibilities. There is a toll-free number available at 
the Department of the Environment for consultation and advice. 
 
Urban affairs does not have any special staff available for the problems which might be experienced 
because of any particular spill. But we do have people available for consultation purposes, and we are 
the co-ordinating body on a provincial basis. 
 

Flood Damage Reduction Program 
 
Mr. Lane: — I would like to ask a question of the Minister of the Environment regarding the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Flood Damage Reduction Program. The townspeople of Lumsden are very 
concerned about your refusal to give guarantees against expropriation. I wonder if the minister would be 
prepared to obtain the consents of the Government of Canada to withhold further action on the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Flood Damage Reduction Program until such time as the communities affected 
have input into the government application of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, I think it would not be good judgment for the province to 
intervene, or to indicate in any way that the agreement should now be reversed, or the decisions reversed 
with respect to it. I think that in the developing of the program the needs of the communities in the 
Qu'Appelle Valley as well as those in the Souris Valley were considered. 
 
There are, in my judgment, no serious implications with respect to the construction of homes in 
Lumsden. It's a matter of desire on the part of people, and I can understand that. If they want to continue 
to build homes in the flood-plain area, surely people will understand (as a result of the history of 
problems in Lumsden) that to do so will only invite disaster to more homes, if homes are built on the 
flood plain. Therefore, I would suggests that the agreement, which was reached and has been formulated 
in terms of 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1533 

the Qu'Appelle agreement, should continue to be met. 
 
Mr. Lane: — A question to the minister. At the meeting last Tuesday, one of the officials from the 
Qu'Appelle Valley implementation commission indicated that the way to protect the town of Lumsden 
would be with a secondary dike. The cost of that was estimated to be $1.5 million by the officials at the 
meeting. They indicated, as well, that over $2 million had been set aside. Would the minister today be 
prepared to reconsider the basic freeze which has been imposed by the Government of Saskatchewan 
and the federal government, and reconsider its plans and seriously review the implications and 
practicality of the secondary diking system as proposed by officials at that meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, reconsideration has been given to this matter of second diking 
which the hon. member talks about. It has been established, and fairly adequately substantiated in areas 
throughout North America where they have attempted to overcome similar problems, that you can build 
the dikes higher. But all that happens is that in succeeding years, the waters seem to rise higher and 
higher and overcome the secondary diking system. Therefore, you have the same kinds of problems. 
That has been the experience in North America. It's a $2 million expense, thereabouts, to increase the 
diking. That doesn't necessarily guarantee that you're going to overcome the flooding problem. If the 
dikes are overcome by the water, then the same problems exist. If you had infill building and all of the 
flood plain had been covered with buildings, then you have the same problem even with the expenditure 
of funds on the increased secondary diking system. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Supplementary to the minister. One of the other reasons for the concern in the community 
and the area is the conflicting statements which they're getting either from the government officials or 
officials from Qu'Appelle Valley. The information which you have just given is completely at variance 
with the information given by officials at the meeting the other day. They indicated that the only real 
concern with the present diking system in Lumsden is the possibility of an ice jam. The likelihood of 
that in the broad valley is not very great and a secondary diking system is the answer to the problem of 
ice jams. So that indicates to me that someone's not talking to someone in your department because the 
information you have just given is totally at variance with your officials. Would you now be prepared to 
reconsider? 
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Speaker, my officials and I met with the people of Lumsden before the 
particular meeting to which the hon. member refers. I was at the meeting. The information which we 
gave to that meeting is the same information which I'm giving to the hon. member here. I'm not aware of 
what particular official may have been at the meeting. However, I detect from the comments of the hon. 
member that basically the same information was given there. True, he says the problem which they face 
is a jamming of ice or of debris in the river system at a flood peak, which can raise the water levels to 
such a point that they overcome the secondary diking system. It matters not why the water overcomes 
the secondary diking system. The fact is that if the water overcomes it and building has been going on in 
the ensuring years, the more damage will occur. I am saying to the hon. member, as I've said before, that 
if the people in Lumsden insist that they want to build on the flood plain, they can go ahead and build. 
But they build at their own risk of insuring their homes and their property. They can't build on a flood 
plain area without assuming that responsibility and that risk. 
 

Letter to Francis Fox re Bill 43 
 
Mr. Andrew: — Question to the Attorney General. On budget day, Mr. Attorney 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1534 

General, I asked you a question with regard to a letter which you had sent to the Hon. Francis Fox 
regarding the objections that you, as a representative of the attorneys general throughout Canada, had to 
the present Bill 43 (I believe it is) on freedom of information. At that time you indicated that you would 
be prepared to present, in the very near future, your concerns about that. To date that has not been done. 
 
When making calls to the office of Francis Fox we are told that he cannot release that information to 
either me or to any member of the parliamentary committee until he has the consent of the Attorney 
General of Saskatchewan. Would the Attorney General advise the Assembly when that consent, or the 
tabling of that document, might be forthcoming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to check my files. I think I've already consented, on 
my behalf and on behalf of the other attorneys general, to Mr. Fox's release of that letter if he so 
chooses. In fact, when I answered the question on budget day it was my belief that it was to be tabled 
that very day or perhaps the day before) in the House, which allowed me to say that I would table it 
here. I take the position that the moment it has been tabled by Mr. Fox, I would be pleased to table it 
here in the House or give it to the hon. member opposite, who has a special interest in this particular 
matter. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. minister, I move that a Bill to amend The 
Rural Municipality Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Local Improvements Act be now read a second time. 

 
Motion agreed to, Bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act 
 
Section 1 agreed. 
 
Section 2 
 
Mr. Lane: — I would just like to make a comment to the Attorney General. I wonder if he could have 
his officials give consideration to a circumstance which comes up fairly 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1535 

regularly, and that is where an individual may have one piece of property in his name. Of course, you 
are required to apply for letters probate in that regard because of provisions in The Land Titles Act, 
primarily. Would the Attorney General or his officials give consideration to allowing probate to be 
waived, either by a certification of the court or something, in those circumstances where the cost is 
really high for the amount of work which has to be done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I will undertake to raise that with my deputy and the officials. I 
will get back to the member by way of correspondence on the feasibility or desirability of this 
suggestion. 
 
Section 2 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 3 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Small Claims Enforcement Act 
 
Sections 1 to 6 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 3  
 An Act to amend The Trustee Act 

 
Sections 1 to 3 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 4 
 
Mr. Lane: — I just have a question to the Attorney General. Section 4(f) is a matter of concern. I raised 
this before Christmas and I was expecting a response from the Attorney General. The Trustee Act is 
designed to protect the public. Section 4(f) is a very, very blanket opening to The Trustee Act. Is it the 
intention of the government opposite to make public the list of any other bodies corporate that may be 
approved for the purposes of accepting moneys for deposit? I am asking the Attorney General to 
specifically advise what companies he has in mind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I don't believe we have any other companies in mind at the 
present time. If there are any, I will undertake to communicate this in writing to the hon. member. With 
respect to the first aspect of the question: if indeed in the future such companies do arise, is it our 
intention to make public or to publish it? The answer to that is yes. I will undertake to do that as well. 
 
Section 4 agreed. 
 
Section 5 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
 
Sections 1 to 6 inclusive agreed. 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1536 

Section 7 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 8 agreed on division. 
 
Section 9 agreed. 
 
Section 10 
 
Mr. Lane: — Just a question to the Attorney General before we come to section 11. Would the Attorney 
General kindly advise when the new fee schedule is to come into effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — I am not able to advise the hon. member on that. The new fee schedule has not 
yet been approved by the appropriate authorities, and I just don't have any idea as to when it might be 
approved. I'm not purposely trying to be vague; it may take several weeks for us to get it in order, so I'm 
just not able to advise him. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Will the Attorney General advise me as to what increase in revenue the government 
opposite expects from the new fee schedule? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Mr. Chairman, I'm simply not able to tell the hon. member for the obvious 
reason that the tariff has not yet been devised and has not yet received approval from anybody. 
Accordingly, the amount of the increase would be very speculative, if that. I would prefer if the question 
came up later on during session, if we're still in session. If we're not, I'll undertake to give the member a 
letter in writing outlining the differences and what it means once it has been confirmed. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Would you also then undertake to advise us as to what changes in the operation of the 
assurance fund are proposed by the basically new section 8, and whether there's going to be an increase 
on what in fact will be paid, should there be a default or whatever? 
 
Hon. Mr. Romanow: — Yes, I can do that. I've asked the officials to make a note of the commitment 
which I make. 
 
Section 10 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 11 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 
Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting the consequential Amendments resulting from the change in the 
name of the Department of Consumer Affairs to the Department of Consumer and Commercial 

Affairs 
 
Sections 1 to 13 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 14 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 15 to 54 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1537 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Highways Act 
 

Sections 1 to 3 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act to amend The Water Power Act (cont'd) 
 
Section 2 
 
Mr. Lane: — No, it's not agreed. I think the minister was going to supply us with some information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Chairman, I agreed last day to get the legal official from our department 
to come and to provide us with the information. We were operating under a situation the other day 
where we weren't fully conversant with the details of section 2. 
 
May I try to explain to the hon. member, with regard to the second part of the Bill, what it seeks to do. I 
understand that when a power dam is completed that under the provisions of The Water Power Act we 
now give the final operating licence for that power dam to operate. That licence establishes the initial 
rental rate for use of water for a 20-year period. They can go on for longer than that, but for 20 years at 
least. 
 
I understand further, Mr. Chairman, that the regulations under The Water Power Act provide that the 
rental rates may then be changed every 10-year period after the first 20-year period of the licence. We 
now, in the amendments that are before us, are seeking to change that provision of the regulations so that 
they would now permit us to review the water rate charges every five-year period, because of the 
problems associated with double-digit inflation, and so on, that the terms of 20 years and 10 years are 
simply too long. Therefore, it is the objective of the legislation to provide the authority for the 
regulations to be changed, in order that the water power rates may be changed within a lesser period of 
time. It is my understanding that none of the power dams which are now in existence or licensed within 
the province will be affected by this, simply because the terms which the renewal of the licence or the 
regulations now affect will not fall in the middle of a period of time when they have been authorized to 
make a certain payment. So there are no power dams, including those that are privately owned by 
Eldorado Nuclear or by the public corporation, Sask Power, that will be affected by this change. They do 
come in a period of time when the rates will be changed, at any rate, because of the regulations as they 
now apply. 
 
Mr. Lane: — So we obviously don't need the bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — We need the bill, Mr. Chairman, for the reason that if we don't make the 
change now, then we must go for another 10-year period. because of the costs associated with the 
economics of today, we feel that period of time should now be changed to a shorter period, in order for 
us to make amendments or increases in water power rates. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Except I think the minister will admit that the proposed amendments allow the cabinet to 
make changes in any of the rates basically at any time. You may be prepared to commit to the Assembly 
that you're not going to, but let me show you the 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1538 

principle that you have argued. You've just argued the very position of people who are opposed to 
maintenance of the Crow Rate which is that circumstances have changed and we have to make some 
changes as well. There are a lot of advantages to long-term agreements. One may not have had all the 
facts at the time of negotiating the price at the outset, but one thing about long-term agreements is that 
they generally tend to give stability to those involved, and that's often worth a price. 
 
What you're saying is that long-term agreements can be changed with this provision by the government, 
basically at any time. I'm also concerned, as well, with subclause 2. If, as the minister says, there is no 
particular problem and they won't be affected, then why do we need subclause 2? What is the concern in 
subclause 2 that the Crown must be exempt from any action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Chairman, let me go over it, so at least I can try to get it clear in my own 
mind as well as to convey, as I understand it, the purpose and the objective of the Bill in the various 
sections. 
 
The initial licence, which is granted at the time that the power dam is built, is for 20 years. Every 10 
years thereafter, the licence of water rates may be changed. It is true that we want to reduce that now 
from a 10-year period to a 5-year period. Therefore it may well be felt, as the hon. member points out, in 
the case of Eldorado or, in the case of Saskatchewan Power Corporation, may feel that it in fact has lost 
something in the sense that it will now be required to meet with the Department of the Environment and 
go through a conciliation process or an arbitration process for the setting of the new rates every 5-year 
period rather than every 10. 
 
However, we believe that because the term in which we are now bringing forward the legislation does 
not affect any licence in mid-course, all we are attempting to do is move them to that shorter 5-year 
period rather than 10. I get the hon. member's point. He is making a brief for the water power licences 
that have been issued — that the power company is now going to be faced with a rate change every 5 
years or the consideration of a rate change every 5 years rather than every 10. I don't understand your 
point. 
 
Mr. Lane: — My point is, as I said the other day, that I don't like anyone who signs an agreement and 
then decides after he has signed it that it's no longer good enough because circumstances have changed. 
As I indicated to you yesterday, if two parties have an agreement, it is quite within their legal right to sit 
down and renegotiate a new agreement. You can do that even if you have the most complex signed 
document you have every had. You can still sit down and change it if you agree to it. 
 
What you are telling me is that you're now shortening the time period under the existing agreements 
from 10 years to 5 years because of changing circumstances, the inflation spiral and everything else. But 
the fact is you did make an agreement. Now you're asking the legislature to come in and change an 
agreement between two parties that negotiated and hammered out an agreement. I have very, very severe 
reservations about that and it's not a practice to be followed. I am sure the hon. member would agree that 
it is not a practice that any government should be making as a matter of course, which this seems to be. 
 
Secondly, the government asked for the rather draconian powers to come in and change an agreement 
made between two willing parties. Then, because it is the government, it also asks for the power to say, 
'If we break that agreement by statute, we 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1539 

want to make sure after having broken it that no one can do anything to it.' That's the effect of clauses 1 
and 2 of section 2 of the Bill. And that is the practical effect of what you're doing. It goes far beyond 
rates; we go into rentals, royalties, fees, dues, charges, all of that. They can be rescinded, revoked, 
amended, changed by cabinet at any time. You don't have five-year terms. Then, if you should make a 
change by a regulation which is beyond the scope of this House for all practical purposes, you say, 'You 
can't touch us.' All I am saying to you is my principle isn't on the rates. I am assuming that the people 
who negotiated that at the time were trying to get the best deal they could an Eldorado Nuclear or 
whatever company was fighting for the best deal it could. 
 
But there's a principle here that an agreement is an agreement. Now, if we're to stand up and agree with 
this, and the opponents of the Crow Rate are saying, 'Oh, well, it's changing circumstances in that 
agreement and it should be changed at will,' the federal government is going to have a precedent. If 
Eldorado Nuclear takes this back to Ottawa and says, 'Well the provincial government just changed the 
agreement there,' and the federal government then is holding up the Crow Rate and saying, 'You guys 
changed it for Eldorado Nuclear just with the passage of legislation, so why can't we do it for the Crow 
Rate?' Let's fact it, that's not beyond the scope of the political arena in Canada. 
 
We are setting a dangerous precedent here and I just can't believe the hon. members opposite are in 
support of it. We have been through the reasons and the fact is the Bill does allow the government to 
change agreements by cabinet order, and once the agreement is changed by cabinet they can't take action 
against the Crown. The Crown is exempt. If the dog gone federal government gets hold of this principle 
— if Eldorado Nuclear feeds it to them — it can go wandering around saying, 'Oh yes, you guys break 
agreements.' I suggest it is the principle which I am arguing. I don't know what the rates are; I don't 
know whether they are fair or unfair. I am just assuming that the parties at the time negotiated in good 
faith and hammered out an agreement. All I am talking about is the principle of any government coming 
to an Assembly and asking for the power to change any agreement that it makes, and having taken that 
power, asking the Assembly, 'Make sure we can't be sued by anyone, so give us the exemption from any 
action.' 
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — Mr. Chairman, perhaps our error, made the other day, is following us in the 
debate today — that is, I was using the term which the hon. member is now using (and we were both 
using last day) and that is "agreement." We were talking about an agreement. The hon. member puts a 
fair bit of emphasis on an agreement which he seems to think was negotiated at the time the licence was 
issued. We have authority in the Act to issue a licence. That is not a matter of an agreement; that is not a 
matter of negotiation; it is a matter of a decision by the Crown to issue a licence with certain powers and 
certain conditions. 
 
Now, what we are proposing to do is amend that legislation, change that power or that right, or that 
authority and, yes, I will go with the hon. member's saying, "I think it does." It changes the principle that 
was set out at the beginning of the legislation which says, "You will have the first 20 years at a certain 
rate and every 10 years thereafter." What we are saying now is that we want to amend the legislation, the 
authority granted by the powers of the legislation, that rather than it being every 10 years it would be 
every 5 years. The proposition is to reduce that period of time. But it is being done under the provisions 
of a licence, and while that does change the principle that it will be done for a 5-year period rather than a 
10-year period and, therefore, the company may feel aggrieved that it now is going to be required to go 
before an arbitration board, or before 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1540 

a hearing board on the water power rates, it may feel sufficiently aggrieved that it wished to bring an 
action against the government. I think that is the point the hon. member makes. 
 
I suggest to you, in my judgment at least, that it doesn't follow the principle of the Crow Rate, and that 
debate is better left where it is. I do think, however, with reference to the amendments which were 
proposed to the House, they allow the department to establish new rates in a shorter period of time than 
the legislation now calls for. 
 
Mr. Lane: — Would the minister be prepared to admit to me that when a licence is granted it has 
certain terms and conditions on it and those terms and conditions are usually negotiated back and forth. 
Is that not correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — I understand that id does not appear on the licence per se, but the licence 
adopts the provisions of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Lane: — And that is negotiated between the parties? You lay it out and if the company isn't 
prepared to take it on those terms it will sit down with your officials and say, "All right, what can we 
work with here to satisfy the basic requirements?" There will be adjustments back and forth. You're 
doing it . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — I think we're putting the emphasis on the terminology. There wouldn’t be a 
negotiation. If the dam were constructed and they wanted a licence, they would meet the obligations of 
the legislation. There wouldn't be any negotiation with the company at that point. If they wanted the 
licence they would agree to a review at the end of the first 20-year period, and a subsequent review 
every 10 years thereafter. At this point what we're doing is changing that principle. I agree with the hon. 
member. We are changing the principle. 
 
Mr. Lane: —Are you prepared to take away the exemption of the Crown which prohibits any injured 
party from taking action? Now, Saskatchewan was one of the first to allow the Crown to be sued in 
court, and now we're turning around and taking away any right to civil action. 
 
I am wondering if the minister would be prepared to withdraw subclause 1.2 because of another 
dangerous precedent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — I am informed, Mr. Chairman, that there isn't a great deal of significance with 
respect to that. It might well be that we could take it out because, as I indicated, the negotiations on the 
10-year time period are either current or will be in the next year and, therefore, the companies involved 
would not be affected, at least in their present term of licence. But when the new licences are issued, 
then the shorter term will be granted. 
 
I would suggest that for the case of caution, and for the case of preventing any actions from being 
undertaken, that the words there, which provide for the Crown to be covered with respect to the changes 
here, should remain. 
 
Mr. Lane: — You just indicated that you don't see any need for it. The government opposite, as I say, 
was one of the first to make sure that the Crown was subject to the courts the same as any citizen. Now, 
you're saying that in a case where you don't expect any problem at all, you're taking the power to exempt 
the Crown and any of its officials from action. Then here you say you don't need it. Will you not at least 
be prepared to 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1541 

admit that subclause 1.2 of clause 2 of the bill should be withdrawn? 
 
I'm prepared to make a motion right now. If you're not concerned about it you should. . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Bowerman: — I'm advised by the official, Mr. Chairman. I was prepared to take that advice 
that the reason that this is provided for is that it's a matter of abundant caution. There is no great 
significance. I don't think that any alarm is going to come or any harm is going to come by way of 
change in the legislation, but the recommendation of the officials, the legal counsel, is that the 
provisions should be there. They were written in as a matter of caution for the government in this case. I 
would suggest that they remain. 
 
Section 2 agreed on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 23 
 
Pepper Mostoway Poniatowski 
Smishek Banda Johnson 
Bowerman Vickar Lingenfelter 
Baker Hammersmith White 
Skoberg Feschuk Solomon 
McArthur Byers Chapman 
Gross Cody Miner 
MacMurchy Koskie  
 

NAYS — 14 
 
Berntson Taylor Katzman 
Thatcher Rousseau Garner 
Birkbeck Hardy Andrew 
Duncan Pickering McLeod 
Lane Muirhead  
 
Section 3 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 38—An Act to amend The Credit Union Act 
 
Sections 1 to 9 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 10 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 11 agreed. 
 
Section 12 as amended agreed. 
 
Sections 13 to 18 inclusive agreed. 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1542 

The committee agreed on division to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 25—An Act to amend The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act 
 
Section 1 agreed on division. 
 
Sections 2 to 5 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Speaker, this afternoon in question period I directed a question, which ultimately 
ended up with the Minister of Finance, pertaining to government policy on conflict of interest in the 
Public Service Commission. Without going into the substance of the question. Mr. Speaker, I did ask the 
minister certain questions about changes within that framework of existing legislation. I questioned the 
minister about press reports. I believe the minister answered and the Hansard record will show that the 
minister disavowed any knowledge of the subject matter which I was referring to as far as the press 
reports are concerned. Mr. Speaker, since that time a press release has come into my hands dated March 
30, 1981, which I understand was released from the minister's office at 10 o'clock this morning. Mr. 
Speaker, I am shocked that the minister, either deliberately or otherwise chose to mislead this Assembly. 
I deem it as a matter of very serious privilege when a minister either deliberately or otherwise has misled 
the Assembly, and I place it in your hands. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I thank the member for having brought the matter of privilege to my attention. I have 
not previously been advised of this matter of privilege and therefore would like to take some time to 
consider it, since it's a matter of high concern when the matter of privilege is raised in this House. I will 
study the matter and report back to the House at a later time with regard to this privilege. 
 
Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, can I comment on this as a point of privilege on my part? 
 
Mr. Speaker: — If in fact the member is raising a point of order with regard to what has gone on in the 
Chamber at this time, it would be legitimate. But I think that I have to study the point of privilege and 
report back to the House at a later time. There's no opportunity for members to get into any kind of a 
debate on the question of privilege because I haven't determined whether in fact there is a question of 
privilege. 
 
Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker. I think the hon. member, the Minister Finance, wished to rise on a 
point of personal privilege as well, to respond to this issue. It may be important that you, Mr. Speaker, 
and the House . . .  In fact, here is his point of personal privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The Minister of Finance may rise one a new point of privilege, if in fact he feels he 
has a point of privilege. The Minister of Finance may rise to take advantage of the opportunity that's 
open to any member of this House under Beauchesne's 322, by which a member may rise to correct the 
record of the House, and the members of the 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1543 

House must accept the member's word. I'm adhering very closely to citation 322 of Beauchesne's. I'll 
just read it in part so the members will be familiar with it: 
 

It has been formally ruled by Speakers that a statement by a Member respecting himself and 
particularly within his own knowledge must be accepted . . .  

 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, if I may, I would like to do just as you have indicated in your 
latter comments. During question period there was a question asked, as the member for Thunder Creek 
indicated, concerning an indication through a press release that there was to be conflict of interest 
guidelines released, not legislation. I indicated to the member that I was not aware that release had been 
issued. I was not of the understanding that it was to be issued and so, therefore, I was not aware of it. I 
did not disavow knowledge of the fact that there were to be conflict of interest regulations or guidelines. 
I indicated that there would be and it was my intention to table them in the House tomorrow, which I 
still intend to do. If by not knowing that the press release had been issued a day earlier than what I 
thought it might be, I indicated to the House something that should have been otherwise indicated, then I 
regret that. But I will do as I have planned, which is to table the new guideline regulations in the House 
tomorrow. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Resolutions 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, as is usually the case when the House sits beyond the period 
of time which we are approaching, and that is April 1, we have to have an interim supply Bill. I want to 
move the following resolution: 
 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding $184,525,140, being approximately one-twelfth of the amount of 
each of the sums to be voted as set forth in the estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1982, 
that were laid before the Assembly at the present session, be granted to Her Majesty on account for 
the 12 months ending March 31, 1982. 

 
Resolution agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I would move the following motion (for the members' 
information there are four such motions that have to be moved), as follows: 
 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1982, the sum of $184,525,140, 
be granted out of the consolidated fund. 

 
Resolution agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, l would move now the following motion: 
 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding $77,175,500, being approximately one-twelfth of the amount of 
each of the sums to be voted as set forth in the estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1982, 
that were laid before the Assembly at the present session, be granted to Her Majesty on account for 
the 12 months ending March 31, 1982. 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1544 

This is dealing with the heritage fund. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Chairman, I would just like to ask the minister, for my clarification: you are 
talking about the dividend as being $550 million; one-twelfth doesn't work out to $77 million. That 
would represent around $900 million. I would like clarification of that, please. 
 
Do you want me to ask that question over again? The $77 million that the minister has just referred to — 
I'd like a clarification of it. If it is one-twelfth of the expenditures for the heritage fund, that doesn't make 
sense. He mentioned the dividend as $550 million; one-twelfth of that is certainly not $77 million. 
Would you please explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — May I see the resolution so l can show it to my deputy? I think I have it. It's 
the total amount to be appropriated which is both the budgetary and the non-budgetary expenditures. 
There are certain advances that are made, as well as the direct expenditures that are made, and that will 
work out to one-twelfth as you see here. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Well, it may to you but it doesn't to me. I'd like to know where you get the figures 
that you are using for non-budgetary and budgetary? The first reply you gave me was from the dividend 
to the consolidated fund from the heritage fund. which is $550 million. Now, where is the rest of it? I'll 
wait for your answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member, we now have the breakdown. It 
includes the budgetary expenditures, which include not only the dividend but other expenditures which 
are made for provincial development, energy security division grant to Saskatchewan. It all comes out to 
$697,206,000. It also includes non-budgetary transactions such as loans, advances and investments, 
which amount to $238,500,000, for a total of $935,706,000 so the initial interim supply (one-twelfth) is 
$77,957,500. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Would you mind telling me where you get the figures of the non-budgetary out of the 
budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — In the estimates book. If the member wants to take some time afterward, he 
will find it on page 128. It includes Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation, $50 million; 
energy security division to SaskOil, $62 million. The list is there and you can check it for yourself. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — I thank the minister for that information. My only question is: why would that be 
included in the one-twelfth calculation? Surely, you are not borrowing one-twelfth of those amounts of 
money to put, as it would work out, about $4 million into the Saskatchewan Mining Development 
Corporation. Why wouldn't you be doing that at the time you need it? Why would you be doing it on the 
basis of one-twelfth? I don't understand that. l can understand your budgetary, but not the non-budgetary 
part. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The money is not advanced in a lump sum at the particular time It's 
advanced over a period of time. I assume it is needed because the operations which are listed there are 
ongoing and continuing. They have certain things which they will be doing at the beginning of the new 
fiscal year for which we are providing money out of resource revenues through the heritage fund for this 
new fiscal year. Therefore, 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1545 

we have to provide them with the funds to be able to do that for this next month. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Chairman, we won't hold it up any longer. We will pursue the matter in 
estimates. My only comment would be this: you don't disburse those amounts on the basis of one-twelfth 
amounts; I presume you disburse them on the basis of lump sum amounts as required. I will pursue it 
further in the finance estimates. 
 
Resolution agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — This is related to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund as well, Mr. Chairman. I 
move the following: 
 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1982. the sum of $77,175,500 be 
granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 

 
Resolution agreed to. 
 
The said resolutions were reported, and by leave of the Assembly read twice and agreed to. 
 

INTERIM SUPPLY 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 51 — An Act for the Granting to Her Majesty Certain Sums of Money for the Public 
Service for the Fiscal Year Ending March 31, 1982, be now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and Bill read a first, second and third time. 
 

MOTION 
 

Printing Error in Bill 39 
 
Hon. Mr. MacMurchy: — Mr. Speaker. on government orders you will note that Bill No. 39 — An Act 
to amend The Local Improvements Act be now read a second time. Bill No. 39 is not, in fact, The Local 
Improvements Act, but rather is The Department of Intergovernmental Affairs Act. Due to a typing 
error, I think a motion is in order to declare all of the proceedings with respect to that particular Bill null 
and void. Mr. Speaker, some of the hon. members here will recall we got into this situation with The 
Snowmobile Act; we thought we had passed the Act and we had not. I think in order to deal with any 
confusion, I would move, seconded by the hon. member for Shellbrook: 
 

That all of the proceedings on Bill No. 39 
An Act to amend The Local Improvements Act taken this day, Monday, March 30, 1981, be 
declared null and void. 

 
The Speaker: — We have a motion moved by the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood, seconded by 
the member for Shellbrook. I may say briefly, in consequence 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1546 

of this, that the proper item will appear in the blues tomorrow and can be dealt with appropriately at that 
time with regard to Bill No. 39. I gather the Bill number is right. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOWS 
 

FINANCE 
 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 11 
 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I would ask if the minister would like to introduce his officials and make a 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, I certainly would, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. I will introduce the 
officials who are immediately here. As the other ones come up, if necessary, I will introduce them. The 
deputy minister of finance is Rob Douglas on my right. Mike Costello, assistant deputy minister of 
finance, is behind me. Morley Meiklejohn, executive director of investments and finance, is over here. 
Don Rowlatt, director of tax and fiscal policy, is down over here. Keith Macrill, director of the 
administration branch. is behind Mr. Douglas. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — There are a lot more behind you. You have lots of support, haven't you? 
 
Mr. Chairman, I am going to start out with a few remarks which will take you back a few days to 
statements you made in this House. I am just going to touch on them. Then I am going to turn it over to 
some of the other members who have many questions to ask. Then I will be coming back with questions 
of my own. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, some time ago, in fact on March 13 you made some remarks in this Assembly 
that I would like to either correct, or ask you to correct me, whatever the case might be. You were 
actually closing debate on the budget at the time and replying to some of my comments which I had 
made in my reply. 
 
You indicated that potash in 1975 was selling for $67.57 a ton and today was selling for $128.50 a ton. I 
don't know whether you have ever read this little manual here which was put out by your government. It 
indicates in that, that in fact your potash was selling for $75 a ton in 1975. So where you get your 
figures, I don't know. Then I checked the annual report of the potash corporation, and it indicates to me 
that it was in fact last year selling for somewhere around $68 a ton by taking the dollar volume of sales 
and dividing by the number of tons that you delivered. So I would like you to tell me how you arrive at 
your figures and why I am wrong and you seem to think you are right. 
 
You further went on to indicate in your speech you made that day that Saskatchewan ranks number one 
in Canada in per capita spending of health programs. Well, according to my calculations, that's not the 
case. I believe you mentioned education as well. In your own words, "Education in Saskatchewan ranks 
first among all the 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1547 

provinces." By my calculations, looking at your expenditures, you rank eighth. Of course, I'm using last 
year's figures. Those are the main ones I would like you to resolve and reply to. I will then carry on with 
some other questions. But, I'll start with that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, there may be confusion here because of different units. I 
have a copy of the remarks I made here the other day. I stand by my figures. There has, indeed, been an 
increase in the average price per ton of potassium oxide, which rose by 90 per cent during the period 
about which we are talking, from $67.57 to $ 128.50. That is not inaccurate. 
 
You mentioned something about the per capita education expenditures we are making. I also have those 
figures. That, indeed, is the case, as well as it is the case with the health expenditures. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Minister, perhaps all of your support staff and helpers with you have computers. 
A figure of $312,170,000 divided by 4.6 million tons, and please don't give me that new metric system 
. . .  I know you did that with your new report. Even if I go into that, you will find that you're way off on 
your prices. I can talk about that. You'll find that it's $80 some per tonne — and that's tonne. So, that's 
higher, and I know you're going to want to discuss that. But, since you know so little about the potash 
corporation, I thought I had better ask someone who knows something about it. 
 
Now, I'm not going to leave it on the record as that because you have $312 million in sales. You have 
4.6 million short tons sold. That works out to $67.86. Now, how do you arrive at your figures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm not sure how the member arrives at his price. It may be that we are 
talking about two different things. I'm talking about potassium oxide tons. It's there. We can tell you the 
price that was paid, or the price that potash sold for during the periods of time which we are discussing. 
The price was, as I indicated, $67.57 per potassium oxide ton. It was $128.50 at the time afterward when 
the member referred to what the final price was at $128.50 a potassium oxide ton. I can't get into the 
report of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, and I'm sure you will take it upon yourself to do that 
when the Crown corporations committee meets and will, no doubt, pursue it. But let me just take a look 
at the potash issue here. Let me read something. 
 

Production and prices for potash are normally expressed in their potassium oxide equivalent. That's 
the way they are discussed. The 1975 average price was $67.50 per potassium oxide ton, and the 
1980 average price was $ 128.50 per potassium oxide ton. 

 
I could add, if you want to convert that into potassium chloride tons, the l975 price on that kind of 
measurement, or quantity, was $41.22 per potassium chloride ton, and it was $78.39 per potassium 
chloride ton, if you want to use that measure. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Will you ever come out with measurements that everyone can understand and that 
you are consistent with? As I say, I'm not going to pursue the point as to the situation today. But you 
know, this was printed by your government in 1975. The Premier's picture is on the front on the inside, 
and he's the one who put the whole thing out. He says right here, "$75 a ton, 1975 price." Now you are 
talking potassium oxide measurements. If that's the measurement you are using, then why are you using 
the potassium chloride measurements in your annual report? As a matter of fact, this annual report 
happens to show measurements of . . .  I'm sorry, of the short ton. Then 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1548 

you get into the new report and it's in measurements of the new metric measurement of potassium 
chloride — the metric tonne. Even using that. your figures don't work out. So, I'm not going to pursue it 
any further. I'll go on to another subject. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would give me a list of the investments that the Department of Finance 
makes for the Crown corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — For what period, can you tell me? 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — For the year under review. Sorry. For the past year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — While my people are going through that, let me just (and I don't want to 
pursue the argument on the potash thing) explain the situation. We don't determine how the 
measurements are made; the industry itself does. It has nothing to do with metric or non-metric, because 
it's not relative there. I am informed that the industry quotes price by potassium oxide ton and it quotes 
output by potassium chloride ton. We don't determine that; it just happens to be a figment of the way the 
industry works. But let me give you the answer to your question. We can get you the answers for the 
things. But, in order to make it easier for my officials, could I ask the member: do you want a list of all 
the securities and investments which are there at this point in time or of all the transactions which were 
done? If you want a list of all the transactions, the list is very, very long. We just wouldn't be able to turn 
it over to you right now, but I would have no problem getting that for you. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Minister, the reason I'm asking the question is that the question was asked in the 
Crown corporations committee for Sask Tel, and their reply to us was, "Well, we don't handle our 
investments. They're handled by the Department of Finance." I presume that to be correct. That being 
the case, again, I would ask you for the list. I would want that list for the past 12 months of all the 
investments which you have made, whether they be short-term or long-term, for the Crown corporation 
listing debentures, stocks, bonds, certificates, and whatever other investments you will make in the 
course of the year. I would find it difficult to believe that that list could be very, very long. If it is. I 
won't ask for it today. 
 
I would also like to have the loans and guarantees which are made by the Department of Finance for 
Crown corporations and the various government departments. I'll give you an example of one which, I 
understand, would be handled by the Department of Finance through a Crown corporation. Culture and 
youth, I understand, guaranteed the loan made by Sedco (Saskatchewan Economic Development 
Corporation) for the movie Who Has Seen the Wind. That's the kind of information which I am looking 
for. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, sir. We can get that. The reason I was asking the earlier question is 
because, if you want us to give you the list of all the transactions which have taken place, Morley tells 
me that it's something in excess of 700. But we will get you the information you want. That is no 
problem. As for the question of the guarantees, like the one made by the Department of Culture and 
Youth to Sedco which helped to finance the production of Who Has Seen the Wind, that's public 
knowledge because it went through the process of an order in council. So that is no problem. None of 
those questions are a difficulty for us. We just have to put it together and get it for you. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Fine, thank you. I'm going to go back to potash just for a second. A colleague to my 
left will ask you some questions while I answer nature's call. Will you 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1549 

calculate for me, or have it done by your department, exactly how you arrived at your calculation of the 
potash? I understand that the potassium oxide is the finished product coming out of the mine, and the 
potassium chloride is something else. Give me the exact calculation of how you arrived at your figure of 
$128, and if it's the same way that was used then. Was it the same as the calculation last year, and is it 
the same one today? I'll be back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I can provide that as early as tomorrow — as soon as our 
people can get to work on it. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Does your department do all the investing for all Crown corporations? If there are 
any exceptions to that, would you inform the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, the Department of Finance provides all the short-term investment 
services for all of the Crown corporations. It provides long-term investment services for the pension 
funds in the Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — In other words, you would do all the investments, regardless of the length of term, for 
SGI? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — The Department of Finance has been handling the SGI portfolio since last 
January or February because SGI requested it. In an effort to co-ordinate our investment efforts, and 
certainly with the well-qualified expertise there is in the Department of Finance, it seemed to make good 
sense to us. Since last January or February (and I am not sure of the month), the answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Thank you very much for the commercial on your department. I think Mr. 
Meiklejohn handles the bulk of those. I don't think anybody has ever questioned his ability. I understand 
he is rated very highly in New York. Mr. Minister, when you took over the SGI portfolio, will you tell 
this Assembly what those investments consisted of, particularly the long-term ones? Would you be 
specific and tell me whether there were investments in any commodity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I can give the member the following information. All 
of the investments were provincial and federal government debentures, as well as some corporation 
debentures, as well as some mortgages. I am not aware, nor are my officials, of any commodities at this 
point in time. But once again, we can provide you with the list and the information if you so wish. I 
think you have indicated that. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Minister, would you tell us what corporate bonds you are holding? Can you tell 
me if SGI has ever played the commodities market at any time — more specifically, silver? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — No, I am not aware if that was the case; neither is Mr. Meiklejohn, he 
informs me. Certainly we will get you the list and the information. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — I would like a list of the corporate bonds that you hold for SGI. Again, I want to ask 
you (and be very specific on this, Mr. Minister): are you telling us, and do I clearly understand that to 
the best of your knowledge, and the knowledge of your officials (whether we are talking the last year, or 
any other year) that SGI has never held commodities in its investment portfolio, either directly or 
indirectly? Think that one over before you answer, Mr. Minister. 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1550 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can't speak of some things that may have happened 
in SGI or by SGI, way back, but as far as I am aware, and the advice to me is that there are not, to our 
knowledge, investments in commodities by SGI. Certainly there have not been any since the Department 
of Finance has been handling the portfolio. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Minister, would you elaborate a little further on the corporate bonds that you 
have indicated SGI holds? And, would you tell us whether SGI owns any common stocks in any private 
companies, and which ones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — They would be held by SGI, Mr. Chairman, and we're asking one of my 
officials to go to the offices downstairs to get that information so we can give you some better answers 
specifically. Obviously we don't have that information in the top of our minds. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Sorry, I didn't mean to interrupt you, but if he's going down to get that information on 
SGI, he might as well get it on several other key Crown corporations. We'd like to ask the same question 
about Sask Tel, Sask Power, PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan), Sask Minerals, Saskatchewan 
Development Fund and Crown investments corporation. I apologize for interjecting here. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you tell me, in the case of SGI, whether or not its investment portfolio was turning a 
profit prior to the Department of Finance assuming that portfolio — which I think you indicated was 
about one year ago. Could you elaborate as to what procedures SGI was following in its investment 
portfolio? What condition was it in? And, would you perhaps summarize some of the major changes that 
the department may have made in SGI's portfolio? I'm not asking for every single transaction, but if you 
have moved in a different philosophical direction, could you briefly describe it to us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, first of all, let me indicate to the member opposite that it is 
our belief that because of the larger portfolio which the Department of Finance handled, we can get a 
better deal by coordinating it in this way. Obviously, its not just one corporation or one source; its a 
whole range. We have a bigger package to deal with. 
 
There has not been a general restructuring, in answer to your question. We are probably, as has been 
indicated to me, a little more active in the corporate bond market and in the mortgage market at the 
present time. But, there has not been a general restructuring of the kind of financing that is being done 
for SGI through the services of the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Did I understand you correctly when you indicated that you could not tell me whether 
or not the SGI investment portfolio has been showing a profit, or has been making money over the past 
couple of years — particularly since it came under the control of the Department of Finance? Or, did I 
understand you to say that you lump that portfolio in with the portfolio of all the other Crown 
corporations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I am informed that, indeed, the investments make money. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — How much? 
 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1551 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — We've only had it for two months — January and February. So, I can't give 
you those figures. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — I'm not interested in the last two months. I want to know about last year, and the year 
before. You must have that knowledge. You took over the portfolio. You know whether they made it or 
not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — We don't have that information. It's recorded in SGI's books and is 
maintained by SGI. I guess that in order to get the answers to those questions on what was done before 
the Department of Finance began to handle the investments, you would probably be best to direct your 
questions in the Crown corporations committee when you consider Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — You know, Mr. Minister, I listened to you in question period today misinform me 
(deliberately or otherwise — I don't know), but I'm not going to listen to you today. Now, don't you try 
and tell me that you took over a portfolio from a Crown corporation like SGI, and that you don't know 
whether in the previous year they had a profit or a loss, or that you have no figures. Who are you trying 
to kid? You have those figures. Let's have them right now. Did their portfolio operate at a profit or a 
loss? If you tell me that you don't have that information, or that your officials cannot get that 
information right now, I won't believe you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I can only repeat what I have said. We don't maintain the 
accounting records for SGI. That is something which is maintained by SGI. What the Department of 
Finance does is provides a service to SGI. Therefore, that is where you will have to ask those questions. 
SGI can better give you the information which we cannot. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Minister, the credibility of your answer is in a minus position. I can't believe that 
you can suggest to this Assembly that, with a staff like you have in the Department of Finance of some 
very capable and bright people, when you assumed that portfolio from SGI (whom it is common 
knowledge mismanaged it and were losing money on it to the tune of some $30 million to $50 million 
— who knows for sure?), you would take that portfolio without certain documentation. You'll never get 
me to believe that there aren't people in your department (who are probably sitting in this House right 
now) who can't give you the information which I have asked for from the SGI portfolio. I can only 
conclude that you're afraid to give that information. You know what it is, or somebody here does. Don't 
try to tell me any differently. It is an incredibly incredible answer. 
 
Mr. Minister, your people know the situation on that portfolio fully. I think we all suspect that in that 
portfolio lies a good deal of the answer to much of SGI's financial troubles. If you want to stuff those 
words down my throat, give me the answer. I suggest to you that a good deal of SGI's financial mess lies 
in the mismanagement of that portfolio. It's in your hands now. It's a fully bona fide question in the 
finance estimates as to the workings of that portfolio. I believe that anything your department handles 
for any Crown corporation is a perfectly legitimate question in finance estimates. Mr. Minister, I want 
the answer as to the situation of SGI's portfolio . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  Don't give us that one. 
 
While the minister is doing that, perhaps the minister in charge of the Mickey Mouse Club could find 
something better to do than . . .  
 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1552 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I have no desire to stuff the words of the member opposite 
down his throat. He's quite capable of putting his foot in his own mouth, so I really don't want to get into 
that. All I can do is indicate, as best I can, what the situation is from the point of view of the Department 
of Finance. 
 
I want to make some comment about the loss in SGI because, I think, there is a tendency to make 
confusing comments as opposed to what the real facts are. The loss in SGI, which was experienced, was 
in The Automobile Accident Insurance Act fund. It had nothing to do with SGI proper. So, I think the 
member is wrong in saying that SGI has not had a return on its investments. Indeed, it had investment 
income last year. I can recall that by having read the annual report of Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance. Once again, I'm sure that when it is considered in the Crown corporations committee, there 
will be sufficient time (the SGI officials will be there) to provide the kinds of answers the member 
opposite is looking for. As I indicated earlier, all the Department of Finance does for SGI is provide a 
service for investments. The accounts are maintained by SGI. Therefore, it is SGI that needs to answer 
those questions. 
 
Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Chairman, I really find your remarks today very incredible, and this is typical of 
the answers that we always get when we hit the estimates in this House. Get it from Crown corporations. 
We go into Crown corporations: "Well, we can't give you that information, you'll have to get it from the 
Department of Finance in the House." It's called passing the buck. 
 
Last week, or two weeks ago, we asked the Sask Tel officials, the minister (I see he has disappeared on 
us) to provide us with the list of the investments that were made by the finance department for Sask Tel. 
 
My understanding (and you've finished saying to my colleague,) is that you handle the investments for 
the Crown corporations. Now you are saying, "You can get that from SGI." Do you know what SGI will 
tell us in Crown corporations? "We can't give you that information. First, it's not in the year under 
review; second, it's not in the public interest; third, get it from the Department of Finance." By that time 
you're long gone. 
 
Now where are we going to get consistency and some answers that aren't what you call passing the 
buck? Since your department (the man is sitting to your left) handles all of these investments, please 
don't get up again and tell us that we have to go to them to get the answers, because they are telling us 
that we have to go to you. Now, one of you has to be telling us the truth, and the other one has to be 
passing the buck. I was going to say something else, but I'm in the legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, I will dispute the point that SGI has said that the member 
opposite should come to committee of finance, because SGI indeed has not yet been considered by the 
Crown corporations committee. 
 
Let me again repeat what the process is. SGI in this case, because we are talking about SGI, will have a 
certain amount of money which it is able to invest. It will phone or indicate to the Department of 
Finance what that amount is, and the Department of Finance will make the investment. I have already 
indicated to you that we will be able to provide you with a list of investments, and the rate of those 
investments. I've never said we couldn't provide you with that. We can. It's just that if you ask me a 
general question. "How much money was made on an investment by SGI?" I can't give you that. If you 
have made an investment two months ago at a certain rate, 14.5 per cent or whatever, I can't 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1553 

tell you how much money that's making. I can tell you what the rate is, and I'm prepared to do that. We 
are putting it together for you. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — In other words, you are going to give me a statement for SGI's activities last year. In 
other words, you know what the cash value of the investments were at the start of the fiscal year, last 
year. And you've taken it over this year, so you should have a statement at the end of the year. You are 
telling me that you are going to give me a complete list and, as well, a detailed financial statement as to 
your appreciation or loss on that portfolio. Did I understand you correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I can provide the member opposite with a description of all the transactions 
of the securities which we have invested by the Department of Finance. That means that I can provide 
you all of that, since we have been doing the investments as of the time the Department of Finance 
became involved. Information before that, the Department of Finance had nothing to do with. It was 
done by SGI, Mr. Chairman, and, therefore, it is a question that is better directed in the Crown 
corporations committee. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Now, Mr. Minister, I don't want that. If you want to take that attitude in all these 
Crown corporations (each one of them) you're going to be here a long, long time. And we'd like to run 
this through. Now look, you can't tell me, and you know very well, that at the start of the fiscal year, the 
SGI investment portfolio (or that of any other Crown corporation that had a separate investment 
portfolio) was worth X number of dollars. It had a book value or a market value of X number of dollars, 
and you know what that was. At the end of that statement or at the end of that year, it also had a book 
value or market value. And you know what that is. I want to know what the gain or loss figure was. I 
don't believe you when you say you can't provide that sort of information. 
 
Now look, be realistic, we all know that SGI didn't say, "Listen fellows, here is our investment portfolio 
for the bright guys at finance to look after." They didn't pass that over to you because they were doing a 
good job. They didn't pass it over to you because they were just making gobs and gobs of money. They 
passed it over to you, obviously, because they were making a mess, because they had people making 
their investments that were out of their league. All of a sudden the people at SGI realized that they had a 
crisis on their hands. Unfortunately, they had built a Taj Mahal over there, and then named it after an 
appropriate person as far as SGI is concerned. But, nonetheless, they passed you that portfolio because 
they were in trouble. They didn't pass it to you because they were making gobs of money. 
 
Now, once again, I put the question to you. What was the market value at the start of the last fiscal year? 
What was it at the close of the fiscal year? Mr. Minister, I am not going to Crown corporations with that, 
because the answer (as the member for Regina South said) is always that it is not in the public interest, 
as is the case with anything that is embarrassing to a Crown corporation. 
 
Frankly, I have a little trouble discerning what you people mean when you say, ''not in the public 
interest." But now I have figured it out. It means simply that it's not in the NDP's interest. Let's be very 
clear. You are refusing to divulge the information as to the market value of the SGI portfolio, what it 
started at in the last fiscal year, and the market value of that portfolio when you assumed control of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I am not saying that at all, Mr. Chairman. Presumably, that 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1554 

will be indicated in the SGI annual report at the end of the fiscal year, 1980. There is nothing 
confidential about that kind of information. It's available. To the extent that we can provide you with the 
information which we have because of investments that have been made through the services of the 
Department of Finance, I have already given you the undertaking I will provide the information. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — With all due respect, I am waiting for it. I am not going to wait one, two. or three 
months; I want it before we move from item 1. If you are not prepared to provide it, I think maybe you 
should pull your estimates and we will move on to something else. I am afraid I have been through the 
mill just a couple of times too many to buy that age-old one: "I'll get you the information, and I will send 
it to you." We'll have that information before we move from item 1 and we'll discuss it. Again, I ask the 
minister for that information immediately. If you can't provide it, I think the appropriate thing is to pull 
your estimates and let's move on to some people who can answer the questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, that is really fairly irresponsible on the part of the member 
opposite. We shouldn't be surprised because that is rather common coming from him. We had an 
indication of that just last week. I challenge the members opposite to indicate to me information which 
was requested at any time last year which we were able to provide but that wasn't provided. I have given 
an undertaking (I shall do so again) on the information that he asks for. It is voluminous. I have just 
finished telling you that there are several hundreds of transactions that take place. But we're going to 
speed it up and provide it to you expeditiously. I am unable to provide it for the members opposite right 
now, because we need to be able to prepare the information, and we will do it. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — In that case, Mr. Minister, I think it would be appropriate for you to pull your 
estimates and come back when you have that information, and then we will discuss it. We're not moving 
off item 1 until we have it, because we're going to talk about it. As I indicated, I think we've been 
through this route a couple of times too many with a few too many ministers, who just haven't quite 
come up with the information which was requested. You shove in the odd "if" or "and," and it becomes a 
trifle debatable. We want the information before we go on because we believe that in that portfolio much 
of SGI's present perilous financial position lies. 
 
Mr. Minister, again I ask you. You can give us that information; your people have it. If they don't have 
it, they can get it very, very quickly for you. Again, I repeat, I want the market value of SGI's investment 
portfolio one year ago, and I want the value when you took it over two months ago. If you don't have 
that information, then I ask you to pull your estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, the market value, as I indicated, will be in the December 30 
annual report for the 1980 fiscal year, so that information is already available. If the member opposite 
doesn't want to consider the Department of Finance estimates, hopefully he's not speaking on behalf of 
all members opposite, because I'm sure they have other pertinent questions they would like to ask, and 
I'm prepared to discuss them. 
 
All I ask the member to do is take a look at the annual report and he will see a lot of the information 
which he is requesting is there. With regard to the investments which we have been making since the 
Department of Finance began to handle the portfolio, and began to provide advice and make investments 
as of January, we will get it for you as 



 
March 30, 1981 

 
 

 

 
1555 

quickly as we can. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — Mr. Minister, I'm not interested in what's happened from January and February; I'll 
ask you for that information next year. I'm talking about information from other years. If the information 
I'm asking for is so readily available, and if it is available in the SGI annual report (and I suggest to you 
it is not), then provide it. I suggest to you that it is not; if it is show it to me. I suggest to you that it's not 
there. I don't believe that your people took over the SGI portfolio without taking over all the 
documentation for several preceding years. Again, I repeat the request — provide us with that 
information. I think it would be appropriate for you to pull your estimates until you can. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Mr. Chairman, SGI handled all its transactions for 1980; the Department of 
Finance did not handle them. Therefore, the member should ask his questions, when he has an 
opportunity to do so, for the year 1980 (which is not the year under review which we are considering in 
these estimates anyway; nevertheless, we do range, and I think that's fair) to SGI officials through the 
minister in Crown corporations committee. The Department of Finance became responsible for the 
investment portfolio of SGI in January of this year. The 1980 investments were made by SGI. I am quite 
confident they were secure and that they were good investments, but I will not take the responsibility for 
them because neither my department nor I was involved with them for 1980. It's something that will 
have to be reported in Crown corporations committee. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — In that case, Mr. Minister, tell me the market value of those investments on January 
1. Was that the date you took them over — January 1? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — January, yes. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — All right, in January. Then give me the market value as of that date. 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. Sorry about the long delay. I just wanted to get some 
clarification here. We can get the market value for any given day because, as the members will know, 
the market value changes. It can change day by day; it can change within a period of hours, or even (I 
am told) as rapidly as minute by minute. So it is difficult to answer specifically that kind of a question. 
But we will see if we can do a calculation as of January on the dealings which have been made, and 
provide you with the information. Once again, I caution the member (and he knows that) that it does 
change. It fluctuates. 
 
Mr. Thatcher: — May I ask you when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I'm told that, in order to put it all together and work it all out, it may take a 
couple of days. We're going to try for tomorrow, but I'm told it may take a couple of days. We'll put it 
together and get it for you. 
 
Mr. Andrew: — Question, Mr. Minister. Last year, in the public accounts committee, there was a 
comment about some of the questionable management practices of DNS (Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan). The public accounts committee recommended that the comptroller's office do a full 
investigation. As I understand it, that investigation was commenced on September 8, 1980. Has the 
minister or the department, at this point in time, received that report? Will the minister make that report 
available to the legislature? 



 
March 30, 1981 
 
 

 
1556 

Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski: — I can indicate to the member that we do not yet have a final report. What 
will happen after that final report has been provided (because the work has been ongoing) is that there 
will be findings and recommendations, obviously, that we will have to look at. And the treasury board 
will need to look at it because we are interested in finding the best possible way of running government 
and expending taxpayer money. The government will have to consider everything necessary in making 
the decisions to implement any of the findings and recommendations. I can undertake, as the member 
has requested, certainly to provide a report on what has happened to the public accounts committee, 
because it was the public accounts committee which made the request. Certainly. I think it's an 
obligation on our part to report to the public accounts committee as to how the issue is disposed with. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 35 — An Act to amend The Small Claims Enforcement Act 
 
Bill No. 3 — An Act to amend The Trustee Act 
 
Bill No. 46 — An Act to amend The Highways Act 
 
Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act 
 
Bill No. 33 — An Act to amend The Water Power Act, on division 
 
Bill No. 23 — An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act, with amendment 
 
Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act, with amendment 
 
Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the change in the name 
of the Department of Consumer Affairs to the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, with 
amendment 
 
Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, with amendment, on division. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


