






















































Hansard: March 02, 1981


447 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
March 2, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I give notice that on Wednesday next, I will move: 
 

That this Assembly opposes the current attempt by the federal government to patriate and amend the 
constitution of Canada, believing that the unilateral nature of the process is incompatible with the fundamental 
principles of Canadian federalism, that constitutional changes must have a broad basis of support among 
Canadians, and that the proposals, if implemented, would upset the balance of Canada’s federal system. 

 
I give further notice, Mr. Speaker, that I will, on orders of the day, drop my motion, standing as government 
motion no. 1, if we have consent to proceed with this motion, which I have just moved. We will be happy to do 
this today and this, I understand, is the agreement between the parties. 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to withdraw item no. 12. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF STUDENTS 
 
MR. WHITE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and through you to members of the House, 12 
students from the University or Regina School of Journalism. They are accompanied by two professors, David 
Green and Al Douglas. I understand that most of them are seated in your gallery, and a couple are in the press 
gallery. I understand that they will be here all afternoon, and I certainly hope they find the proceedings enjoyable 
and informative. I will attempt to meet them during the course of the afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and to the members of this 
Assembly, a number of special guest sitting in the Speaker’s gallery who I will not attempt to introduce 
individually, but who are all directors and superintendents of education here in Saskatchewan, and who are 
meeting in Regina through their association today and tomorrow. The number includes one who is a former 
member of this Assembly and is in the gallery. 
 
I would like you to join with me in welcoming them here, and welcoming them to a productive conference during 
this, the first day of Education Week. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
448 

MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the opposition, I would like to join with the Minister of Education 
in giving a welcome to the directors and superintendents who are here today. I hope you enjoy the deliberations 
and the debate that takes place, and I wish you well in your job, especially in this important week of Education 
Week in Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the House, and to you, a young lady 
who is in the Speaker’s gallery. She is Diane Byers from our neighbor to the south, the United States. She is from 
Indiana. She is an exchange student at Watrous, Saskatchewan, which is in my constituency, and she is 
accompanied by Rose and Joe Yaworski from Watrous. 
 
I would like to extend to her, our welcome and our wishes for a pleasant stay in Canada, and an enjoyable and 
education time in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Reduction of Crude Oil Production by Alberta 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, the province of Alberta carried through 
with its plan to reduce crude oil production by approximately 100,000 barrels a day, to demonstrate its serious 
opposition to the national energy program. Now I understand you support their right as owner of that resource to 
exercise production controls. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you support the position of the Government of Alberta in carrying out these cutbacks, as a sound 
strategy to bring the federal government to the bargaining table to negotiate a fair and equitable national energy 
program? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the question is: do I support the move of the Government of Alberta 
in cutting back oil production as a sound tactic in arriving at a fair and equitable national energy program? 
 
I fully support the idea of pursuing a fair and equitable national energy program. I support the right of the 
Government of Alberta, as the owner of that resource, to make a judgment as to whether or not the price of that 
resource is appropriate, as I would expect that any other owner of any other commodity would exercise a 
judgment as to whether or not he sells at the offered price. I don’t express any view as to whether or not this is a 
tactically sound move on the part of the Government of Alberta. They are obviously able to make tactical 
judgments for themselves without any assistance or comment by the Government of Saskatchewan on whether 
their tactics are sound. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Mineral Resources. 
 
Mr. Minister, the national energy program has seriously curtailed the development of heavy oil. The most recent 
export levy has seriously shut down much of the Swift Current field, and now the Alberta cutbacks are going to 
have a very noticeable effect on the production of high-sulphur crude in southeastern Saskatchewan. 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
449 

Can the minister advise the Assembly as to the magnitude of the impact of the cutback, the effect that it’s going to 
have on the coffers of the province of Saskatchewan and whether or not the producers can look for any relief from 
the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Mr. Speaker, the level of the impact in southeastern Saskatchewan is difficult to 
assess precisely, but I agree with the member it will be significant. Obviously the loss for the province will be 
determined by how much of that crude oil does not find a market, and it could indeed be significant. 
 
The basic problem is that our so-called sour light crudes in southeastern Saskatchewan are blended with sweet 
Alberta light crudes in order that they can be refined in eastern Canadian refineries. With the decline in Alberta 
light crudes that are available, less of our crude oil can be used in eastern Canadian refineries, because it will be 
replaced with oils which don’t have the same beneficial effects as those in Alberta do. 
 
I think it’s too early to be precise in what the impact will be. I do know that my officials advise me it will be 
significant. 
 
I might say in response to the member’s last question that we do not have any current intentions of significantly 
reducing our royalties to counter the effect of the national energy program. Last year we had in place the same 
royalty program as we do now. We had a record year in the Saskatchewan oil industry. We believe that had there 
not been a national energy program in place, with the impact it’s having on Saskatchewan, we would have had an 
even better year this year. We do not believe that to be the case now because of the national energy program. 
 
We are continuing our discussions with the federal government at the official level. I personally informed Mr. 
Lalonde of our opposition to the program and the impact it’s likely to have. Obviously we are not as a government 
and I, as a minister, pleased with the national energy program and its impact on Saskatchewan. In December, 
when I met with the ministers from Alberta and British Columbia, we jointly stated our opposition to the national 
energy program and that remains our position. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister I believe your statement was that you did not anticipate a significant reduction 
in royalties. Given the fact that the national energy program has impacted more severely on Saskatchewan because 
of the higher royalties of Saskatchewan and because of the income tax situation, is the government giving any 
consideration to reducing the royalties so the producers in Saskatchewan at least have a break-even or a marginal 
profit position rather than the minus or negative situation that exists now? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, I am rather disappointed, Mr. Speaker, because the last thing ever expected was 
that the members opposite would make the same argument as the federal Liberals. That is indeed their position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has said that their national energy program does have a negative impact on 
producers and they have suggested to both Alberta and Saskatchewan that we should make up for it by vacating 
the field which they have tried 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
450 

to take. First of all, I don’t agree with that in principle and, secondly, I think it would be a very dumb negotiating 
tactic. 

 
Saskatchewan Position on Constitutional Proposals 

 
MR. LANE: — On Saturday the Deputy Premier is quoted as stating that Allan Blakeney has to come off his 
opposition to the package, the package being the constitutional proposals of the Government of Canada. Does this 
indicate a further division between yourself and the Deputy Premier on the government’s position or is the Deputy 
Premier urging the Premier to now get back on the fence, the position which he had take up until two weeks ago? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the statement was not made by me so I cannot tell you the precise 
meaning of the speaker. But obviously the Deputy Premier was making the point that our opposition to the federal 
proposal goes right down the piece, that we are opposing virtually each part of the package. The Deputy Premier 
was making the point that if we are to have any resolution of the matter by agreement between the federal 
government and a large majority of the provinces, it will be necessary both for the federal government and a large 
majority of the provinces to move their position somewhat. I would expect that is an appropriate prediction. If we 
are to get an agreement (and that was the context of the Deputy Premier’s question).I doubt whether it will be 
possible for the federal government to maintain its position or for all the provinces to maintain theirs. 
 
MR. LANE: — There seems to be a significant difference between statements mad by the Deputy Premier and 
the Premier because we have that example and, secondly, the Premier has indicated that there would be no joining 
of the court challenge, but the Deputy Premier has said that the province of Saskatchewan may join the supreme 
court challenge. Would you now sate either your position or the government’s position, whichever one you are 
taking, as to whether or not you would be joining the court challenge? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the question is a hypothetical. The only court cases which are 
currently extant are the ones before the court of appeal in Newfoundland and the court of appeal in Quebec. We 
have stated categorically that we are not joining in either of those. We do not know whether there will be an 
appeal to the supreme court, although I must say it’s likely. So far as I’m aware, none has been launched. If and 
when one has been launched we will give our consideration to whether or not we would become a party. We will 
not become a party to the position asserted by the six provinces in the court below that unanimity is necessary. 
That is not our position. There may, however, be some status to go before the supreme court and take another 
position. That is not possible to determine until one knows the parameters of the likely appeal. 
 
MR. LANE: — I’m sure the Premier would take the warning in the spirit in which it is given. You have been 
successful to date in waffling and not stating positions because it can’t be determined at this time. You delayed 
your appearance before the constitutional committee for a long time. But I’m going to point out another 
inconsistency and I would ask the Premier to answer this. You argued in the past that if Ontario should have a 
veto, then Saskatchewan should have a veto. (And I think that’s a position which you had taken at different times. 
You’re shaking your head that you are not being accurate.) You now have indicated on a CBC program on Friday, 
I believe, 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
451 

that Canada is basically made up of four regions and that each region should have a veto, and I think that was the 
suggestion you made. I think the Premier will admit that if the West is to have a veto it must start to work together 
in order to have common ground, in order to have a common position. Would the Premier now admit that he has 
been moving to the Conservative position in that area, that western Canadians must begin to work together and 
western government must work together in order to get fairness and equity in the constitution. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I entirely agree with the hon. member that western governments must 
work together, and I think the record of our government in working with western governments over the last 10 
years is exemplary. It was in association with my fellow western premiers that the western economic opportunities 
conference was launched. My colleague, the Premier of Alberta, and I have been able to work in the milieu of the 
four western premiers; he, when there were three New Democrat western premiers; I, when there were three 
Conservative western premiers. And we have continued to do that in the interest of western solidarity. We cannot 
agree on every issue but we agree on a large number — there is no question of that. 
 
To direct my attention to the first remarks of the hon. member for Qu’Appelle, it has been the position of our 
government that we generally supported an amending formula along the lines of the Victoria Charter. I have said 
that at conference after conference. That amending formula is one which involves dividing Canada into four 
regions and having a majority in each region before there is an amendment to the constitution. We have not taken, 
and do not take, the position that all eleven governments in Canada must necessarily agree on all the details of 
every constitutional amendment from here forward. That is not the position of the Government of Saskatchewan, 
and we do not now take it. 
 

Mistikwa Community College 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Continuing Education. Mr. Minister, it has been 
brought to my attention that the ledgers and the financial documents of Mistikwa Community College in North 
Battleford have been seized by the RCMP, and that also in the past year and one-half there have been about 10 
resignations from the staff of that community college, and that other employees are threatening to walk out if the 
rather corrupt administration practices are not corrected. What action have you taken, Mr. Minister, to look into 
this problem and will you inform the Assembly (if you have taken action) what your finds are? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to any RCMP investigation I would not wish to 
comment on an investigation undertaken by the RCMP. I’m sure the hon. member would realize that it would be 
neither appropriate nor correct for me to insert myself into any of the activities related to an RCMP investigation. I 
am sure that when such an investigation is complete we will be aware of the results of that investigation. I might 
say that the hon. member makes some rather sweeping charges with respect to management practices in that 
community college. I will say that I’m aware there have been difficulties associated with the administration of that 
community college. I have taken steps to ascertain the facts with respect to those difficulties, and I am now 
assessing my responsibility with respect to those difficulties and will be taking appropriate action at the 
appropriate time. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, will you provide to this Assembly a full account of the findings 
that come out of your investigation of the Mistikwa Community 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
452 

College to assure us that there has not been a misuse of public funds? Will you give your findings to this 
Assembly? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I would certainly be accounting to the members of this Assembly for 
the activities of community colleges in my responsibility as Minister of Continuing Education. I am not sure 
exactly what the hon. member is referring to. If he is referring to an accounting of the investigations that the 
RCMP is involved in with regard to what I understand is a very specific matter, that would be something the 
Attorney General would speak to. But with regard to the general administration of community colleges, and this 
community college, of course, I will provide an account to the hon. member at the appropriate time. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary on this topic. Mr. Minister, my question and what I want to find out is: have 
there been wrong practices at the Mistikwa Community College? You are investigating: the RCMP is looking into 
it. Will you provide the findings, whatever they may be, to the members of this Assembly. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Certainly I am prepared to provide to the members of this Assembly the results of 
any reviews I undertake. 

 
Federal Herd Maintenance Program 

 
MR. GARNER: — My question is to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, it is a fact that in Saskatchewan 
today the federal herd maintenance program is in total chaos and shambles. What communications have you or 
any of your department officials had with the federal minister, Mr. Eugene Whelan, regarding this program that is 
affecting every cattleman in the province of Saskatchewan today? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the hon. member for Wilkie, I can’t recall recent 
correspondence with the federal minister of ministers with respect to the herd maintenance program. There was 
correspondence going back to early in the fall in which I joined with the Minister of Agriculture from Manitoba. I 
think it is safe to say that in the new year the hon. minister from Manitoba and I have really given up attempting to 
deal with the federal ministers to get the program turned around. What we have been doing in responding to 
requests coming from producers (and they have been significant) is referring the producers to the members of the 
appeal committee. (I understand the hon. member knows there has been an appeal committee established) and 
referring them also to their member of parliament as well to the ministers responsible in the federal government. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I don’t know whether you are aware of it, but I 
would like to bring it to your attention that some of the cattlemen in Saskatchewan who did receive the herd 
maintenance program funding payments in January have now, at the end of February, received a letter telling them 
that it was a computer error and they have to send the money back. Now, these farmers have bought feed to feed 
this cow herd. Now I’m not dumping on your, Mr. Minister, not at all! I would like you, Mr. Minister, today to 
join with me to send a telegram to the federal minister, Mr. Eugene Whelan, telling him to investigate this and get 
it cleaned up. The farmers and cattlemen of Saskatchewan need this money. They have applied for it and don’t 
have it to send back. They received it in January. 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I would be glad to join with the hon. member in 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
453 

sending a Telex to the Hon. Minister of Agriculture and the hon. minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat 
Board. The program seems to be bouncing back and forth between them. Our message (and I think the Telex 
should express this if we get together on it), should not only express the concern raised by the hon. member for 
those who have been paid and have a letter saying they have it to pay it back, but more particularly should express 
concern for those who have not been paid at all. I say to the hon. member that that number is significantly larger 
than the number who have been paid and have been asked to pay it back. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to hear the hon. member is supporting the efforts of Saskatchewan in the 
drought assistance program and condemning along with us the efforts of the federal government. The federal 
government’s program has been a disaster, particularly as it relates to the herd maintenance program. 
 

Prince Albert Pulp Mill Sale 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister responsible for Crown investments corporation. 
Mr. Minister, since your announcement in January of the purchase of Prince Albert Pulp Co. Ltd. and chemical 
plant, including the Meadow Lake Sawmill which I am particularly interested in, there have been no indications 
from your government at all regarding its intention with regard to the Meadow Lake Sawmill. In view of the 
extreme hardships that the long-term closure of the mill has had on the Meadow Lake economy, and in that area, I 
would ask you if you will today inform the House and the people of that area just what the intentions of your 
government are with regard to the mill of which you now own 100 per cent? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, at the time we acquired the shares of the Prince Albert Pulp 
Company we indicated that we were going to be holding negotiations with some people in the private sector with 
a view to bringing a new partner into the Prince Albert Pulp Company. Those negotiations are ongoing. We have 
indicated publicly that we intended to operate on an interim basis with the Prince Albert Pulp Company, and we 
didn’t intend to make any major changes in its questions. 
 
With respect to the Meadow Lake Sawmill, the advice I have been receiving from the people in place now is that 
there is no economic way that the sawmill could be reopened at this point in time. What we have said to the 
potential partners we are talking with is that this is one of the first things we would like them to look at. We have 
it on our list in terms of our new partnership and what the future may hold for it. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the question I am asking you is on behalf 
of the people. There we’re talking about 150 jobs worth $2 million to the economy of that area. You profess to 
purchase industries like this on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, yet you give them no information as to what 
their future will be in terms of their jobs. They’re selling their houses. They’re going to Alberta; there’s no 
question about it. They’re being hired in that same industry by Canfor and other companies just across the border 
in Alberta. So there certainly is a market for the same type of industry. Mr. Minister, my question is this: do you 
not agree that when you purchase industries on behalf of the people that you certainly owe it to those same people 
to give them information regarding what you intend to do with their money? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member obviously didn’t listen very 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
454 

closely. When we purchased the mill it was closed and there was no indication that the mill was going to be 
opened in the near future .-.-. (inaudible interjection) .-.-. Well the member realizes the reason was that it came 
along with the P.A. pulp mill. Otherwise I’m sure no one would have been buying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I’ve been trying to say to the member is that at this point in time there is no economic analysis 
that will suggest that the mill should be reopened. If one takes a look at lumber prices one can see why. What I 
have said is that when we have in place the new partnership, we intend, along with our new partners, to take a 
look at this and make a final decision with respect to the disposal of the future of that mill. Now, I think if the 
member looks at the history of the mill and how it got there, it is rather interesting. Whether or not it should ever 
have been there is, of course, another .-.-. (inaudible interjection) .-.-. Well, Mr. Speaker, the fact is that we do 
own it. I agree with that. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — A supplementary to the minister responsible for CIC. Would you mind advising the 
Assembly, Mr. Minister, what you paid for the Prince Albert pulp mill? Secondly, I understand the pulp mill is for 
sale. How much are you trying to sell it for? Two questions. 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member obviously doesn’t really want us to do very well 
because he wants us to negotiate in public. I’m not going to comment on the price that we’re asking for it — as 
much as we can get — let me put it that way. With respect to what we paid for it, we exercised our right of 
refusal. We paid, in effect, the price that the people who were going to acquire the P.A. pulp mill had offered to 
Parsons and Whittemore. What I have said is that now when negotiations are going on .-.-. (inaudible interjection) 
.-.-. If the member for Indian Head-Wolseley would shut-up and listen once in a while he might hear something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s going to be better by the end of March, I can tell. I’m coming in like a lamb and out like a lion. 
 
What I want to say is that when the negotiations are complete, then we take a look along with our partners, at what 
financial data we will make public. In the event that for some unforeseen reason the mill continues to be operated 
as a public company for some extended period of time, I would then make public the price and table in the House 
an analysis which we have done which justifies the price we paid. 
 

Clean-up of PCB Spills 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister responsible for the environment. You issued orders 
for the clean-up of the PCB (polychlorinated biphenyl) spills at both Inland Steel and Federal Pioneer. Did you 
issue any other orders for the clean-up of PCB spills? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, the order we issued to Inland Steel was not an order to clean-up a 
PCB spill. The order we issued to Federal Pioneer was for the clean-up of that particular chemical. With respect to 
other orders that have been issued, I would have to take the question under advisement and bring the answer 
forward for the member. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Supplementary. Could you inform this House then, when you are checking, why you have 
not given an order to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
455 

clean up the spills it has on Avenue C in Saskatoon, where it has been spilling the containers for many years? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, as to any information available to the member, if he considers that 
information to be important for the purposes of the Department of the Environment, through me, issuing clean-up 
orders, there is legislation which requires people who spill chemicals to report it. If the hon. member knows of 
some materials that have been spilled and hasn’t reported it, I think he finds himself in a position where he should 
have reported it earlier. However, with regard to any spills that are there, that are reported and are significant to 
the point of requiring clean-up, we will take whatever action we deem necessary. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Education Week in Saskatchewan 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to bring to the attention of this Assembly, the citizens of 
Saskatchewan and the media, that the Premier of Saskatchewan did, on February 4, 1981, designate the week of 
March 1 to March 7 as Education Week in Saskatchewan. I want to inform the members of this and it gives me 
great pleasure to join parents, trustees, teachers, students and citizens of Saskatchewan in celebrating Education 
Week and in celebrating our education system in this province. It is my personal belief, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
a fine education system in Saskatchewan. It is something we can be very proud of. I believe that it is the best in 
Canada and something we should celebrate and appreciate. 
 
The theme of this year’s Education Week is Saskatchewan Education, Opening Doors for Everyone. This theme 
attempts to emphasize two points. It attempts to emphasize the importance of opening the doors to our education 
system to our citizens so there is more open communication and participation by all people in the education 
system. 
 
Education is, I believe, everyone’s business and through this them we hope to invite parents, we hope to invite 
members of this legislature, we hope to invite citizens of Saskatchewan, to come into our schools, universities, 
technical institutes and community colleges, and find out more about what is happening and communicate with 
the students, the teachers and the trustees in those systems. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, this them emphasizes the importance of education in terms of opening up 
opportunities for our young people, our adults and all of our citizens. I believe that education plays an extremely 
critical role in terms of generating opportunities for full participation as citizens and as productive members of our 
society for all people. This then emphasizes something we are trying very hard to do in Saskatchewan and are 
very proud of, and that is the attempt to ensure that there is full opportunity and equal opportunity for all citizens, 
regardless of background, to participate fully and to benefit fully from a good quality education. 
 
I would draw to the attention of members and citizens, and the media as well, that trustees, universities, schools 
and technical institutes all across the province are holding special activities and functions this week to provide an 
opportunity for us, as citizens and as persons with responsibility and interest in education, to come in and 
communicate and find out more about what is happening. 
 
I would like to encourage all members of this Assembly to take the opportunity to 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
456 

participate in those activities so they too can be a part of that process of communications and understanding. Now 
I personally will be devoting a substantial amount of my time this week to doing that very thing and I would invite 
other members, as well as the media to do likewise. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Minister, since this is Education Week in Saskatchewan, and since education certainly is 
the key to the future of this province, I agree with the minister that the goal of complete accessibility for all to the 
best education is what we as legislators and what the people of the province want. I believe and understand that 
the complexities facing educators and parents in this province in meeting the challenges of the ‘80s and ‘90s, the 
new horizons, is a very important decision, a decision which all people must take very seriously because it is the 
key to our future. 
 
I join with the minister in urging all legislators and parents and interested people in this province to visit their 
schools and to discuss with the people running these schools the goals which we want to achieve in public 
education in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 30 — An Act to amend The Vehicles Act (No. 2) 

 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Vehicles Act (No. 2). 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 31 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act 

 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 

 
Certificate of Elections and Returns 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day I have an announcement to make to the Assembly. 
 
I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has received from the chief electoral 
officer a certificate of the following elections and returns: of 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
457 

John Otho Chapman, Esq., as member for the constituency of Estevan; of Neal Hebert Hardy, Esq., as member for 
the constituency of Kelsey-Tisdale; of David Manly Miner, Esq., as member for the constituency of The 
Battlefords. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Appointment of Clerk Assistant Procedural 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that David Joseph Mitchell, Esq., has been appointed Clerk 
Assistant Procedural of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
PRIORITY OF DEBATE 

 
Constitutional Position of the Government of Saskatchewan 

 
MR. LANE: — Notice of intention was given to the Clerk this morning, notice of my intention to move that a 
matter of urgent and compelling public importance be given priority of debate under rule 17. The statement of this 
matter is as follows: 
 

There is legitimate cause for concern and fear that the resolution respecting constitutional change currently 
being debated in the House of Commons, Canada, will have debate limited by closure. 

 
This resolution, which affects the status, the rights and the privileges of the people of Saskatchewan, does not 
have the support of the people of Saskatchewan. It is, therefore, of urgent and compelling importance that the 
constitutional position of the Government of Saskatchewan be given priority of debate under rule 17 so that 
its position may be placed before the House of Commons before the impending vote. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have the motion? A notice regarding this matter proposed for priority of 
debate was received in the clerk’s office at 11:55 a.m., for which I thank the hon. member. 
 
Matters raised under rule 17 must be of urgent and public importance. I am sure all hon. member members will 
agree that this matter is important. The intent of rule 17 was to provide the Legislative Assembly with the 
opportunity to debate a subject which was not of a continuing nature but one that had just arisen. I am sure all 
hon. members will agree that the matter of constitutional change is a continuing one. Matters under rule 17, from 
Beauchesne’s Rules and Forms of the House of Commons of Canada, Fifth Edition, paragraph 285, page 91, and I 
quote: 
 

.-.-. must deal with a matter within the administrative competence of the government and there must be no 
other reasonable opportunity for debate. 

 
I further refer all hon. members to rule 17(10(d) which reads: 
 

.-.-. the motion must not anticipate a matter which has been preciously appointed for consideration by the 
Assembly, or with reference to which a 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
458 

notice of motion has been previously given and not withdrawn. 
 
Two motions are already on the order paper pertaining to the constitutional question. I rule that this matter cannot 
be raised under rule 17 since the matter is a continuing one and one that can be debated today, and because it 
anticipates two notices of motions presently on the order paper. 
 
I refer all hon. members to precedents of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan: May 16, 1980, April 14, 
1977, and April 13, 1977. I also refer all hon. member to Beauchesne’s Rules and Forms of the House of 
Commons of Canada, Fifth Edition, page 91, paragraph 285. 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to speak to your ruling. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I have made my ruling and I am afraid the member can’t debate the ruling. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — On a point of order, Mr. Speaker. I would like Mr. Speaker, to clarify one thing. Part of 
our ruling dealt with the fact that there were two similar motions on the order paper. I think that prior to orders of 
the day, or back in routine proceedings some place, both of those were withdrawn and dropped. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think the Leader of the Opposition has a valid observation and the observation has to do 
with the discrepancy between one and two. The point I was making in the ruling (and I think it is unnecessary to 
explain it) is that whether it is one, two, three or a half-dozen it anticipates something that is on the order paper 
which can be discussed today. I think the validity of the ruling stands unimpaired by the observation of the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
MR. LANE: — I want to raise a new point of order, Mr. Speaker. Part of your ruling was that this was of an 
ongoing nature. I think it is fair to say, in fact, that the position of the government opposite is not of an ongoing 
nature and may change from time to time. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I now that the member for Qu’Appelle is eager to get into a debate on this 
matter, and since I have not brought my notes with me I am sure he will help me to move down the order paper to 
a place where we can maybe get into something of that nature. 
 
MR. LANE: — With all due respect, Mr. Speaker, you are presupposing that there will be approval. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I can only go by what is before me on the order paper. I have something under government 
orders which I will now call. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Constitution of Canada 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to drop motion no. 1. By leave of the House I would like 
to introduce a substitute motion which I read under the heading of notices of motions and questions. I will not 
take the time of the House to read it again unless members opposite ask. I supplied the Leader of the Opposition 
with a copy. I drop the motion and I ask leave to introduce a substitute motion. 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
459 

MR. SPEAKER: — The members have heard the request by the Premier for leave to introduce a substitute 
motion under government motions. Is that agreed? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — As indicated in the Leader-Post. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I call on the Premier. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I know that all hon. members will record this occasion and note it as 
March 2, an occasion when the Leader-Post was not wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion which I dropped dealt with the position of the Government of Saskatchewan when it was 
put on the order paper some months ago and the great bulk of it would still stand. Since that time some events 
have caused a further position of the Government of Saskatchewan. I think therefore that the new motion will 
allow this Assembly to express, to the Government of Canada and to others who may take not of our position, its 
view of the role that the Government of Saskatchewan sees as appropriate in the ongoing constitutional debate. 
 
Let me just talk a little bit about the history of this issue which is now so very much to the fore in Canada. We 
know that Canada became a country by the passage of the British North American Act of 1967. It is often referred 
to as the constitution of Canada. But at that time Canada was a colony and, as a British colony, it was not thought 
that the British North American Act would be amended except if, as and when the British parliament decided to 
amend it. Canada has gradually changed its position, it status, from that of a colony to a fully independent country. 
It is not easy to say with precision when Canada was an independent country but I think that following World War 
I, when Canada signed the Treaty of Versailles and when Canada jointed the League of Nations as an independent 
country, everyone acknowledged what had been clear for decades, that Canada was independent. 
 
However, we did not have a constitution which allowed Canadians to amend that constitution. This matter was 
addressed at a number of imperial conferences, notably commencing with the one in 1926, and led to the 
formulation of the Statute of Westminster which was passed by the British parliament in 193l. The statute in effect 
said that any law passed by the British parliament after 1931 should have no effect on Canada, Australia, New 
Zealand or the Union of South Africa or he Irish Free State, which were also covered by the Statute of 
Westminster. That was the way the Statute of Westminster was drafted. 
 
Canadians, on seeing this said, “Wait a minute. If future acts of the British parliament have no effect in Canada, 
we will have no way of amending the British North America Act. Please, therefore, insert a provision in the 
Statute of Westminster which says that even though no other British act passed after 1931 could have any effect 
on Canada, that British acts dealing with the amendment to the British North American Act will have effect.” That 
is, in effect what section 7(1) of the Statute of Westminster says. It says, “Hold on there; we don’t know how to 
amend the British North American Act; you are going to have to do it for us.” This request was sent formally to 
the British parliament reciting that all of the provinces and the House of Commons and the senate agreed. That 
was the situation. As the history of the day will indicate everybody assumed that Canadians would get together 
and find a way to amend the British North American Act in Canada in a few years and that amendment would 
then be introduced into the British North American Act and then the provision of the Statute of Westminster 
would be 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
460 

repealed, and we would have a British North America Act with an amending provision contained therein. 
 
Well, as we all know, some 50 years have gone by and we still don’t have a way of amending the British North 
America Act in Canada. We have made a number of amendments to the British North America Act. I should 
perhaps indicate here that the British North America Act can be amended in matters which concern only the 
federal government by act of the federal government. It can be amended in matters concerning only the provincial 
governments by act of this legislature. When I say that the British North America Act cannot be amended in 
Canada, I am, of course, referring to those amendments which affect the power of the provincial governments and 
the federal government to make laws: matters which may affect the division of legislative jurisdiction between the 
federal government and the provincial governments. 
 
There have been since 1931, a number of changes which have affected the legislative power of parliament and the 
provinces to make laws. All of those have been made by act of the Parliament of Canada or (correction) by a 
resolution of the two Houses of the Parliament of Canada and with unanimous provincial consent in each case. 
 
Canadians have addressed this matter on a number of occasions. Some will recall the round of negotiations which 
took place in the early 1960s. I had occasion to attend some of the conferences called by the Hon. Davie Fulton 
who was minister of justice. These were followed by conferences called by the Hon. Guy Favreau when he 
succeeded Mr. Fulton as minister of justice. These produced an amending formula which came to be known as the 
Fulton-Favreau formula. That did not achieve the necessary consent to have it forwarded to Westminster to be 
included as our amending formula. 
 
Another round of discussion took place in the late 1960s culminating in the federal-provincial conference at 
Victoria which gave rise to an amending formula known as the Victoria Charter. During the 1970s a number of 
proposals were put forward bearing such names (I mentioned the Victoria one), the Toronto consensus, the 
Vancouver consensus, the Canadian Bar Association formula and many others. 
 
We addressed the matter of amending the constitution in real earnest in the late years of the 1970s. We had by this 
time reached the conclusion that we were unlikely to be able to repatriate or patriate the constitution with an 
amending formula unless there were other changes. We addressed ourselves, as 11 governments to fashioning a 
pattern of changes which would meet with broad general acceptance across Canada. 
 
We had a very fruitful federal-provincial conference in October and November 1978, and a further one in 
February 1979. At that time a good number of provisions were agreed upon, at least tentatively, and so-called best 
efforts drafts were arrived at on such thorny matters as the control and management of resources, 
communications, family law and a number of other items. 
 
This round of negotiations was effectively terminated by concerns respecting the upcoming Quebec referendum 
and many of the politicians in Canada directed their attention to campaigning on one side or the other of the 
Quebec referendum. I, on behalf of our government, campaigned in Quebec and outside Quebec, giving the views 
of our government (and I hope the people of Saskatchewan) on the Quebec referendum, urging Quebecois to vote 
in favor of full partnership in the Canadian federation. That 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
461 

vote came in May 1980, and as you know, it was roughly six to four against the proposal to proceed with the 
negotiation of something called sovereignty-association. 
 
Prior to that we had had a federal election and accordingly, we had a new situation by mid-1980. We had a new 
federal government, with a new mandate, and we had a Quebec referendum at which the proposal for 
sovereignty-association had been turned back. We therefore picked up the negotiations again. In June, 1980, there 
was a first ministers’ conference, a short one to set out the procedure to be followed in the upcoming months. 
 
We agreed that we would set up a continuing committee of ministers’ of the constitution, with a co-chairman on 
the federal side, Mr. Jean Chretien, and on the provincial side, Mr. Roy Romanow, the hon. member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, colloquially known as ‘the Toque and the Uke’. They chaired the constitutional 
conferences all summer. They spent four or five weeks at various conferences in Montreal, Toronto, Vancouver 
and Ottawa, and out of that, unfortunately, no decision was forthcoming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we took the view that we should during the summer of 1980, build upon the consensus which was 
arrived at in February 1979. The federal government had a different view. They felt that many new issues needed 
to be put on the table, and they were put on the table — issues surrounding mobility rights of labor and capital and 
industry across Canada; issues surrounding a very, very elaborate charter of rights — for the most part, new 
issues. 
 
We then moved into the September conference. I wish to state and recall some of the positions taken by the 
Government of Saskatchewan at that September conference. We took the position that unilateral action by the 
federal government was inappropriate. We took the position that Canada is a federation and that no changes in the 
constitution of Canada which affect the legislative jurisdiction of the federal government and the provincial 
governments should be made without what we called the double majority. 
 
I believe that a double majority is part of the constitution of every federal state in the world, and I believe that is 
part of the constitution of Canada. Whether or not it is part of the law of Canada, we about to find out. In any 
case, it is part of the constitution of Canada. This involves, I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that no constitutional 
amendments of that kind should go forward without the consent of the federal government, by which I mean at 
least the House of Commons and a broad consensus of the provinces. I took that position at the conference. I took 
the position that the future amending formula should contain the idea of the double majority. At the end of the 
conference, I deplored those people who were suggesting that the national will was to be found only by looking at 
the view of the House of Commons (a view which I thought was being put forward by the Prime Minister), and 
the other view that the national will was to be made up of the will of the 10 provinces of Canada without reference 
to the House of Commons or the Senate. 
 
I don’t believe that either of those views is right. I believe one of them is the view of a unitary state, which Canada 
is not. The other is the view of the confederal state, which Canada is not. Canada is a federation, and in order to 
make changes we need that double majority. 
 
Well, as you know, we did not arrive at an agreement, and the Prime Minister 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
462 

announced very early in April that he was going to act unilaterally. He was going to patriate the constitution of 
Canada. He was going to add a number of things to the constitution of Canada — a charter of rights, and some 
other aspects. And he was going to do it all without any substantial measure of consent from the provinces. We 
immediately announced our opposition, and I held a press conference as soon as I had an opportunity to look at 
the material filed. I felt that I owed it to the Prime Minister to take a day or two or three to look at his material, 
and having done so, on October 9 my press release said (among other things) “I regret very much that the Prime 
Minister felt it necessary to act in this manner, i.e. unilaterally. It is inconsistent with out historical traditions and 
with our present conception of Canada as a federal state.” The later in the same press release: “I want to leave no 
doubt of my strong objection to the unilateral nature of Mr. Trudeau’s proposed action.” 
 
There could then be no doubt where the Government of Saskatchewan stood immediately after the federal 
resolution was tabled in the House of Commons and the Senate. Very shortly thereafter, a few days thereafter, the 
10 premiers met in Toronto to consider the matter. At that time it was clear that a difference was to be seen among 
the premiers. Two of the premiers, the Conservative Premier of Ontario and the Conservative Premier of New 
Brunswick, said that they approved of the unilateral actions. Six of the premiers — five Conservative premiers 
and one Social Credit premier — took another position. I’ll come back to that in a moment. The Premier of Nova 
Scotia and Premier of Saskatchewan took a third position. I do not here seek to speak for the Premier of Nova 
Scotia. There may have been a third and a fourth position, but I want now to tell you what the position of the six 
premier was, as Ii perceived it, and why we did not agree with it. 
 
The six premiers, the premiers of British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Quebec, Prince Edward Island and 
Newfoundland, decided to launch a legal action to see if they could stop the federal unilateral actions. They 
decided to launch it on the grounds that the action was illegal because it did not have the unanimous consent of 
the provinces. The member for Moosomin will doubtless have heard that. Members must understand that we are 
not now talking solely about a convention of the constitution, because conventions of the constitution by and large 
are not legally enforceable. The position taken by the six provinces was not only that this was a convention of the 
constitution, but also that it had hardened into law and the courts would enforce it. That was their position and as 
a result of that six provinces have, in one way or another launched three legal actions — one in Manitoba, one in 
Newfoundland, and one in Quebec. We did not join that action for two reasons. One, we did not believe it was 
sound in law. We believed, as the six premiers believed, that it was certainly a convention of the constitution. We 
did not believe that the Canadian courts would enforce it as part of the law. 
 
The position of our government on October 14 was set out in a very lengthy press release which I issued in 
Toronto and anyone who wishes to know the position of the Government of Saskatchewan on that matter will be 
able surely to ascertain it from reading that. There is, I think, no question that in our judgment there were grave 
concerns about whether or not this was sound in law. And there still are concerns. I don’t know what the outcome 
will be. In our judgment the six provinces will not prevail. We only have one judgment, from the Manitoba Court 
of Appeal, It was three to two for the federal position, certainly indicating that the provinces have no arguable 
case. 
 
It is, I think, interesting to note that on the basic argument advanced, that this convention had hardened into law, 
not more than one judge held with that position — 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
463 

not more than one, depending on how you read Mr. Justice Husband’s judgment. Certainly the lead judgment for 
the provinces, the judgment of Mr. Justice Solomon did not support that view of the law. He went off on another 
tack. We did not join that for another reason. We believe that basically Canadians did not want the provinces to 
assert the proposition that every change in the constitution had to have the unanimous consent of 11 governments. 
We did not believe that that was sound in law, but perhaps more important, that it was in line with what Canadians 
from coast to coast wanted. We believe that Canadians from coast to coast wanted, and still want, patriation. We 
believe that Canadians wanted, and still want, an amending formula but we believe also that Canadians wanted, 
and still want, the rights of the provincial governments and the federal government respected in this process. 
 
Our view was one which is not in accord with that of the federal government, which asserts that these changes 
must be made or can be made on the basis of the unilateral action of the federal government. It is not the view of 
the six provinces which says that these changes can only be made with the unanimous consent of the 11 
governments. Our view was that we ought to attempt to get a package which could command the support of the 
federal government and of a broad consensus of Canadians across Canada but not necessarily all of the 10 
provincial governments. That was our position and continues to be our position. We set out to work in that 
direction to see whether we could not either strip down the package to make it more broadly acceptable or 
alternatively add to it to make it more broadly acceptable. 
 
Let there be no doubt at all as to what our position was. It’s all on the record. When we appeared before the 
parliamentary committee on December 19 our preference at that time was the same as it was at the end of the 
September conference. We believed that the first step ought to be a return to the bargaining tables. That was our 
position at the end of September, was restated again in December and incidentally is our position today. 
 
We believed that if the federal government were unwilling to return to the bargaining table with all matters open, 
then we ought to arrived, by bargaining or at least by negotiation, at an amending formula, that we ought to 
proceed now with patriation and an amending formula and that is all — what I called before the parliamentary 
committee a bare-bones amending formula. I believe that that is the proper course of action. I believe that that is 
the proper course of action because I think it is the only one on which there is a large measure of agreement by 
Canadians from coast to coast, and I believe it’s the proper course of action in our dealing with the parliament of 
Westminster. There is, I think, no doubt from the history of the Statue of Westminster which I have recited that 
the British agreed to be the trustees of our constitution on the understanding that the Canadians would put together 
an amending formula, put it in the British North America Act, and then the British would be done with it. They 
did not bargain for Canadians including huge charters of rights and the rest in the constitution, and then ask the 
British to pass upon whether or not this was wise or prudent for Canadians. 
 
For all of those reasons, I have said and I continue to say (it’s all on the record of when I appeared before the 
parliamentary committee in December), that our next step, if we cannot get back to the bargaining table with all 
matters open, is to arrive at what I call a bare-bones amending formula. I think that is the proper course of action. 
If that is not going to work, if in fact a very large number of Canadians felt — as apparently a fair number do — 
that we ought to entrench a charter of rights and other things in the package at this time, then we ought to see if 
we can get a package which is more broadly acceptable to Canadians from coast to coast. 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
464 

As we saw the package, it included certain language provisions embedded in the charter of rights which were said 
to be of interest to the people of Quebec. Whether true or not I do not know, but I think we must concede the fact 
that Mr. Trudeau has considerable status to speak for the people of Quebec after his electoral victory there earlier 
in 1980. There were embedded in the charter some mobility rights which were said to be of importance to the 
province of Ontario — they certainly argued strongly enough for them at the federal-provincial conference in 
September. There were some equalization provisions of very considerable interest to the four Atlantic provinces 
and I suspect to Quebec. But there was not very much of interest specifically to western Canadians. 
 
We felt if we were building the big package, if we could have inserted provisions with respect to resource control, 
that these would offer some concessions or some advantages for western Canada. Please understand that they 
were never intended to deal with the issues surrounding federal government versus provincial government 
jurisdiction in resources. They were primarily designed to deal with issues surrounding provincial government 
versus resource companies. They flowed out of the cases we had lost in the supreme court — The Cigol case and 
the central Canada potash case, and neither of those involved any clash of federal legislation with provincial 
legislation. Each was concerned only with whether or not provincial law was valid, having regard to provincial 
constitutional jurisdiction. That’s what the resource provision were designed to deal with; we dealt with them 
exhaustively in 1978 and 1979, and arrived, as I said earlier, at a best-efforts draft to deal with them. The federal 
government has withdrawn from some of its earlier agreements, but there was some suggestion that provisions 
would be included which would be of assistance to western Canada. 
 
On the basis of this, we argued for the inclusion of resource provisions which would firstly give us the right to tax 
indirectly as well as directly; secondly confirm our right to control the rate of production and like matters of 
resources in our province; thirdly confirm that right, even though the resource might subsequently enter 
interprovincial trade and, fourthly, confirm that right, even though the resource might subsequently enter 
international trade. 
 
The first three items — matters dealing with indirect taxation with the confirmation of the right to regulate the 
production of a resource even where the resource moves to another province of Canada — are now part of the 
resolution. The confirmation with respect to a resource which might subsequently enter international trade is not 
now part of the resolution. 
 
That brought us up to the period early in January, when Mr. Chretien put forward his final amendments. We, I 
think, remember Mr. Chretien’s final amendments and it is my recollection there are not more than 10 or 15 
amendments which followed his final amendments. They came about once every half day toward the end of 
January, but that was part of the process in which we were all involved and in respect of which made it so very 
difficult to arrive at conclusions concerning the appropriate form of the resolution. 
 
When Mr. Chretien had brought in his amendments, we had a package which included patriation, with which 
everybody agreed, an amending formula which had a formula for provinces — a legislative formula. If I may put 
it that way, which said that future amendments would require the consent, in effect, of the region of Quebec, the 
region of Ontario, the region of Atlantic Canada, represented by any two provinces, and the region of western 
Canada, represented by two or more provinces, making up 50 per 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
465 

cent of the population. 
 
While that would not have been our choice of a formula and while we put forward to the parliamentary committee 
an alternative which did not name Quebec and Ontario but which said there should be seven provinces with 80 per 
cent of the population — two of the seven being from Atlantic Canada and two of the seven being from the four 
western provinces and those two or more making up 50 per cent of the population (it’s there in the brief) — we 
were prepared to accept the so-called Victoria Charter arrangement. 
 
The amending formula also contained within it a referendum provision. Our government takes the view that a 
referendum provision is in appropriate and unwise in constitutional amendments in Canada. Dealing first with a 
couple of the technical aspects of it, when the referendum provision first came in, it provided that the federal 
government could introduce an amendment into the House of Commons and the Senate and as soon as that had 
been passed, it could call a referendum without giving the provinces even the right to consider the matter — what 
I call the instant referendum. We campaigned strongly against that and put forward some amendments through 
negotiations with the federal government and other provinces. I am glad to say — I believe partly as a result of 
our efforts — that that provision is out. 
 
This is only patching something you don’t like. It’s always a problem when you say you oppose the idea of a 
referendum to say, “But if it’s going to be there I wish to fix it in the following ways.” We did that, in part with 
respect to the proposal for an instance referendum. We did it, in part, with respect to a rules committee which 
would have something like the powers of the chief electoral officer of Canada. We, however, do not agree with 
the idea of a referendum, because we believe that it is possible for it to be very, very dividing in a country like 
Canada. 
 
It is so easy to think of the legislative and constitutional amendments in Canada which would divide region 
against region. It is so easy to see us ranging ourselves against eastern Canada or against Quebec on a referendum. 
Canada is a regional country. It is now divided in its outlook. I wish it were not so, but it is true. Many of these 
divisions can only be healed by compromises. There is no possibility of a compromise with a referendum. It is 
black or white. This country is only now recovering from the last major, national reference we had during World 
War II. It was called a plebiscite then. It was a plebiscite as opposed to a referendum. But that divided us into the 
Quebec region and the other three regions. Those wounds are only now healing. I suggest that we would have 
more wounds of that nature. We would have the prospect of a federal government launching referenda because 
provincial governments could not agree with federal action. We would have competing advertising campaigns. 
We would have gross oversimplification of very complicated issues. And in the end, I suggest, in many occasions 
we would have region arrayed against region. I suggest that in this country, at this time, a referendum is not an 
appropriate way to go about constitutional amendment. So, we have opposed the referendum consistently. 
 
There are equalization provisions in Mr. Christine’s package. The original ones were quite inadequate. We 
advanced some drafts and the drafts have found their way into the resolution, and we are pleased. 
 
The resource provisions are highly desirable with respect to indirect taxation and our right to regulate and control 
production of resources. They are inadequate in so far as they leave open the question of what happens when our 
right to control the production 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
466 

of a resource runs counter to the federal government’s right to regulate interprovincial and international trade. 
 
There is a very extensive charter of rights. The charter of rights contains language rights, protecting the French 
language. We approve of the language rights contained in the charter. We approve of those contained in the 
document filed in October. We find some of the new changes obscure. We’re not sure what they mean. If they 
mean what we think they mean, we have no opposition to them. Certainly we would have had no opposition to the 
original ones filed in October. There are, however, many other things in the charter. It has been the position of our 
government that we felt that an entrenched charter of rights was on balance not a good idea for Canada. I approve 
of charters of rights, but I approve of charters of rights passed by the Parliament of Canada and the legislatures of 
the 10 provinces. I do not wish them embedded in the constitution because I believe that places on the courts the 
ultimate decision with respect to many broad social issues which, in my judgment, ought to be decided in the 
political and not the legal arena. I have given many instances of this in the past but I will give a couple today so 
people will know what I’m talking about. 
 
Take the issue of whether or not there should be capital punishment. People will know that I do not approve of 
capital punishment. That’s not relevant to this discussion. There is in the charter a provision that outlaws any cruel 
or unusual punishment — in those words. The same words are to be found in the American constitution. In that 
constitution we have seen in recent years, in the last two decades, a goodly number of supreme court decisions on 
the matter of capital punishment which have had the effect of laying down the rules under which there may or 
may not be capital punishment. 
 
I may or may not agree with the Supreme Court of the United States on those matter. I take the view, however, 
that those are issues which ought to be decided by the public. They ought to be the warp and woof of political 
discussion. I do not believe that Canadians will long accept willingly the idea that they are removed from the 
political arena because they are embedded in a charter of rights and therefore are moved to the judicial arena. 
 
I say the same with respect to something like Sunday observance. I don’t know whether freedom of religion 
means the freedom not have the tenets of one religion enforced upon one, but that is certainly a very tenable view. 
If this is so, then I think we must recognize the possibility of the courts deciding that Sunday is in essence a 
Christian day, that it is something which we ought not necessarily to expect Moslems, or Buddhists, or adherents 
to a native religion to adhere to, and therefore there is no justification in law for enforcing Christian holidays like 
Sunday or Christmas. That has a certain appeal from the point of view of pure logic, but it strikes me that in a 
country like Canada with a strong Christian tradition, there is a large body of the public that believes that they 
ought to have a voice in whether, let us say, stores are open Christmas Day, that it ought to be at least partly in the 
political arena and it ought not, by having it embedded in a charter of rights, be removed from the political arena 
and moved over to the judicial arena. I could give many, many examples of that. They are there in the charter. 
 
The history of the United States Bill of Rights is instructive in this regard. I had an interesting conversation with a 
clergyman a few weeks ago. He was a clergyman who took the view that he opposed abortion. He said he went to 
a conference of clergymen in the United States, and they sat about having a bit of a round robin on the abortion 
issue. They asked the Americans: “Where is the abortion issue in your state, and in your 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
467 

state, and in your state?” One said, “Our state court has said this,” and the other said, “The federal court of appeal 
in our area has said this.” They went around, all stating where the abortion issue was in each court, and they asked 
the Canadians: “And where do you stand? What do your courts say?” It then dawned on the Canadians that it 
wasn’t the courts who said what happened in Canada, but it was rather in the Criminal Code and in the statutes of 
Canada. 
 
Now I don’t know where one stands on the issue of abortion, and it’s not relevant for this particular argument. 
However, I am of the view that a great number of citizens feel that they ought to have a voice in that issue, and 
that it ought not to be withdrawn from the political arena and transferred to the judicial arena by reason of having 
it embedded in a charter of rights. So for all of these reasons — and you’ve heard me give these reasons on many 
occasions — I take the view that the best compromise is to have a charter passed by the Parliament of Canada, and 
a charter passed by each province, which will protect each individual, which will serve to be a basis for allowing 
each individual, if he feels an injustice, to take his case to court, but if in the process of adjudicating on the rights 
of that individual a broad social issue is determined by the courts, it can still be reviewed by the legislature or the 
parliament. I think that’s the best balance between protecting individual rights by a charter of rights and protecting 
the rights of the voters to have a voice in the broad social issues which determine the society in which we live. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So we have, for the reasons I have articulated, opposed the entrenchment of a 
charter. I know that my views are not shared by a great number of people whose views I respect. It may well be 
that I’m wrong on this, but I feel rather strongly that the point of view which I hold ought to be articulated, and 
ought not to be swept away by those who are simply asserting their devotion to human rights. This is not the issue. 
The issue is not human rights; the issue is not charters of rights. The issue is the best way to protect human rights, 
both in the person’s capacity as an individual and his capacity as a voter and a citizen. 
 
It is sometimes argued that all of the Japanese Canadian were badly treated in Canada during wartime, and that it 
wouldn’t have happened if we had had a charter of rights. No one can deny that they were badly treated. It is at 
least arguable whether it would have made a particle of difference whether we had had a charter of rights or not. 
The Americans had a bill of rights at that time and they moved the Japanese just as unceremoniously away from 
the Pacific coast and inland as we did. 
 
The rigors of wartime and the concerns about national safety are not likely to be mitigated and ignored simply 
because there is a charter of rights or a bill of rights. The essential protection for human rights is, as we all know, 
the belief by the broad group of citizens that the rights of the minority are their rights, and that they must be 
protected because who knows who is going to be the next minority. 
 
Well, that brings us up really to the last three or four weeks. We had some last minute negotiations with the 
federal government, and there have been some press reports on those, indicating that they were prepared to make 
some changes in the referendum provisions, changes which, I regret very much, are not there; changes which, I 
regret very much, I could not agree with, not because I couldn’t agree with the changes but because of what went 
with them. 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
468 

They offered us something further with respect to resource control, but they coupled that with a proposal that the 
status of the Senate be changed. The resolution now contains a provision respecting the Senate, or rather does not 
contain a provision with respect to the Senate which will have the effect of a very major change in the status of the 
Senate, having to do with constitutional reform. 
 
There are those who say that because the Senate is not now included in the resolutions, we are maintaining the 
status quo. That is entirely wrong. Those, by the way, include some of the by-line writers on the pages of the 
Leader-Post, who are quite wrong. They simply are not appreciative of the legal aspects involved. Let me try to 
outline the situation. 
 
Right now the amending formula of the constitution in Canada is effectively this: what will the British 
government accept in order to pass an amendment to the BNA Act? That, by and large, is the amending formula. 
It is a little inelegant but that’s what it is. 
 
I believe that if the House of Commons passed a resolution, and that 10 provincial legislatures passed a resolution 
and shipped it off to Westminster, the British would change the BNA Act like that, in a very short time, whether 
the Senate agreed or didn’t agree. Because I believe that’s the case (and I don’t know who has ever disputed it), 
the Senate does not now have a veto in fact, or in law. 
 
You will all know that in ordinary Canadian laws, the Senate has a veto. You can’t pass an amendment to the 
Criminal Code of Canada without the Senate agreeing, because for ordinary Canadian laws, the Senate has a veto. 
But the British North America Act is not an ordinary Canadian law. It’s a British law, and the Senate does not 
have a veto. 
 
The effect of this resolution before the House of Commons and the Senate, if passed by the parliament at 
Westminster, will be to change the BNA Act from a British law to a Canadian law. By the very fact of changing it 
from a British law to a Canadian law you give the Senate an absolute veto — absolute, the same as they have in 
the Criminal Code. Now the Senate does not have a veto in fact or in law, and when it is over the Senate will have 
a veto both in fact and in law, and any court will enforce it. And that is a major change. It is a change which our 
government could not accept. I wish the Progressive Conservative members on the House of Commons and the 
Senate committee had raised strong objections to this change in the status of the Senate, but I regret they did not 
do so. 
 
Leaving that matter aside, I am saying the proposals with respect to the Senate are unacceptable and they ought to 
be unacceptable to Canadians. No responsible proposal for change of the constitution made during the 1970s, that 
I am aware of did not contain a proposal to remove the Senate veto. 
 
The Victoria Charter, of which I spoke, provided that amendments under it would have to have the consent of the 
House of Commons and the Senate, but if the Senate did not agree with what the House of Commons said, the 
House of Commons could pass it again in 90 days and that was it — a 90-day suspensory veto. During this 
process it was suggested that this be 180-day suspensive veto. We raised no object to that. If another 90 days is 
needed in order to explain this to the Canadian public, all right. But the suggestion that the Senate, of all people, 
should have an absolute veto, is surely repugnant to anybody’s idea of democracy. 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
469 

Let’s see where we are with respect to this issue now. Suppose you are promoting a constitutional amendment and 
the House of Commons doesn’t like it. You can change the House of Commons, or you can vote to change it. 
Suppose the legislature of any province of Canada rejects a constitutional amendment which has been passed by 
the House of Commons and some other provinces. There is now a proposal for a referendum. If the legislature of 
British Columbia or the legislature of Ontario does not agree with the constitutional amendment there can be a 
referendum. But if the Senate doesn’t agree, there can be no referendum. You can get at legislatures by votes and 
referendums; you can get at the House of Commons by electoral votes; you can get at the Senate in no possible 
way, except the grim reaper. 
 
That is the proposal which now stands in that resolution and that is the proposal which is unacceptable — 
unacceptable to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Where are we now? Let me attempt to say where I think we are in Canada now. 
The process of which I have spoken is certainly one which is dividing Canadians. It is raising the level of 
bitterness in Canada. There is great potential for further bitterness. There is a prospect that there will, in the 
Parliament of Canada, be closure applied to terminate the debate prematurely. That will raise further bitterness. 
There is a prospect (I hope a small one, but I am not sure it is) that the federal government would forward to 
Westminster resolutions for action by the British parliament before the Supreme Court of Canada has dealt with 
the issues which are now in dispute. That would be clearly in violation of all principles and rules of law and 
would put the British parliament in an exceedingly difficult position — one which they ought not to be put in, one 
which Canada ought not to foist upon those who have accepted this job as the trustee of our constitution, not by 
their wish, but by ours. There are prospects, if the parliament at Westminster very properly decides not to deal 
with this matter until it has been through the courts in Canada, that comment would be made, objection would be 
raised and that abuse may even be hurled at the parliament of Westminster for doing the job we asked them to do. 
We’ve already heard suggestions that Canada might be considering withdrawing from the Commonwealth and 
other totally irresponsible suggestions simply because the British parliament was asking, and British 
parliamentarians are asking. questions which are entirely proper for them to ask. So I think the prospect for further 
division, is very much there. 
 
We believe that in all these circumstances, the proper course of action is to make a last effort at getting a broad 
consensus and I want to say to hon. members opposite that I think this is our best hope — to make a last effort at a 
broad consensus. And I want to say that if the federal government takes the view that it can act unilaterally, that is 
no basis for broad consensus. Or if the other people take the view that all 11 governments must agree on all 
issues, that’s no basis for a broad consensus because that’s not going to happen. Therefore, we must be there 
looking for a basis which is not based upon unilateral action and is not based upon unanimity. That has been the 
position of the Government of Saskatchewan and continues to be the position of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. I invite anyone to look at all the public statements made by our government to see whether they’re 
not only consistent with that position but virtually inconsistent with any other position. 
 
We, therefore, as this House to adopt this motion. I want you, Mr. Speaker, to consider carefully what the motion 
says. It opposed the current attempt by the federal 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
470 

government to patriate and amend the constitution of Canada and, surely, we can all agree with that. Believing 
that the unilateral nature of the process is incompatible with the fundamental principles of Canadian federalism 
(and surely we can all agree with that), that constitutional changes must have a broad basis of support among 
Canadians (you understand our position on that), and that the proposals, if implemented, would upset the balance 
of Canada’s federal system (and I believe particularly the provisions with respect to the referendum have that 
potential, that very real potential!), we have put forward this motion because we believe that it represents 
something that everyone in this House can support. It represents a position which will be widely supported by 
people across Saskatchewan. It represents our opportunity to put a unanimous position on constitutional 
amendment before the authorities at Ottawa and before anyone else, be they at Westminster or elsewhere, to 
whom this resolution ought properly to be put. We believe that this is the best way to go. All of us could state in 
ringing prose our own position but that is to invite division in this House when we are looking for support on both 
sides of this House. 
 
Therefore, I am moving, Mr. Speaker, the motion which I will read in a moment, which declares our objection to 
the process, declares our object to the contents and declares that the legislature of this province, and I believe the 
people of this province, object to the contents, object to the process and call for an effort to get a broad basis of 
support among Canadians for a constitutional amendment being patriated and an amending formula which can 
command the support of Canadians from coast to coast. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. MacMurchy: 
 

That this Assembly opposes the current attempt by the federal government to patriate and amend the 
constitution of Canada, believing that the unilateral nature of the process is incompatible with the fundamental 
principles of Canadian federalism, that constitutional changes must have a broad basis of support among 
Canadians, and that the proposals, if implemented, would upset the balance of Canada’s federal system. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — It is somewhat interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier has urged one last kick at the cat, one 
more call to the negotiating table. Yet it has been obvious since last September that the Premier is either stalling 
for time or completely misreading or underestimating the federal government position, because it is quite clear in 
the strategy paper leaked on the first ministers’ conference that once unilateral patriation is commenced by the 
Government of Canada, and once the step is taken, there is no turning back and it must be proceeded with to its 
logical conclusion. It is stated right in the strategy paper. I think that takes away dramatically from the tenor and 
intent of the motion. 
 
It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, as an aside that when the Premier wanted his motion today he dropped item 
one. In that particular motion, the phrase: 
 

That the legislature endorse the efforts being made by the Government of Saskatchewan to secure changes in 
the federal resolution to make it more broadly acceptable 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
471 

has been very pointedly dropped from the motion. I think it indicates that not only do the people of Saskatchewan 
not support the efforts being made by the government opposite, but I suggest the people of Saskatchewan are 
deeply and gravely concerned by the actions of the government opposite, by its refusal for some considerable 
period of time (and if the remarks of the Attorney General on the weekend are any indication for some future 
time), to take all actions necessary to oppose the unilateral patriation of the constitution. 
 
Every once in a while we get a statement on our desks, but somewhere there is a statement which came today to 
the members regarding .-.-. (inaudible interjection) .-.-. I am going to suggest that hon. members should read what 
is put on their desks, because I have had the opportunity to do it when I was listening to the Premier’s remarks. I 
think it may in fact sum up what the people of Saskatchewan feel about the position of the government opposite. I 
am quoting from a speech which we all received from Mr. Panabaker, president, chief executive officer, Mutual 
Life Assurance. He opens his statement on the constitution by saying: 
 

Near the end of the musical My Fair Lady, Elizabeth Doolittle, frustrated beyond endurance by the actions 
and attitudes of other characters, says vehemently: ‘Word, words, words. I’m sick of words. I’ve had words 
all day through. First from him and now from you. Is that all your blighters can do?’ 

 
And I think that sums up the constitutional position of the government opposite. that it’s been words, words, 
words, and no action. There’s little doubt that the position of the government opposite with regard to the 
constitution and its debate has been a matter of much concern to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Sitting on the fence is not Saskatchewan’s nature. It is also not the nature of Saskatchewan to have its political 
leaders refuse to take strong and dynamic stands. The break with tradition continues in that it has always been 
Saskatchewan’s tradition to have strong, vocal leaders strongly argue Saskatchewan’s position at constitutional 
councils and Saskatchewan has always had a tradition of strong and vocal headers fighting for Saskatchewan’s 
interests against those of central Canada and a centrally oriented federal government. This tradition included 
Jimmy Gardiner and Tommy Douglas and Ross Thatcher, but obviously the tradition has come to an end. 
 
Why is this failure of leadership so tragic? Because western Canadians have to fight. We are faced today with an 
intrusion into the ownership, management and control of our resources and we are facing a massive effort by the 
federal government to stop development in western Canada at the very time when we are on the verge of attaining 
new economic power and political maturity. 
 
With regard to our resources, it is interesting to note that Ontario and Quebec (and I’m just going to give a short 
history lesson; the Premier gave a very lengthy one) had full control and ownership of their resources since 
confederation. However, with regard to the western provinces (and I think, in fairness, if one integrates into the 
argument offshore resources, the maritime provinces), we haven’t had that control. We have had to fight to try to 
get ownership of our resources. Manitoba has been in confederation for approximately 111 years and has had 
ownership and control of its resources for only the last 51 years. While Saskatchewan and Alberta have been in 
confederation now for approximately 75 years, they have had full ownership and control of their 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
472 

resources for only 51 years. In other words, western Canadians have not been recognized as equals and have not 
had equal rights and powers from the time they entered confederation. 
 
I need not rehash to any great length the eastern Canadian bias which exists in Canadian politics — a bias which 
we must overcome in western Canada by fighting harder and more vocally than others. We in western Canada 
have chosen, I think rightly, to reject the national government of Canada and, without access to the councils of 
power, it is incumbent upon our provincial leaders to take an even stronger stand and to argue more strongly than 
perhaps would normally be the case. 
 
It is trite to say that the populous areas have the power and western Canada does not yet have the political power 
to wrest that power from central Canada. But where is Saskatchewan in this battle for economic and political 
power? The Attorney General and the Premier both have stated that Saskatchewan must take the middle road. The 
Premier made it quite clear in the Saskatchewan perspective that he endorsed the middle road. The Attorney 
General, time and time again, said Saskatchewan must take the middle road. The Attorney General on releases as 
late as August stated that Saskatchewan should take the middle road. I’m not sure that’s a correct. position. 
 
Let’s look at some of the actions. The Government of Saskatchewan proposed a national energy plan and, as a 
consequence of that proposal, has lost credibility across Canada when it attempts to fight the Trudeau-imposed 
national energy plan. The Government of Saskatchewan proposes a national energy bank to give up control of half 
our resources, and thus loses credibility when it attempts to oppose federal government take over of our resources. 
The middle of the road is not the answer. 
 
We stated our constitutional position in this Assembly last spring. We believed then that there was one course of 
action for Saskatchewan, and we have not changed our position today. I suggest ours is the only party in this 
legislature that can say it has been consistent since it stated its constitutional position. We have no choice in 
western Canada but to have that unity of spirit with other western Canadian provinces. We suggested last spring 
that the proper course of action was for the Government of Saskatchewan to support the other western provinces, 
to get together with the western provinces, to do our negotiating with the premiers of Alberta, Manitoba, and 
British Columbia, and to come to a consensus or a common position that we can support in what I believe to be 
the inevitable confrontation with Pierre Elliott Trudeau. I say inevitable because that has been his forte and his 
course of action since he became Prime Minister, that is to say confrontation and not conciliation. 
 
The fight that we urge and have been urging can take two forms: action and words. Saskatchewan is now 
attempting to use words not anywhere near the strength and stridency of former leaders and former governments 
in this province, yet with equivocation, which has not been the practice in Saskatchewan history. The word, we 
believe, which should have been used was no from the start. We may be prepared to negotiate but our position is 
no to unilateral patriation, no to the charter of rights, and no to the unilateral actions of Pierre Trudeau, not taking 
the position that we’ll talk about it, that we’ll sit down and try to renegotiate. It’s interesting that the middle of the 
road position was again reaffirmed by the Premier today. There were confusion and contradictions in the position 
of the government opposite. First of all we tried, and I think members opposite can remember, to find out last fall 
whether or not the Premier was going to appear before the constitution committee. “Decision hasn’t been made; 
decision hasn’t been made; decision hasn’t been made.” We asked when they were 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
473 

going to appear before the constitutional committee when finally a decision was made. “Well, we’re not sure, 
we’re not sure, and we’re not sure.” Finally when the Premier was out we asked the Deputy Premier, “When are 
you going?” He made the tactical error opposite or broke with the common front and gave a date and came back, 
much to the surprise of the Premier, “Oh, I guess now we’re going.” I told him we were going. He didn’t even 
know when, or if, you were going before the joint Commons-Senate committee. 
 
His appearance before that committee was, in my view, an attitude of defeatism. “You are going to proceed, Pierre 
Elliott Trudeau, therefore we have to try to make the best of a bad situation and we propose the following 
alternative,” or, “We don’t particularly like that but if you are going ahead, keep this in mind.” This was 
notwithstanding that the Premier and the government opposite were faced with one of the most damning 
documents — the federal government strategy position, precisely what the Government of Canada was going to 
do. 
 
I suggest, notwithstanding the answer today during question period, confusion as to the government opposite’s 
position. The Attorney General wants the Premier to get back on the fence and withdraw his objection; the 
Premier says that they may be considering now the matter before the supreme court, but he is very imprecise and 
uncertain. That confusion and indecision is the talk of the eastern Canadian press and I think that all members of 
this Assembly are well aware of that reaction. words were uttered, but not strong words, and not decisive words. 
What action could the Government of Saskatchewan have taken? It could have joined the other six provinces in 
the court challenge to unilateral patriation of the constitution. The Premier has attempted to give a defence this 
afternoon as to why he didn’t. That defence contradicts what he said on October 14. He said, and I am quoting 
from the fourth paragraph of the statement by the Hon. Allan Blakeney, October 14: 
 

Such unilateral action is inconsistent with Canada’s traditions and with the fundamental principles of a federal 
state. It may also be a breach of Canada’s constitutional law, a question which will not doubt be tested in the 
courts. 

 
I think I said that rather accurately. I think that indicates most clearly, Mr. Premier, that you had doubts as to the 
constitutional validity of the unilateral action. If you had those doubts, the action to take against the federal 
government was the action of joining the court action. It is interesting that through this time the Government of 
Canada was led to believe that it had an ally or a potential ally from western Canada. I would like, if I may, to 
quote from the federal strategy paper indicating just how important it was for the federal government to have a 
symbol of a lack of western unity. On page 41 it says: 
 

Given the government’s lack of representation, it would probably be more difficult to defend unilateral action 
on such a regionally sensitive issue as resources than it would be to withstand a ferocious attack by the 
Government of Quebec over the entrenchment of minority language education rights given the federal 
government’s strong representation from Quebec. 

 
Breaking up a solid western provinces block of opposition is a prerequisite to our being in a position to take 
action on package 3 rather than package 3(a). Saskatchewan may prove to be the key. The argument has been 
put to the provinces that they would do well to make a deal on resources now because the chance to do so in 
the future may not come around for a long time in 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
474 

which case they will have to live with the status quo because they wanted too much. 
 
The federal government itself in September and in August knew the importance of a divided West and they knew 
the importance of a western Canada that wasn’t talking with one position. They knew how important it was to 
their cause to be able to have in particular the key, Saskatchewan, sitting on the fence at least, and preferably in 
support. They knew how important it was for Saskatchewan to be isolated, separated from the other western 
provinces. 
 
I would be frankly surprised if the Government of Saskatchewan didn’t have that position paper and the strategy 
paper. Let me indicate again how afraid they were of a unified western position. I am not quoting from page 36: 
 

Given that unilateral action will be undertaken in the face of widespread provincial government and 
parliamentary opposition, it will be important to ensure that the particular package is popular among the 
citizens of all regions of the country. A solid front of provincial government and parliamentary government 
opposition from the West could pose real difficulties for the Government of Canada. 

 
Real difficulties. You could have stopped Trudeau’s action by opposing this action from the outset. You could 
have stopped the divisive position being taken by the Government of Canada if you had opposed and stayed firm 
with the other western provinces. the most symbolic action you could have taken at the time of the unilateral 
patriation move, to show your opposition, was joining the court action. You could have done it. 
 
Such action would have been a strong symbol both of concern and of opposition, a symbol to all Canadians the 
one major region of Canada was strongly opposed to the constitutional position and proposals of Pierre Elliott 
Trudeau. More than a symbol, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would have been strong proof that western Canada was 
opposed to the unilateral patriation of the constitution and much of the constitutional package. But 
Saskatchewan’s position, as stated by the Premier opposite and the government opposite and the Deputy Premier, 
was evidence to Trudeau that western Canada was divided, that Trudeau in fact had an ally in western Canada, 
that Saskatchewan was prepared to go along with him if the price was right. The Government of Saskatchewan’s 
position made it clear to Trudeau that he could proceed because the West was in fact divided. Saskatchewan 
walked into Trudeau’s trap notwithstanding that his position had been made clear in the strategy paper. 
 
Would a court action have stopped negotiations. Of course not. Would the challenge have prevented further 
discussions? Of course not. The Premier knows full well that in any court case negotiations can proceed while the 
matter is proceedings to court, and negotiations can proceed even after an appeal process if an appeal is being 
proceeded with. 
 
Here’s the tragedy for Saskatchewan people. Your actions, and the government’s position, and the Premier’s 
statements, left a very distinct and clear impression in eastern Canada and in Ottawa, that you would support 
Trudeau’s position. The Leader of New Democratic Party. Ed Broadbent, said Allan Blakeney would have no 
trouble supporting the constitutional package. I could quote that. After the release of the 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
475 

package Ed Broadbent said, and I’m quoting from the Leader-Post of October 22: 
 

I haven’t the slightest doubt that Mr. Blakeney would be pleased. 
 
Was that ever refuted? No. It was never refuted. So the impression was reinforced again that Allan Blakeney and 
the Government of Saskatchewan would come around. 
 
Saskatchewan’s position, as I have indicated earlier, also was filled with inconsistencies. First it was going to 
appear and then not appear. Then no dates were set. We have the confusion today, as I have stated earlier, over 
whether or not there should be a court challenge, whether or not the Premier decides to go to London. The 
Attorney General say in Calgary that the Premier should go to London. So we still don’t know what the 
government opposite is prepared to do. 
 
I think it very significant that the Premier did not oppose the constitutional package when it was introduced, and 
now decides to oppose the package even though the NDP has said there has been significant improvement which 
it’s taking credit for. If the new improved package was worthy of support, or was worthy of opposition, why did 
you not oppose the original package? That’s a very inconsistent position. The new improved one is worthy of 
opposition but not the first one — a very strange inconsistent position to take. Why is the court action so 
important? I say it is important in fact, and I also say symbolically, because Saskatchewan has been involved in 
every court action on the constitution since 1961. Failure to join in this one certainly leaves the impression that the 
matter was not important enough, or Saskatchewan was not going to use all of its efforts to oppose the package 
and was prepared at least to remain neutral. 
 
In addition to losing a court challenge on potash and oil in the past in the Supreme Court of Canada, the Premier 
opposite said the supreme court was biased. He then proceeded to use the fact that the Saskatchewan Court of 
Appeal had found in favor of the provincial government’s position. Surely you could do the same today. 
 
In all your political defences of your actions taken on potash and oil, you used the fact that you had the support of 
the Saskatchewan court. Why today are you afraid to appear before that very court or the Saskatchewan courts? 
You’ve used them as a defence in the past. I can quote from the Premier on November 23, 1977, when he began 
to play the numbers game on the number of judges. He’s referring to the supreme court decision on Bill No. 42, 
stating again what he believed, even though the supreme court overruled him: 
 

We believe our position to be constitutionally sound. So indeed did the Court of Queen’s Bench in 
Saskatchewan believe it to be constitutionally sound. So indeed did the court of appeal in Saskatchewan, to 
whom you would have us refer the things, believe it to be constitutionally sound. 

 
Five judges for and no judges against. It has now gone to the supreme court and seven judges apparently have 
found against it, and two for it. 

 
In fact the Premier said eight superior court judges have held that the law was constitutional and seven superior 
court judges have found that the law was unconstitutional. He used the numbers game in the past — why not 
today? Would it not be better to get a decision from the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal and begin to follow the 
process that you’ve used in the past? The failure of the government opposite to use even its past practices 
indicates that it is not prepared to use its best efforts and its 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
476 

strongest efforts to fight and oppose Trudeau’s constitutional package. 
 
The Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, in addition, is one of the most experienced courts in Canada in constitutional 
matters. Its effort would be a speedy course of action to obtain a hearing by the courts. Again, a significant 
weapon is not being used in the constitutional fight. 
 
Why not an appearance before members of the British parliament by the Premier of Saskatchewan and the Leader 
of the Progressive Conservative Party? We do not include the leader or spokesman of the Liberal party because it 
has publicly stated its endorsation of the constitutional position. Frankly, based on the actions and the evidence to 
date, we don’t believe that you would argue in the strongest terms before the British members of parliament. It 
would be necessary for a representative of the official opposition to appear and make it clear that a significant 
percentage of the people of Saskatchewan have, in fact, opposed that package from the outset and that this 
opposition is not a recent phenomenon. The representative of the official opposition would be able to make sure 
that full efforts are being made to convince members of the British parliament that the people of Saskatchewan 
oppose the unilateral patriation of the constitution. 
 
The Premier of Saskatchewan could make it clear to the people of Saskatchewan would not be bound by 
constitutional proposals which take away their rights and powers and privileges unless the people of 
Saskatchewan agree to such changes. The Premier could take action as a first step within his own party. 
 
It is very interesting to note that in September the national leader of the New Democratic Party stated that Allan 
Blakeney would have no difficulty supporting the constitutional package. All Saskatchewan NDP members of 
parliament supported that package and voted in favor of the resolution endorsing the package — every single one 
of them voted in favor. But in February, only because of the political heat in Saskatchewan, the Premier then, 
exercising this influence as leader of the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party, proceeded to put pressure on 
Saskatchewan NDP members of parliament. It’s very, very interesting to speculate whether Trudeau would, in 
fact, have proceeded in the manner he did, if the New Democratic members had not indicated their support at the 
outset and if the New Democratic Party had been at least divided in its support. But the Premier took no action in 
September and October. He refused to take action. He could have done it because he did it in February. 
 
Throughout this whole debate, since the federal position was set out and laid out, it is obvious that the Premier of 
Saskatchewan has not taken courses of action which would indication is opposition. There is little doubt that he 
has left the impression in central Canada that he could support the package with some amendment and it was only 
a matter of determining price. The real danger is that Allan Blakeney may well have the single and sole 
responsibility for Trudeau’s actions because, firstly, he has held himself out as the great negotiator and the great 
conciliator and this image has been fostered by members opposite. I recall speeches by the member for Regina 
North-East; I see the member for Shellbrook endorsed that .-.-. (inaudible interjection) .-.-. Oh, you’re not there 
yet, Mr. Minister. You’ve got a long way to go out there before you’re the member for Shellbrook-Torch River. 
 
But let me say this image fostered and even the political apologensia of John Twigg and whoever is writing for the 
Financial Post these days, even they reinforced the impression that Allan Blakeney was a man of stature and a 
great conciliator and a great 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
477 

negotiator. If he had that stature, then the obligation was twice as great on him to take a stand, and the failure of a 
man of that stature to take action again reinforces the impression in eastern Canada that he would support the 
package and that Trudeau had an ally. He can’t have it both ways. 
 
The Premier has made it clear that Pierre Elliott Trudeau could proceed with the national energy package, for 
example, because it was the Premier opposite, over the objection of most, if not all premiers, who was proposing a 
national energy package. He has certainly given the impression to Trudeau that a national energy package would 
be well in order and would be supported in Saskatchewan. You cannot say that he is a man of political influence 
when he refused and fails to use that influence. In addition, there was the deliberate attack that went on from 
government members opposite and I’m assuming that, at least by silence, the Premier was endorsing the attempts 
by government members and cabinet ministers. I think the former minister of highways was the prime example, 
saying that our neighboring province’s premier, Premier Lougheed, was in fact a separatist. The members to my 
far left were simply the advance guard for the separatist Lougheed. So while you are taking a neutral position in 
eastern Canada on the constitution, you were actively encouraging a position designed to embarrass the Alberta 
leaders — obviously not a position of western unity, and obviously not a position of western opposition to the 
constitutional position. 
 
There is no doubt that the eastern press for once was right when they said the loser in the constitutional debate 
was the Premier of Saskatchewan. He lost respect throughout Canada, going so far as to have been called the 
constitutional Nero, obviously fiddling while the country burns. His judgment has been seriously doubted and it’s 
not just a tragedy of the party opposite, it’s Saskatchewan’s tragedy, and for that we all suffer a great deal or have 
a great deal of regret. Saskatchewan and western Canada are under attack as they never have been, for which the 
Premier and the government opposite must take a significant share of the responsibility. We’ve said again and 
again that the West must stick together and the West must work together. No single province is able to stand up to 
a tyrannical federal government, and if we need evidence of that, the Quebec referendum is the most recent 
example. It was folly for the government opposite to take the position that it could deal with the federal 
government as an equal political power, especially in light of the stated position of the federal government that the 
West could be divided and that Saskatchewan was the obvious ally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition will be presenting amendments setting out the specific action that can be taken. The 
resolution is obviously of little practical value. We will be supporting it, but we want to make it clear as well that 
we will be proposing a course of action which I feel the members opposite can endorse, so that not only do we 
just have words, we have actions, because action is long overdue. The amendments will be introduced by future 
speakers. The reason is that some of us may want to get back into the debate once we find out whether or not the 
Deputy Premier now supports the Premier, or the Premier supports the Deputy Premier. And we want to hear what 
the Deputy Premier’s position is on the constitutional debate because they’ve been going at odds and making 
conflicting statements. Perhaps once the cabinet have all given their own opinions, we may finally be able to 
distill the position of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with, I think, a great deal of regret that the people of Saskatchewan are today angry and 
frustrated and upset with the position of the government opposite or lack thereof. It is surprising when we have a 
tactical paper which laid out in 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
478 

unbelievable detail what the federal government was going to do, that the government opposite would go along 
with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a tragedy for Saskatchewan, and it has been a tragedy for western Canada. We have one 
choice, one option, and that is to begin to take some action — the action I have outlined. The immediate step, Mr. 
Speaker, is a constitutional reference under the constitutional references act of this province to the court of appeal. 
Saskatchewan has to do it alone; because it is so far behind the other provinces, it should begin to make up for lost 
ground and should begin immediately. 
 
I would hope that the members opposite will come forward with some justification for the lack of action. I would 
hope that the defence they give is far better than the one attempted this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. I wait with a great 
deal of interest to see if the Government of Saskatchewan is finally prepared to take some action on Trudeau’s 
unilateral patriation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I find it particularly interesting that the member for Qu’Appelle 
should be standing in this House and talking about any alleged inconsistencies on anybody’s part. He should be 
talking today about the need to fight and the need for action. It is particularly ironic that that member should be 
accusing this government, of all governments, and the leader of this government, of all leaders, of being soft on 
resource companies. 
 
I recall the kind of credibility that this government has built in its defence of the people of Saskatchewan, 
credibility built in fights with the oil companies (oil companies supported by the members opposite), fights with 
the potash companies, fights in the courts over Saskatchewan resources and the right of Saskatchewan people to 
control those resources, fights in the supreme court for the rights of Saskatchewan people — all fights against the 
advice of the member for Qu’Appelle; that member who, in previous incarnations, cast himself very clearly on the 
side of the multinational corporations and in opposition to the people of Saskatchewan; that member who, in 
debate on Bill 42, said that we are destroying the principle of equalization upon which this nation was built, and 
what we should do is share more with the people of Ontario. He now stands in his place and says that we are soft 
on resources and that we’re soft on eastern Canada. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Was it a Liberal or a Conservative? 
 
HON. MR. HAMMERSMITH: — It’s hard to tell the difference. In B.C. they call them all Social Credits, but 
they’re all the same thing. It makes little difference. That same member who in 1971 was a Liberal and in 1975 
was a Liberal, and in 1978 was a Conservative, who marched up and down this province suggesting that we 
should get along better with the oil companies and get along better with the federal government and we should 
compromise and we should sell out the birthright of the people of Saskatchewan, now stands and would cast 
himself as a fighter on their behalf. I say that he has had opportunity to demonstrate that. He has not, in past, 
demonstrated any credibility in terms of his willingness to fight for the rights of the people of Saskatchewan, but 
now with the introduction of this resolution and the opportunity to support it, he can establish credibility for 
himself and his party and I look forward to seeing whether he does that. 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
479 

I want to congratulate our Premier and our Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs on having taken the position 
across this country, a position that is clearly understood by most people in this country — other than those who sit 
opposite — a position of exemplary responsibility and leadership. We had an example again today of the 
responsible and continuing search in this House and beyond for a broad basis of support and consensus as to what 
this nation is about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Premier has been recognized across this country as one of the key participants in this process. 
We had an example today of why this is so, because we had an example of those people who can only react to and 
follow events and those people who lead events in this country. 
 
We have chosen, and I think rightly so, to reject the extremes — to reject on one hand the blind acceptance of the 
Trudeau position, as was the case with the Conservative governments of Ontario and New Brunswick. It is 
interesting that members opposite feel that Bill Davis has no responsibility to this country. And we rejected on the 
other hand the option of taking our bat and ball and going home — the option of doing as the Levesque-Lougheed 
gang of six have done opposing for oppositions’ sake. 
 
We said that neither approach was responsible and that the last possible mile had to be walked in negotiation. We 
said we would negotiate for change, even though we opposed the process. We said that we would not throw down 
the gauntlet immediately. We would not oppose unless it was clear that the federal government would continue to 
refuse to accommodate the needs and wishes of all Canadians. We said that negotiation and compromise, 
searching for the middle ground, was the Canadian way, and that it was in the tradition of a federal state like 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we said from the outset that we neither underestimated nor, as in the case of the member for 
Qu’Appelle, overestimate the will and the ability of the federal government and the Prime Minister to control 
irrevocably events in this or in any other matter. The member for Qu’Appelle appears to resign himself to the 
inevitability of events being controlled by Pierre Trudeau. We reject that. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that particularly as a representative for the Prince Albert area, I am proud to serve part 
of an electorate which has elected three Canadian prime ministers. All of those great Canadian had a vision of this 
nation, united and strong, and at the same time they recognized the diversity of its regions — a diversity which 
they believed added to, not diminished the character of its people. But they also understood that if the regions are 
to work together, it would have to be through compromise, through negotiation, in an attempt to understand the 
needs and aspirations and cultures of all the people and all the citizens that are part of the fabric of this great 
country. They viewed those approaches as fundamental principles underlying the foundation of this nation. 
 
The resolution we are debating today is a statement to the rest of Canada that this province still believes in those 
fundamental principles. I am convinced that all of the prime ministers elected by the people of Prince Albert 
would be proud to see the stand taken by their current member of parliament, Stan Hovdebo. 
 
It was not an easy decision — not the kind of decision based on short-term political gain. It was a difficult 
position that he and three other Saskatchewan New Democrat members of parliament took. It was not an easy 
decision for them or for many of us who see ourselves as part of this entire nation, and not caught on one extreme 
or the other of how this nation is defined and how it has defined itself. During the past year, the 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
480 

Premier and the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs have been key figures in an attempt to reach a consensus 
which would result in a new constitution for Canada, which would recognize the changes that have taken place in 
the past 114 years — a constitution which would enjoy a broad basis of support among the majority of Canadians. 
 
I believe the majority of Canadians want our constitution patriated. I believe that all Canadians want a new, “made 
in Canada” constitution and we all want a framework which will take into account the uniqueness of each region 
and at the same time enhance the things we share as a nation. No other government has tried, to the extent that 
Saskatchewan has, to make that constitution a reality. We have tried to reset goals both in process and in content. 
We have negotiated and we have searched for common ground. We have tried to find that consensus whereby all 
Canadians, from whatever region, could feel part of one great nation. It is with a deep sense of sorrow and of 
regret as Canadians that we realize this attempt has ended in failure. It is a disappointment that I know is shared 
not only by the people of this province, but by people all across Canada who had hoped that the broad consensus 
would develop. 
 
Why did this process fail? I have hard it say by a few that Saskatchewan never really wanted an agreement — that 
we were bargaining in bad faith. Others have attempted in a very inadequate way to make the case that we were 
sitting on the fence. Nothing could be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. When the current Prime Minister 
rejected the negotiating process last October and decided to take unilateral action, he not only proposed to patriate 
but also to arbitrarily amend the constitution of this country. He has maintained this stance knowing full well that 
an overwhelming majority of Canadian are opposed to this action. And what doe he say is the justification for 
taking this extreme position? He says that for 50 years we have been able to achieve unanimous agreement from 
the federal government and all the provinces for a new constitution; that’s true. He said nothing of the items that 
have been around for less than 50 days. I ask is unanimity in a country as diverse as Canada a reasonable goal? Is 
it a desirable goal? Does it serve any purpose? I think not. In fact, unanimity in Canada is almost impossible. Still 
by September of last year the provinces and the federal government were closer than they had ever been before to 
an agreement on a limited package. However, that wasn’t good enough for Ottawa. Trudeau had set a date as an 
artificial deadline for complete agreement. And I ask who was negotiating in bad faith? 
 
Could the federal government possibly have been sincere in its efforts to reach a consensus when they were 
prepared to act unilaterally if that total agreement could not be reached? I think not. By moving unilaterally at that 
point, the Prime Minister demonstrated all too clearly how he felt about negotiating an agreement. Mr. Trudeau 
says changes are need now to fulfil promises made during the Quebec referendum campaign. Why is it, then, that 
all political parties in Quebec are opposed to unilateral action? Moreover, the present package fails to satisfy 
many of Quebec’s traditional demands. Still the Prime Minister proceeds. In attempting to define the national 
interest of this nation by himself, he is contributing to a crisis which will divide the nation more than it has ever 
been divided before. The writing of a new constitution should unite a nation and its people. And a constitution 
must draw its support from the public and from a broad consensus of those people which it serves. Present actions 
of the federal government are resulting in the opposite. Obviously Trudeau’s stated reasons for acting unilaterally 
are a facade. What his real reasons are, I don’t know, but that his actions are creating a mood of distrust in the 
country is clear for all. Today there are six provinces which are taking Ottawa to court. Western alienation and the 
western separatist movement is growing. We reject both those extremes. 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
481 

We reject the extreme on the one hand that says this federation, this nation, is whatever the central government 
say it is, and we reject also the other extreme, that says this nation is whatever the 10 provinces say it is. This 
nation is founded and maintained on seeking, identifying and insisting upon a delicate balance between those two. 
Both extremes threaten that balance. Both are divisive. Neither honors the true spirit and intent of confederation. 
How long will it be now before the bitterness and suspicion will fade so that the main issues of constitutional 
change can be discussed in a spirit of good will and co-operation a gain? And all this time our country’s social 
and economic problems worsen while Trudeau moves stubbornly ahead, oblivious to the discontent he is creating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to insisting on an unacceptable process, there are many things in the content of the 
current package which are also unacceptable. I limit my own remarks today to two of them, two in particular 
which I find objectionable, and they are related to each other. The Premier outlined very clearly all of the parts of 
the package we object to. I think that anyone in a democratic society, anyone particularly in a federation such as 
ours, rejects the whole idea of amendment by referendum. And when is added to that the proposed powers of the 
Senate to be able to override the wishes of elected governments, I think that Canadians, as they come to consider 
and come to understand what is proposed, will reject that overwhelmingly. Here we have an institution that is 
made up predominantly of Liberal party hacks, an institution whose main reason for existing is to conduct 
campaigns and to raise funds for the Liberal Party of Canada, and we propose to give to that institution greater 
powers than we propose for the elected governments of this land. 
 
I want to refer briefly, Mr. Speaker, to the manner in which Saskatchewan particularly and the nature of this 
province is ignored in the resolution currently before parliament. We are a province in which the majority of 
citizens have a mother tongue that is neither of the official languages. We are a province with a multicultural 
nature that reflects the Canadian mosaic best, I think of all provinces in Canada. I come from an area where 
people can go shopping, read, visit each other, attend church, participate in Canada’s official languages, and I say, 
Mr. Speaker, that they are no less Canadian than the citizens of central Canada! I am proud on their behalf that we 
articulate a position that rests on the fact that not only is the process and the package bad for Saskatchewan and 
bad for western Canada, it is bad for Canada, the majority of Canadians and the future of this country. 
 
It is a position that is not based on narrow, short term, partisan political interests. It is a position that is based on a 
broader vision of the country, and on a vision of the country that rejects the extremes of Bill Davis on one hand, 
and Peter Lougheed on the other. We reject both those extremes. We have a different vision of this country and 
we say that this country needs a constitution that should be a broadly supported constructive step forward, for all 
the people of the nation. What we are faced with, from Bill Davis on the one hand and Peter Lougheed on the 
other, are both potentially and continuingly divisive. 
 
One of the aspects of the current resolution before parliament which we must consider is that it will lead to a 
Canada fundamentally different from the one which we know today. What I find most objectionable, Mr. Speaker, 
is a Canada defined basically, at this juncture, by one person who wants to get it all over with so he can retire. In 
the past 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
482 

114 years we have built a great nation which not only recognized, but attempted to balance both national and 
regional interests. In a nation such as ours, that is the only kind of governing system which has the potential to 
meet the needs of all. The unilateral action of the federal government is threatening that balance. It threatens to 
destroy a relationship between regions which our forefathers nurtured through decades of hardship. 
 
I cannot sit silently by and see this happen without voicing my objections in the strongest possible terms, and I 
call again on members opposite to show they mean what they say when they say they are finally willing to speak 
out in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan rather than those interests which they have always supported. I 
call upon them to join with all other members of this Assembly and vote in favor of the resolution opposing the 
federal action. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the member who just sat down wasn’t listening when the member 
for Qu’Appelle indicated that the opposition would, in fact, be supporting the resolution. However, that was the 
first time that particular statement had been made by anyone from this caucus and so it was with a rather mixed 
emotion that I looked at the Leader-Post this morning and saw the headline: “Berntson says PCs will back 
resolution.” I don’t know what they’re smoking down there, whether they are suffering from some sort of 
hallucination or whether they are just dreaming. Up until about one hour ago, the very best it could have been was 
a guess. That is the down side; the up side, of course, is that it’s the first time I’ve ever been on the front page of 
the Leader-Post and secondly, it’s the first time they’ve ever spelled my name right. I appreciate that. 
 
As it relates to the resolution that the Premier brought before the House today with our consent — as a matter of 
fact it was at our urging, but there was a distinct lack of negotiations of what the Attorney General called 
meaningful input. The input was “Here, take a look at it, take it or leave it.” Well, we’re not going to take it. 
We’re going to be offering some amendments. The reason we’re going to be offering those amendments is that the 
resolution has no guts. 
 

That this Assembly oppose the current attempt by the federal government to patriate and amend the 
constitution of Canada believing that the unilateral nature of the process is incompatible with the fundamental 
principles of Canadian federalism. 

 
And that’s wonderful. 
 
The constitutional changes must have a broad basis of support among Canadians. They must have a broad basis of 
support among Saskatchewan as well, And the proposal, if implemented would upset the balance of Canada’s 
federal system. And it’s gutless and it’s toothless. Naturally, we’ll oppose the federal unilateral action but we want 
to more than oppose, we want to fight it. Initiate an action, get the thing into court. 
 
The constitutional resolution before the House of Commons today affects the status, the rights and the privileges 
of every Saskatchewanite. That does not have the support of the Saskatchewan people and the Premier comes in 
and says: “Well, we’ll oppose it. We’ll just write a nice little letter to Pierre and I’m sure he’ll listen. We’ll oppose 
it.” 



 
March 2, 1981 

 
483 

Our Premier doesn’t seem to understand that Trudeau isn’t looking for unanimity, consensus, broad support, or 
even a simple majority. What he’s looking for is obedience and subservience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have with my research department over the last weekend, spent some considerable time putting 
some very, very meaningful notes together that I’m sure all people will want to hear uninterrupted. In active 
negotiations and discussions in a very positive way with the Acting House Leader, we’ve agreed that that’s just 
what will happen so I therefore beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:50 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
March 2, 1981 
 

 
484 

CORRIGENDUM 
 

The following errors appeared in the 1979-80 Hansard Index: 
 
On page 87 under the entry “Motions” it should read “see also Resolutions.” 
 
On page 154 the Unionest Party of Saskatchewan was incorrectly spelled “Unionist.” 


