






















































Hansard: April 02, 1981


1703 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
Thursday, April 2, 1981. 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday next, move: 
 

That this Assembly, recognizing its support for the concept of a permanent independent office of 
Speaker, urges the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately establish a royal commission to 
study the concept of an independent permanent Speaker. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, it's indeed a pleasure for me to introduce to you, and through you, 
16 grade 12 students from the Avonlea High School. They are accompanied here today by their teacher, 
Karen Marsh and bus driver, John Hubbard. They are seated in the east gallery. Mr. Speaker, of course 
Avonlea is well-known in Saskatchewan as well as in Canada for being the home of the curling 
Campbells. Skip, Garnet Campbell brought the first Canadian curling championship back to 
Saskatchewan here in Regina in 1955; and also, Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of curling with him for 
some 17 years after that, which was perhaps his downfall. I hope the students and their chaperones find 
their visit here today educational and informative. I will be meeting with them in the rotunda for 
pictures, and downstairs for a drink later. I wish all members to join with me in welcoming them, and 
wishing them a safe journey back home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me pleasure to introduce to you, and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, a group of 33 grade 11 and 12 students from the community of Goodsoil in 
the northwestern part of Saskatchewan in my constituency. I think these people are to be congratulated: 
their teachers here with them, Mr. Tanejai and Miss Naismith, their bus driver, Carl Holfes, and the 
principal of their school, who is not here. But the people in that school should be congratulated for 
seeing the educational good that a trip like this can do, when you consider that they've come over 400 
miles down here. Certainly, we hope they enjoy their stay here at the legislature and find it educational 
and informative. I understand they will be going to Saskatoon to look at some of the sights there 
tomorrow on their way home. I hope they enjoy their trip, and I hope that you will join with me in 
welcoming them, and wish them a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. CHAPMAN: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1704 

through you to the Assembly, 45 students: 30 of whom are exchange students from the province of 
Quebec, and 15 from the Estevan Comprehensive High School. They are here today in the Speaker's 
gallery, and are accompanied by their teachers, Donna Duncan, Irwin Krueger, Yvon Richard, Jocelyn 
Bordeleau, and Doris Folbar on the administrative staff and the member of ECS. The students from 
Quebec are here on a one week exchange, and they are hosted by the Estevan Comprehensive School. 
Indeed, I am pleased that they chose to visit this Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan, 
and that I have the opportunity to welcome them, along with the students from the Estevan 
Comprehensive School to this Assembly. I hope that you have an informative afternoon in the 
legislature, an enjoyable visit to the city of Regina, and a safe journey home. On April 27, 30 students 
from the Estevan Comprehensive School will journey to the province of Quebec. I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Monsieur L'Orateur, c'est un plaisir aussi pour moi, au. 
nom des membres de l'Assemblee d'accorder une chaleureuse bienvenue a ces jeunes de la province de 
Quebec. J'espere que vous alliez jouire de votre sejour ici. Aussi, j'aimerais vous souhaiter un bon 
voyage de retour. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. NELSON: — Monsieur le President. Moi aussi je veux souhaiter une chaleureuse bienvenue aux 
30 eleves du Quebec, qui sont venus d'Ecole Polyvalente les Sergneuries, je crois, dans la ville de St. 
Pierre-les-Becquits. Je voudrais dire que j'etais dans votre province il y a deux mois. C'etait un voyage 
qui etait tres, tres agreable. Vous autre Quebecois, vous etes des autres par excellence. Tout le monde 
qui etait dans le voyage avec nous, les trois autres deputes de l'Assemblee ici, nous contemplons 
retourner a votre province bientot. Nous esperons que votre sejour ici sera aussi agreable que le notre 
chez vous. Nous esperons aussi que votre visite dans notre Assemblee sera tres interessante et tres 
agreable. Enfin, nous vous invitons tous a revenir bientot nous visiter. Vous etes toujours bienvenue ici. 
Merci. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to the Assembly, through 
you, some 55 grades 5 and 6 students from the Dr. George Ferguson School in Glencairn, in my 
constituency. They are accompanied by Mrs. Ferguson and Mrs. Gulka-Tiechko. I look forward to 
meeting with them later. We will be having refreshments and pictures. I am sure they will find the 
afternoon informative. Mr. Speaker, I hope all members will join with me in welcoming the students to 
this Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DYCK: — Mr. Speaker, I very delighted to introduce to you and to the members of the legislature, 
38 grades 6 and 7 students from Mayfair School in the Saskatoon Mayfair constituency. I apologize in 
advance for the pronunciation of these names. They are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Van Meenen 
and Mrs. Byneskowsky. (And I got the laugh I sort of anticipated by mispronouncing those names.) I 
want to welcome them to this legislature. I hope they have an enjoyable afternoon in the legislature and 
in Regina. I also look forward to meeting them later on in the rotunda area. Perhaps we can have an 
exchange of questions. I hope you have a safe journey back to Saskatoon. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1705 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

School Unit Mill Rate Increases 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Education. I am sure the minister is 
aware that within the past few days many school units in the province of Saskatchewan have set their 
mill rates. If I may, just very briefly, give some of the increases to the minister, in and around Thunder 
Creek: Thunder Creek School Unit, 9; Davidson, 14; (these are increases) Herbert, 20; Outlook, 14; 
Yorkton, 18, and the list goes on and on. My question to the minister is simply this. In light of these 
tremendous increases which these school units have found necessary to implement on their property 
holders, would the Minister of Education acknowledge in this Assembly today that obviously his grants 
to these school units are totally inadequate? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — No, I would not acknowledge that the grants are inadequate. I think, as 
the hon. member is aware, the decision with respect to mill rates set by school boards is one which they 
make. The distribution of funds takes place through the foundation grants formula, which is basically an 
equalization system. Schools boards that wish to go beyond the levels of increases in funds which are 
associated with the foundation grant system are, of course, free to that. I do not have information at this 
time on why individual school boards have increased mill rates at the level they have, although I am 
certain that if the hon. member were to ask those boards, they could explain in detail some of the 
programming decisions they have made in association with those. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question to the minister. Yes, Mr. Minister, I have asked them 
and this is the answer, and I would convey this to you in the form of a question. You've indicated a 
moment ago that it was a local decision. May I specifically use the case of Thunder Creek school unit? 
Its increase is nine mills. I am informed by the board that seven of those nine mills are specifically for 
salary increases to teachers. As the minister well knows, the salary increases, even though they have not 
been approved as of yet, are jointly negotiated by the teachers, the trustees and representatives of the 
provincial government. Since seven out of nine mills in Thunder Creek (and the same proportion would 
follow through, I'm sure, throughout the province) have been negotiated virtually by the provincial 
government since you hold the deciding balance, obviously your grants must be inadequate. Are you 
not. in effect, simply sending the bill back to local government when you, in effect, negotiated that 
increase? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — The hon. member should know that the teachers' salary increase, which I 
think is a justifiable one and a perfectly defensible one, is negotiated in conjunction with trustees as well 
as government members of the committee. If the hon. member is saying that the trustee members of the 
committee disagree with the level of salary that has been reached in the negotiations, then he knows 
something that I don't know. I have not received any such communication from them. 
 
I would say to the hon. member that I think the salary change has been made in accordance with a 
perfectly acceptable system of bargaining those agreements. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1706 

The hon. member should know that we contribute directly through grants close to 55 per cent, on 
average, of the costs of school operation in Saskatchewan. In addition we contribute the major part of 
the costs of capital construction. There is a down payment that school boards must raise in the first year 
of construction, which can affect mill rates in that given year on a one-time only basis, but other than 
that we pay those costs. 
 
I think the proportion of costs we are sharing directly is hardly equalled anywhere else in Canada. In 
addition through the property improvement grants we contribute another major rebate on property taxes. 
In total, the provincial government is assuming 75 per cent of the costs of education in this province. I 
think that is a very adequate level of grants in support of education and I would defend that anywhere. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question to the minister. The minister knows full well that when 
these increases, as negotiated by the three levels, are passed on to the local school unit boards, the 
school units have only a few options. They can reduce the number of teachers; they can close schools; 
they can close classrooms. Is the minister telling this Assembly today that in rural Saskatchewan it is a 
satisfactory procedure to pass the bill on to the local school unit? Is he telling us he finds it acceptable, 
when they cannot raise the money except by making these huge increases, that they be forced to reduce 
the quality of education by either reducing staff or reducing the schools? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I reiterate what I said before. We do not make decisions on 
behalf of the school boards about the number of teachers they should have or about the direct nature of 
the program they should offer. There was a time, and there was a government previous to this 
administration (just previous, I might add), which did try to operate a system like that. I would point out 
to the hon. member that practically every school board, if not every school board in this province, felt 
that system was not an acceptable one and rejected it. They asked that we go to a system whereby we 
provide a level of funds that is distributed to boards on the foundation grant basis, and the boards then 
make their decisions about the number of teachers they wish to have on staff, the extent of the program 
they wish to offer, and the mill rate that they set, freely, to finance that program. 
 
I would say to the hon. member that system is accepted throughout Saskatchewan by school boards. I 
would hope the hon. member is not suggesting we revert back to the system that existed about 10 years 
ago, for it sounds dangerously like what he is suggesting. 
 

Rise in Farm Credit Corporation Interest Rates 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, in light 
of the statement that was made by your federal counterpart, Mr. Whelan, yesterday, announcing that 
farm credit corporation interest rates will go up to 14 per cent from 12.75 per cent, do you now not agree 
that it is time for you, as the provincial Minister of Agriculture, to implement a program to help to 
enable young farmers to purchase land in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, the policy of this government, with respect to programs 
for farmers to assist them to get into farming, is very clear. The program has been, and is now, a land 
bank program and a FarmStart program. We have left the area which farm credit covered to farm credit, 
as part of the national policy. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1707 

I would argue with the member that the problem with the increase in interest rates with respect to farm 
credit is simply a problem which should be focussed in terms of farm credit interest rates. But it is part 
of an overall policy of interest rates being established by the federal government. 
 
MR. GARNER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, it is quite evident that the federal 
Department of Agriculture is not concerned about the farmers in Saskatchewan, and I think you would 
be the first one to agree, in light of the total shambles that the herd maintenance program is in, in 
western Canada. Will you now not agree to implement a program — a policy of the Progressive 
Conservative Party of Saskatchewan — to allow young farmers to borrow $350,000 at a mortgage rate 
of 8 per cent for the first five years, and 12 per cent, or market value, for the remaining 20 years 
(whichever is the lower) in order to enable the young farmers in Saskatchewan to buy and own their own 
land? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, no, I do not believe we should consider such a policy. I'm 
not sure that the farmers in Saskatchewan are interested in such a policy. There have been policies of 
this nature around the province of Saskatchewan in the past, and there were opportunities to implement 
such policies, and the farmers of Saskatchewan did not have the opportunity to get the benefit of such 
policies. I think they would look at this policy proposed by the hon. member for Wilkie as something 
they would pursue with some caution. 
 
I think it should be the purpose of members opposite, and this government, to focus their attention on 
national policies, as they relate not only to the issue of farm credit, but as they relate to the issue of 
overall interest rates. I note that the members opposite tend to be reluctant to do that for obvious reasons 
— because the spiralling interest rates began when their party was in power in Ottawa. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the minister. Mr. Minister, will you not agree that 
the provincial government is not protecting the farmers of Saskatchewan against the high inflationary 
rate by wanting to own all of the land in Saskatchewan? And are you not aware that there is a very large 
percentage of young farmers in Saskatchewan who do not want to be tenant farmers of your land bank 
program? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I suppose one can argue about how much land farm 
credit owns, how much land land bank owns. It's not the purpose of the land bank program to be the 
only vehicle for assisting young farmers getting into farming. But it is one vehicle which has produced 
significant results in terms of the number of young farmers who are farming in this province. 
 
We will continue to address land bank as one vehicle of assisting young farmers in getting into farming. 
There are conflicting arguments about the level of funding with respect to land bank. I hear more 
arguments that there is not enough money allocated to land bank to meet the demands than the argument 
put forward by the hon. member for Wilkie who says there is too much land bank money. 
 

Farmers Pay For Machinery Twice 
 
MR. SWAN: — My question is to the Minister of Agriculture in the absence of the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs. The question deals with an article in today's paper titled 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1708 

"Farmers Must Pay for Machinery Twice," and I'm sure you are aware of the case in point. Has your 
department been taking a look at what the Government of Saskatchewan could do to avoid a 
circumstance like this arising again in this province? Have you looked at the legislation which is in place 
to protect farmers from unscrupulous implement dealers? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose, yes, the 
issue is before the government. It has been brought to our attention by the MLAs from the area involved. 
As the hon. member knows, the matter has been before the courts of two of the unfortunate producers or 
farmers. 
 
I can't respond to the hon. member today directly on what the government will be doing, but our 
intentions are to introduce legislation in this session to protect farmers in future circumstances. Presently 
we're looking at amendments to The Agricultural Implements Act as the vehicle to do it. I won't commit 
myself, nor can I commit myself, that that will be the vehicle. But our intentions are to introduce 
legislation; what form it will take, we will have to wait to see. I note in the hon. member's question that 
we can't do anything about what has happened, but it would strongly appear that we can do something to 
protect farmers in the future. I don't share the hon. member's point that we should focus on unscrupulous 
implement dealers. I have a good deal of respect for the agricultural machinery dealers in this province. 
Perhaps the hon. member hasn't. I am more concerned if we can do it by zeroing in on the unscrupulous 
finance companies, and there is a finance company involved in this particular case. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture. I have a notion, Mr. Minister, that you 
took my words out of context, and, if you'd like to come back, you may do so. I agree with the minister 
that many of our machinery dealers are very upstanding people. Are the machinery dealers in 
Saskatchewan required to carry a performance bond? If they are, how much is the bond? 
 
MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the hon. member for picking up on his earlier 
remarks. The answer to the hon. member's question is that I don't know for sure. My understanding is 
that they are not required to be bonded. There is bonding in other provinces for machine dealers (so I'm 
told), but I would not want to commit myself to that. I would assume that the people who are drafting 
the legislation will take into account the bonding idea, and perhaps other ideas, in addressing this matter. 
 

Natural Gas Hookups 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the minister responsible for SPC (Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation). Mr. Minister, many farmers in rural Saskatchewan are inquiring about natural gas 
hookups. They are informed that estimated costs for one-half mile are approximately $87 to $100. For 
just under one mile one quote I have is $16,800. Would the minister not agree from these quotes that 
you are not just providing a service but reaping a profit at the same time? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, the policy with respect to gas hookups of this sort is that, 
basically, in some form or other the costs will have to be recovered, because it is a very expensive 
system. We do provide some underwriting of the costs but basically those costs must be paid. The hon. 
member should know that the cost estimates which are provided are done specifically by calculating 
what has to be invested in terms of the capital facilities, the pipelines, the hookups, and so on 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1709 

associated with providing that service. Those quotes, I assume, accurately reflect that. And so when 
farmers get those quotes they are getting a statement of the necessary costs for making those hookups. I 
point out to the hon. member that there is no way of eliminating those costs. We have looked at every 
possible way of cutting those costs down as low as possible, and there is no way of bringing them down 
any lower than those estimates. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary to the minister. The Foothills Pipeline main transmission line to 
the States is coming through the southwest portion of the province, and a lot of interest has been 
expressed by rural residents. Some have written to you and each of them has received the same letter 
that the cost of tapping a high-pressure line, the necessary reduction and odorizing equipment, and 
one-half mile of plastic pipeline, is about $8,700. You are actually using this $8,700 and deliberately 
distorting it as being the cost to one consumer, but the major cost is the cost of putting in a regulating 
station which is anywhere from $4,000 to $6,000, and not every consumer requires a regulating station if 
the thing is designed properly. Would you not admit that you are distorting these figures to discourage 
rural residents from pursuing the feasibility of changing to a less costly energy form? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — No, I would not agree at all. I don't understand the reference to "exactly 
the same letter." I think the hon. member knows, or perhaps does not know and I could inform her, that 
there are quite a substantial number of farmers along the Foothills Pipeline who have worked out 
arrangements with Sask Power whereby they may tap off the line and do connections into their farms. 
We have agreements on those, and the costs are not all the same, from my recollection, but are costed 
out on the basis of the individual connections. There are also a very substantial number of farmers who 
are investing in taps on the lines, so that in future, if the decision is made that they wish to carry from 
those taps into their farms with lines, they will be able to do so. Each of those is designed by the 
engineers in accordance with what is required and the costing is done specifically as it applies to that 
hookup. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Supplementary. Well, I'm aware that a lot of them are investing $250 or whatever 
to have that valve put in, or that tap-off put in, for future consideration. But the $8,700 that you are 
quoting — could you give me a breakdown, Mr. Minister, of that, because in it you say that the $8,700 
is made up of the necessary reduction equipment, your valves, odorizing equipment and what I'm saying 
to you is that we do not agree when you send this out to individual farmers or ranchers. You are actually 
distorting the actual cost, because not each consumer requires a regulating station which makes up 
between $4,000 and $6,000 of that $8,700. So you are actually distorting that figure. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I'd have to check as to whether or not the individual farmers would be 
prepared to be identified, so perhaps I can't identify farmers individually, but I'd certainly be prepared to 
provide the member with information regarding the hookups that have been arranged, the associated 
costs and the way those costs are established, as well as the program with respect to tapping the lines so 
that people may do future connections. There has been not only communication with my office but SPC 
officials have been meeting these individual farmers and discussing with them the necessary 
arrangements. I will get that information for the hon. member and I will provide the hon. member with 
as much information as I possibly can provide on each individual one without contravening the 
individual farmer's interest in not being identified. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1710 

MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Minister, I don't think you got the point of the hon. member for Maple 
Creek. What she is trying to tell you is that you are putting in a reduction station for each individual 
farmer and charging him that price of $4,000 to $ 6,000. What she is saying is that there can be three, 
four, five or six hooked on to any one station. So, in fact, the price should be somewhere around $1,700 
for a hookup. That's exactly what she's trying to get across. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — If it is technically feasible to use one reduction station for more than one 
hookup we are more than able to do that and prepared to do that. That assessment is carried out by the 
engineers, by the gas engineers. I am not of course a gas engineer. They carry out that assessment and 
where they can provide the lowest cost possible hookup, they do so. 
 

Location of Indian Land Settlements in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Question to the minister in charge of treaty Indian land entitlements. Mr. 
Minister, today your department has announced that 142,000 acres are going to be made available to the 
federal government for possible land settlements with the bands that are entitled. Mr. Minister, the only 
information available is that this is somewhere south of the northern administration district. I also 
understand that this will be the first land which is presently in agricultural production or agricultural use 
to be offered in this fashion. In essence, Mr. Minister, would you tell us where this land is? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I don't have with me here all of the land selections which 
are involved in that 142,000 acre commitment of land that the hon. member talks about. I'd be prepared 
to take it as notice and bring that information forward for the hon. member. 
 
With respect to the issue of Indian land entitlements, I think it's not a new subject to this legislature. 
Saskatchewan has developed what has come to be known as the Saskatchewan formula for the 
fulfillment of outstanding Indian land entitlements in our province. We have developed that formula on 
the basis of the requests made by the federal government, under the provisions of the resources transfer 
agreement of 1930. The hon. member will know that in order for us to finally fulfil all of the outstanding 
entitlements in the province there is a potential 1.2 million acres to be set aside at some future time. 
 
The 142,000 acres, of which the hon. member comments, is land which has been selected by various 
bands and does have some third-party interest that now affects the land in question. What we are doing 
is committing the land at this point in time, providing it is acceptable to the band and to the federal 
government, for the purposes of transferring it at some future time to the Indian band or to the federal 
government for the establishment of Indian reserves. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A question to the minister. Mr. Minister, since the federal government has 
indicated that all of its land and holdings in this province are subject to selection by the Indian bands 
involved, it raises an interesting point, since the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration), for 
instance, has extensive holdings in community pastures. Would the minister elaborate: what would the 
situation be with Crown land which is presently being used extensively for community pastures in this 
province? What effect would it have on the livestock industry? In other words, Mr. Minister, would you 
tell us, approximately (and I'm not going to hold you to those) how many acres of community pasture 
are involved in your offer — in this 142,000 acres — 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1711 

to the federal government? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Gentlemen, I'm not sure that I can give the member a realistic answer, 
or even an approximate guess, as to what number of acres would be involved in community pastures. 
But I would suggest that perhaps most of the acres set aside will be lands that are related to community 
pastures. And the provision which we have made or stipulated is that third-party agreements must be 
satisfied. This is what I would suggest is happening in areas where there have been discussions and 
undertakings both with the band and the pasture patrons which are nearing agreement. There has been an 
understanding reached between the patrons and the Indian bands that the only real difference that will be 
put into practice is that the patrons will be paying their dues to the Indian band rather than the provincial 
government. But the pasturing of cattle will continue. In fact, there is provision negotiated where the 
Department of Agriculture in some cases will continue to administer the pastures for another 5-year 
period, at which time they will be turned over to the bands to administer on their own. But there is some 
agreement being reached in various stages with community pastures and PFRA pastures, as I understand 
it; where there is a PFRA pasture, the PFRA will continue to administer the pasture on behalf of the 
band. Patrons will still pasture their cattle. Moneys received for grazing fees, grazing dues and so on will 
go to the Indian band rather than to the provincial or federal government. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Point of Privilege 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Yesterday the hon. member for Souris-Cannington raised the point of privilege to 
the effect that the reply to an oral question was misleading. I deferred my ruling at that time. I want to 
take this opportunity to stress to all members that the protection of the privileges of the members of the 
Assembly itself is paramount. It therefore follows that to raise a point of privilege is of great importance, 
and should not be taken lightly. 
 
On several occasions lately I have been asked to rule on whether an answer to an oral question was 
sufficient. The point is actually a dispute over fact, which should lead to debate. It is the role of 
members to debate issues, but it is not the role of the Chair to ascertain whether an oral question or 
answer is based on fact. This is for the House to consider. Actual points of privilege arise very rarely 
and pertain to instances where the rights and privileges of members have possibly been infringed upon. 
If the member feels that an answer to a question is vague or not the answer he would like, the 
opportunity is there for the member to ask a supplementary question or new questions on subsequent 
days. I would ask all hon. members not to involve the Chair in a dispute of fact. 
 
I have reviewed the point raised by the hon. member for Souris-Cannington, and find that no prima facie 
case for privilege exists. I refer all hon. members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth 
edition, page 12, paragraph 19, sub (1), and paragraph 114, and paragraph 322. 
 
MR. BERNSTON: — Naturally you have made your ruling and I accept that. I would just wonder why 
in your ruling there was no reference made to the letter to which I referred and, in fact, provided you 
with a copy. You were asked to review that and make your 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1712 

ruling based on the letter and the comments in Hansard. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I sought advice from a number of locations. One of them was the letter which the 
member presented. The other ones were the Hansard of March 27, 1981, and the raising of the point of 
privilege on April 1, 1981. All were considered. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 
 
HON. MR. KAEDING: — In introducing the amendments to The Rural Municipality Act, I'd like to 
indicate at the outset that these amendments result, for the most part, from close consultation between 
the Department of Rural Affairs, the individual municipalities and their administrative arm, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. 
 
We are very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to have such close communication exist between the two levels of 
government, in matters of concern to municipal governments. This government has always made a point 
of providing the greatest amount of local autonomy possible. The amendments proposed here continue 
our efforts on their behalf. They are required to meet the ever-changing needs of local governments to 
enable them to serve the people of Saskatchewan more effectively. 
 
One of the most significant amendments to the bill is legislation to provide for uniform weights for 
vehicles using any road within the province. Up until now, The Highways Act governed the weight 
regulations on provincial highways. Each municipality, by-law, subject to the approval of the highway 
traffic board, could restrict the weight of vehicles with their loads on municipal roads and bridges within 
the boundaries of the municipality. The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, after 
discussion with member municipalities at district meetings and after a trial period of two years, has 
requested that legislation be enacted to establish uniform weight restrictions on all vehicles using any 
road in the province. 
 
These amendments to The Rural Municipality Act will place secondary highway weight limits on all 
municipal roads. The weight of vehicles using roads will now be governed by the weight restrictions 
established by regulations or orders issued by The Highways Act. This achieves the objective of 
uniformity as requested by the municipalities. This is possible because of the extensive, uniform, 
high-quality municipal road system we enjoy across this province. The high level of technical and 
financial assistance provided over the years by this government to the rural municipalities has enabled 
those municipalities to develop a rural network which we believe to be second to none on this continent. 
The total of all the upgraded rural roads now considered capable of handling secondary highway weight 
limits is approximately 54,000 kilometres in the municipal system. 
 
In addition to the power outlined above, each municipality will also be given the authority to issue 
overweight permits, under authority delegated by the Minister of Highways. Carriers of intermunicipal 
loads, using municipal roads, will have an opportunity to know what weights are allowed on any 
municipal road at any given time. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1713 

The municipality will be given the power to delegate the authority given to it by the Minister of 
Highways, to any person designated by the council. We believe that this is necessary in order to avoid 
any undue delays in obtaining an overweight permit by any carrier of goods or materials. 
 
To retain local autonomy, the municipalities are also given the authority to establish a committee of two 
members, with powers to issue orders in accordance with the regulations, to prohibit the operation of 
tractors on specific municipal roads or bridges, or to restrict the weight of vehicles travelling on 
municipal roads or bridges. Under the legislation, rural municipalities will be given additional new 
powers to enable them to protect these roads. In cases where, in the opinion of the council, certain 
haulers of bulk commodities within or through the municipality are causing considerable damage to the 
road system, they may require those persons to enter into a maintenance agreement. The agreement 
would require such users to pay certain charges which would relate to the damage in excess of normal 
being caused to the road system. It will be an offence, under this act, for the hauler to continue to use the 
road until such an agreement is signed, and penalties are prescribed in the legislation for failure to sign 
such an agreement. 
 
Up to the present time, very little of the financing of rural municipalities has been accomplished by way 
of debenture debt. In fact, in 1979, only eight rural municipalities had any substantial debenture debt. 
However, as the cost of road equipment escalates and as councils attempt to enter into contracts for 
longer stretches of expensive road construction, there is a need to provide more flexibility in rural 
municipal financing. With this in mind, we are removing some of the restrictions regarding the 
borrowing of funds for both operating and capital expenditures. 
 
Under existing legislation, rural municipalities may only make loans for operating expenses up to 75 per 
cent of the estimated total of taxes levied without the consent of the local government board. These 
amendments permit loans of up to the full amount of taxes levied in the previous year and these loans 
may be extended for two years. In the case of debenture debt, the amendments permit an increase from 5 
per cent to 20 per cent of the total taxable assessment. This will update borrowing power in rural 
municipalities to the same level as that now enjoyed in urban municipalities. 
 
There is also an amendment to the act which removes statutory limitation on remuneration paid to 
members of the council absent from the municipality on business of the municipality. 
 
Amendments to section 324 of the act provide a special lien upon land on which a building owned by 
another person is situated, where taxes levied in respect to that building remain unpaid. 
 
These, Mr. Speaker, are the basic elements of the amendments and I am pleased to move second reading 
of Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, I have read through the explanations of this bill and there are parts 
that I want to study. The first part of it, section 1, is fine. When it gets into weights on road and such 
changes, I want, because of the record of this government on having bills go through without consulting 
the farmers, to make sure we have consulted them this time. So I'm going to take time to discuss this bill 
with municipalities. At this time I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1714 

Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that 
Bill No. 39 — An Act to amend The Department of Intergovernmental Affairs Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Rolfes that Bill 
No. 47 — An Act respecting Dental Therapists be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Koskie that Bill 
No. 48 — An Act to amend The Residential Tenancies Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, in addressing this bill, there are a couple of things I want to point out 
to the minister regarding the plight of some people in this province who rent apartments. The situation is 
that people who are forced to live in rented accommodation are, in many cases, the unattached people in 
our society, and if we look at the most recent statistics, 37.2 per cent of the people who live below the 
poverty line in Saskatchewan are unattached. Many of these people are widows, and I find in my 
constituency that they are having a tough time meeting the demands put upon them to have adequate 
accommodation. 
 
I don't think it should have to be the tenants, or those in society who own the apartments, who should 
have to subsidize the rent in anyway, shape or form. When we see this happening, it must indicate one or 
two things to us. It may be that that 37.2 per cent, those unattached people living below the poverty line 
in this province, need some type of rent subsidy. That could be one of the avenues that we perhaps have 
to look at, or it also might mean that we do not have enough adequate rental facilities in some of the 
areas (and I'm speaking of small towns in Saskatchewan, and I'm sure the same holds true in the cities). 
 
I just wanted to point out to the minister, in relation to this bill, that I hope he will take into 
consideration the remarks I have put forth, because I certainly feel that there is a need out there. A 
number of these people have nowhere to turn. As I say, many of them are widows whose husbands 
might have been working at a time when pension plans were not very good, and they simply do not have 
very much money. The rents are taking a large portion of their income, so I would suggest that perhaps 
you should be looking at something which can help these people, so they can enjoy the dignity of life in 
this province that we all want to enjoy. 
 
Those are the only remarks that I would have on this bill. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1715 

Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 13— An Act to amend The Community Colleges Act 
 
Sections 1 to 3 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 4 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Something has always bothered me, Mr. Minister, with regard to the community 
colleges. I must say that I believe the community college is a very worth-while educational venture and, 
in the main, they are beginning to satisfy a need that exists in Saskatchewan, especially in the rural 
areas. It is affording an opportunity for people to take basic upgrading skills, to take more training in 
fields of interest, and I think this is good. But I notice one thing that has bothered me for some time. I 
would put it forward as a suggestion to you and I'd like to hear your remarks on it. 
 
In here it says: 
 

. . . to establish community colleges in regions for the purpose of providing adult education 
programs and services either indirectly, in co-operation with existing adult education agencies, or 
directly in order to meet the particular needs of the adults in those regions. 

 
It disturbs me a bit that the community college in this province is directed at the adults only. When we 
have declining enrolments in the schools, and schools in the rural areas that cannot offer as wide a 
curriculum as may be needed, I wonder why we don't mesh the community college and the school 
together. 
 
Let's take art for an example. We can go into the schools and find a lot of students who have ability in 
art. They have the ability to become fine artists in their own right. And you know as well as I do that the 
existing art program in many of the schools does not develop this potential. They may try; some schools 
don't even have art programs. But I've often wondered why, in a town under the auspices of a 
community college, they will bring in a fine instructor and he will teach oil painting or water colours or 
whatever. (I'm using art as one example. I think we could think of many more things such as night 
classes in welding; I took one in meat cutting.) Now, in that same town, those students in the school 
have approximately seven or eight subjects to choose from. It only makes common sense to me that the 
two of them should be meshed together. 
 
I don't know what the regulation is at this time. When I was teaching, there was a regulation that the 
students could not take a community college course. I had a girl in my high school who was a darn good 
painter. I said, ''Baloney on that regulation. You can be absent from class at this time if you so wish. 
You go down and you take that art class." Now I think that was educating that girl. I think we should be 
looking at this and taking advantage of the community college to add to the school curriculum. I don't 
like to see an act that's entirely geared toward the adults of this province. I think it should be geared 
toward the people of this province and it should be used as a complement and a supplement to the 
existing school system where it can add to the curriculum. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1716 

I know the fear. Some say that the kids will all stay away from school and go to community college at 
night or something of this nature. I don't think that would happen. I think their parents and the people 
out there, the principals and the schools, would direct those students into using what they could of the 
community college so that it would serve all people, not just the adults. I'd like to hear your comments. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Well, certainly it's not the intent that this section preclude that possibility 
and I don't believe it does that. I agree with the hon. member that there is an opportunity for 
co-ordination and for tying together the services. Essentially this section tries to establish the fact that 
the kindergarten to grade 12 school system has the responsibility for the young people and children. It 
has clearly established legislation and other support framework for ensuring that the needs of the young 
people are met and that there is involvement of parents and so on. This section essentially establishes 
that the services of the community college system will be directed toward adults and, as well, to their 
dependent children if that ties into the services, but the adults become the responsible people to whom 
this system relates. There is a distinction there. This does not mean that there cannot be services 
provided to young people, but the assumption would be under this provision that the families and the 
adults will be involved in determining the kinds of programs and services that will come through the 
community college system. 
 
The families and adults could do that through their school boards and tie together the community college 
programs with school board programs. We have an advisory committee that's looking at that very 
question. But this is not restrictive in that sense; it just establishes the kind of relationship that the 
community college system will have with people; and it is not the responsibility of the community 
college system to deal directly with young people, but rather to deal through adults and parents and so 
on, if that is deemed advisable. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — You feel it would weaken this act if we dropped the word "adult" from there and 
just put in "services to the people of Saskatchewan." You would like to maintain that connotation of the 
adult in there. Is that correct? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Yes. I would prefer to leave it this way in that it does make the 
distinction. I would not object to the hon. member's change, and perhaps he could leave it with me to 
think about for future amendments to the act. I would not object to the hon. member's change if we also 
then referred to other sections of the act that provided for the opportunity of parental participation and 
that sort of thing, in the programming as it affects young people — children. I would not object to that 
kind of change. We could pursue that if the hon. member would let me think about that for our future 
amendments to the act. But I would not like at this time just to make that single change, because I think 
it then opens up the possibilities of another system delivering programs to children without making the 
adequate provisions in the act, which are not here, for the involvement of the parents, and for the 
decision-making structure that would relate to how children come into the system. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — That's acceptable to me. I'm not going to push that we have to change this clause. I 
take it that you will look into this suggestion, look at the entirety of the act and see if it can be 
designated toward the people of Saskatchewan. I'll go one step further. If that is not possible, by the 
powers of your office or of your influence, I would hope that the suggestion, where feasible, could be 
used as a complement to the school system. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1717 

Section 4 agreed. 
 
Section 5 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I'd like the minister just to verbally explain what this means, if he would. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the previous section of the act indicated that the 
community college board would be made up of the appointments of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, 
plus the chief executive officer or principal of the college. It is our considered view at this time that 
there is no longer good supporting reasons for the suggestion that the chief executive officer, that is to 
say the principal, who is accountable only to the board, should also be part of the board. I feel, and we 
on this side feel, that it more appropriately establishes accountability and responsibility and the division 
of those things therein, if the board does not include the chief executive officer, and if the chief 
executive officer directly reports to the board, as is the case in the school system now, for instance, in 
the K to 12 system. 
 
However, in the original proposal, we also excluded other employees of the college from any possible 
appointment by the wording of the section. It has been indicated to me, by a certain number of people 
(and I have sympathy with their argument) that there is no reason in principle that we should exclude all 
possible employees of the college from possible appointment to the board. It may very well be that staff 
and existing board members themselves find reasons to experiment with participation of employees on 
the board. That kind of possibility could arise; we don't have a specific proposal at this time. I would not 
like to preclude that possibility by this act. The bill which we had originally tabled here did that. So I 
have made the change which simply says, "the board shall consist of those people who are appointed," 
and it does not eliminate the possibility now of appointing an employee of the college to that board. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Okay, do I have this correct, now? What the act says is that the chief executive 
officer can be on the board, and an employee can be on the board. It would seem very strange if the 
chief executive officer were excluded and an employee could be on. That would really hamstring him. 
This means that the board can consist of people from out there in society, and the chief executive officer 
can but does not necessarily have to be an employee of the board. Is that correct? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — You are reading it correctly in terms of wording. I don't want to mislead 
the member, though. I think he and I have a little disagreement there. I happen to believe that we should 
not be making the appointment of the chief executive officer to the board, because the chief executive 
officer can only report to the board. I don't believe he should be part of the board. There are. 
theoretically, ways you could experiment with worker participation in the operation of the colleges by 
appointing some employee to the board. I don't have any formal proposition in that regard, but I want to 
leave that possibility open. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I want to say that maybe we do have a little difference of opinion here. I have 
served in the same type of capacity as the principal of a consolidated school district, where I was not on 
the board, of course. I was accountable to the board. I think I would have been put in a very difficult 
position administering that school division, had one of my teachers been my boss. I think there can be a 
real problem. I think you are hamstringing your chief executive officer. You can't be two things. You 
can't be both the boss and the employee very easily. I see a problem in this. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1718 

HON. MR. McARTHUR: — I point out to the hon. member that this is the question which would have 
to be considered before you would appoint a member of the staff to the board. I am not saying that at the 
present time we intend to appoint any members of the staff. But all of the approaches to industrial 
democracy or employee participation in board direction of institutions or corporations have to address 
that question. There are many successful experiments in employee participation at the board level in the 
management of operations. I just don't want to preclude that possibility, if someone comes up with an 
interesting proposal, as it applies to some particular college. This section does not propose to appoint 
anybody at this point as an employee. But if there is an interesting proposal, I would like to be able to 
consider it as a possibility if everything works out, and we can deal with some of those questions you 
raise. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, well, I think we could probably debate this for a while, but the proof will be in 
the pudding. Let's see what happens. 
 
There is another matter here that you should be looking at with regard to the boards of community 
colleges. If you will remember in my introductory remarks, I said I thought community colleges are 
doing a good thing. I think you agree that there is more that can be done. There is a whole horizon out 
there for them. They are becoming an important part of our society. I think it is time that the word 
"appoint" was dropped, and the word "elected" was substituted. I think we are at the point where these 
boards, because we get into the funding later, collect tuition fees. They are also financed by direct 
grants. Why not have them elected just the same as we in this society elect our school boards and 
municipal councils. This is what Canada and Saskatchewan stand for, I could understand when the 
community college was in its infancy that probably one had to appoint the people to get the thing going 
and get it built, I think it's functioning now. I think it's a very good movement, and I just wonder why 
we're still sticking with the appointment procedure. I think in the true, democratic spirit of education in 
Canada, the election method is still the way of getting the feeling out there. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — As I understand the history, and certainly as I feel the current situation, in 
principle no one can deny that elected boards have certain attractive features to them. However, there are 
two specific problems that arise, and I don't think we have the solutions to them yet. 
 
One is whether or not you could get voter participation in an additional system of election for 
educational or any other kind of institutions. That's one problem. There certainly was a feeling when the 
colleges were set up, and there still is a feeling, that we have a lot of work to do to get a higher level of 
participation in school board elections and local government elections and so on. Another system of 
elections may simply be too difficult to handle. We may get a very low participation and, therefore, not 
really adequate representation of the different cross sections of society, and so on, that are involved. 
 
The second problem relates to the question of fiscal responsibility. Almost without exception, any 
elected board responsible for programming needs an element of fiscal responsibility. I suppose you 
could argue that, but nevertheless it seems to be true. We have not yet found a way, by taxing or other 
means, whereby these boards would at least have an element of fiscal responsibility in order to develop 
that fiscal discipline between the elector and the representative. 
 
So, at the current time we are still proposing to continue the boards with this structure. I have not yet 
come up with answers to those two questions. But, I would be prepared to 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1719 

consider, at some time in the future, such propositions and have another look at them. 
 
Section 5 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 6 agreed. 
 
Section 7 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 8 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — The only reason for the amendment is that you've changed the deal on the 
employees? I guess that's in section 9, isn't it, about the terms? Are they staying the same, the three years 
and so on? There's no change? Okay. 
 
Section 8 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 9 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Does this mean that the appointed board is responsible for both the expenditure of 
the tuition and the grants? Just explain the expenditure of funds; that's what I'm concerned about. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — The reason for this amendment is something that was raised by the 
trustees. The current section in the old act, prior to the amendment we are proposing, says that the board 
is responsible for expenditures made by it for the operation of the college from the funds provided. In 
fact, in the interpretation of the legislation, that is read as meaning funds provided by the department. 
They also get tuition funds, for instance. 
 
A strict reading of this act would mean they cannot operate the college out of those funds. So, we're just 
removing that section to make it clear that they can operate on the basis of all the funds. 
 
Section 9 agreed. 
 
Sections 10 and 11 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Registered Nurses Act, 1978 
 
Sections 1 to 3 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 4 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 5 agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 32 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation Act 
 
Sections 1 to 8 inclusive agreed. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1720 

Section 9 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I wonder if the Attorney General will advise the Assembly as to why he wishes, or 
the government wishes, to have an outside, private sector auditor do the auditing for the Crown 
corporation, SaskOil, as opposed to the provincial auditor? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I believe the minister who is most directly responsible for 
this bill will unfortunately not be here today or tomorrow, and rather than delay the business of the 
House, we should proceed with the bill. The minister has offered the explanation. The explanation, I 
think, is a good one. There are two or three reasons. First of all the provincial auditor is, as has been 
pointed out by the member himself, extremely engaged in the day-to-day auditing of departments and 
other aspects of government and some Crown corporations. 
 
Secondly, the procedure related to chartered accountants and other Crown corporations now has evolved 
in such a way that they have private downtown CA firms. I just finished, for example, dealing with the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, audited by Deloitte, Haskins and Sells, subject to an overall 
supervisory role by the provincial auditor. 
 
Thirdly, the Crown corporations themselves want to have a relationship with an auditor on an ongoing, 
day-to-day basis, in a purely consultative capacity, as they enter into various accounting problems. It's a 
combination of all those reasons which resulted in the government, some time ago now, moving in this 
direction 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Attorney General, I think we're all aware that the provincial auditor is 
overburdened, has been overburdened for a good many years, as well as being underpaid. It has always 
been a source of mystery why your government chooses to leave that situation in effect and to leave the 
provincial auditor with an insufficient budget to attract the kind of people who are necessary. But that 
situation is true and I guess it's going to continue to be true. 
 
However, my question to the Attorney General is this. I am thinking of the time when ultimately these 
audited annual reports come to that wonderful wealth-of-information committee commonly known as 
the Crown corporations committee, otherwise known as the not-in-the-public-interest committee, or 
otherwise — well, we have a few other names for it. 
 
On the assumption that questions were being asked on the auditor's report, and in the unlikely event that 
the minister didn't answer that it was not in the public interest, and in the unlikely event that the minister 
was prepared to answer a straight question in a forthright fashion, my question to you is: would we be 
able to call the auditor who did the financial statement and would he be present in the room at that time? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, the practice this morning and yesterday morning with the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was indeed to have the outside auditor, Mr. Bundon of Deloitte, 
Haskins and Sells, present as a back-up official. The SaskOil corporation, of course, goes to Crown 
corporations. The minister responsible will have to give answers on the annual statement audited by the 
outside auditor in this eventuality. The answers will have to be tendered by the minister based on the 
advice given to him by the outside auditor. If you're asking whether or not the outside auditor actually 
responds to the questions and answers, the Crown corporations committee 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1721 

doesn't work on that format, as we all know. Maybe it should or maybe it shouldn't: that's another issue. 
It never has and it doesn't now. It's unlike the public accounts committee. of course. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — This is my final question to you on this matter. Rather than bringing an outside 
auditor into the Crown corporations committee, if you were to call Bill Clarke from Clarkson Gordon, I 
wonder what the cost per hour would be to pull him into the Crown corporations committee, or have him 
sitting in the wings for a couple of days. I ask the Attorney General whether the economics have been 
considered of simply upgrading the provincial auditor's office to where it can handle the Crown 
corporations? I think that has been a non-political issue. I've discussed it many times with the former 
minister of finance. 
 
The general agreement is that the provincial auditor is understaffed. He doesn't have a sufficient budget 
to attract the kind of people that he should be able to attract. It has been an acute problem for many 
years. Which is the more economical, to upgrade the provincial auditor's office to where it can do the job 
or go outside? Let's face it, when government is involved with professional services, you pay top dollar. 
I don't think I'm taking anybody in vain at that point. When it's the government, it's top dollar for 
minimum service. Have you gone through the pros and cons? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I can't answer that the government has gone through the 
pros and cons, in all honesty. Perhaps the Minister of Finance or other officials or ministers have: I have 
not. To the best of my knowledge, this has not been done. I emphasize the point which I made earlier in 
response to the first question from the member for Kindersley: we are not talking solely about audit 
functions. We are talking about non-audit functions of an accounting nature. We are dealing now with a 
multimillion dollar Crown corporation. We need to have access to audit functions and C.A. (chartered 
accountant) functions on an ongoing basis. I think it's safe to say that if you combined the two, and were 
able to have a professional outside counsel available to advise you on a regular basis, the economics 
would pretty well justify what's being done here. In any event, it doesn't change the professional ethical 
requirement on the professional outside auditor to do the audit accurately and to answer questions 
accurately. Nor does it change the obligation for the minister to answer those audited statements as 
accurately as he can. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Has the provincial auditor's office been asked for an opinion on taking the Crown 
corporation from his jurisdiction? If so, did he comment to the government as to his position on that 
question? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — I don't know if he has been. Frankly, I would be surprised if he were. 
This is a practice which, rightly or wrongly, the government established several years ago. One of the 
first times I recall was in the debate in 1975-76 on the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan when I was 
piloting that bill through the House. So, for four or five years, we have been moving in this area. I don't 
know what his position would be. This is not to say that we would dismiss his comments, but the policy 
now is fairly firmly established. Whatever he could add would be of importance but would not redirect 
the policy. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — As a recognized parliamentarian, I wonder if the minister could advise the 
Assembly what is his interpretation of the function of the office of the provincial auditor. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1722 

HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not sure I thank the member for an indirect 
compliment which I will accept but not fully believe. All I can say, in very general terms, is that my 
perception is that the provincial auditor is to make sure that the expenditure of the public dollar is 
carried out according to the statutory and other dictates of parliament or the legislature. 
 
I think some areas such as a proliferation of Crown corporations, as we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan (thankfully), may require a different kind of a nuance, involving, if you will, a degree of 
financial accountability, perhaps not directly through the provincial auditor, but through mechanisms 
such as Crown corporations committee. 
 
In terms of regular departments and agencies of government, as opposed to Crown corporations, the 
argument seems fairly clear. But when you're dealing with a Crown corporation of the size of SaskOil or 
SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation) or PCS (Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). I think there needs to be an adjustment, which is perhaps the best word to use, to that 
overall statement. 
 
In any event, I would remind the hon. member again of the point that I am sure he realizes. All this 
amendment does is allow the flexibility to make the appointment of an external auditor, if and when it is 
deemed to be appropriate in the future. No decision has yet been made and to the best of my knowledge, 
SaskOil has not yet determined that it would do so, if and when this amendment goes through. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Would the Attorney General not agree that in every such case before, when this 
legislation has been introduced concerning Crown corporations, that very shortly thereafter the audit was 
taken away from the provincial auditor and put into the hands of a private auditor? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — I can't answer that by way of absolute certainty in every case, but, I think, 
in general terms, the answer is yes. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Is the Attorney General aware of the most recent recommendation of the public 
accounts committee in Ottawa dealing with the very same question, with an extension of course, and that 
is on whether or not the auditor general of Canada should be the auditor for the Crown corporations 
federally. In particular, they addressed three corporations, which by comparison to SaskOil are far more 
massive: one being the CBC; two being Eldorado Nuclear; and three being the Export Development 
Corporation. I am sure the member will agree that these are far more vast than SaskOil, so your first 
point, it seems to me, doesn't apply. 
 
The whole direction being moved in Ottawa is exactly the other way, so that the auditor general's office 
will be doing the audits on more Crown corporations, and not only will they be doing audits, but also the 
comprehensive audit, as they are the only people eligible to get into that whole concept. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, an argument can and has been made by the hon. member, 
but an argument can equally be made, as we seek to advance, by the government. I don't think it's a 
black and white situation when it comes to how best to control public funds, if you will. The fact is that 
in the Saskatchewan legislative scene, we have a mechanism which is more or less unique to the 
legislative parliamentary situation. That is the Crown corporations committee. Whether it is operating 
well or badly is another issue. The fact is that they do not refer the atomic energy commission 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1723 

or Air Canada to a Crown corporations committee on a regular yearly basis in the House of Commons, 
as we do ours. 
 
There's another nuance of accountability which is unique to the Saskatchewan political scene and, 
accordingly, allows for some mitigation from the overall rule that a provincial auditor should be the 
watchdog of parliament's or the people's purses. We do have this yearly institution of the Crown 
corporations committee, such as it operates. I personally believe that it operates as well, or as good (and 
I don't want this to be inflammatory to anyone) as the opposition can make it, albeit some degree of 
co-operation is required from the minister. There is no doubt about that. But this is unique, and, 
accordingly, I acknowledge that he makes a point. I would also ask him to acknowledge (I don't mean 
stand up to acknowledge) that there is a counter point based on the exclusive nature of the Saskatchewan 
Crown corporations scene. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A further question, following up on the Ottawa matter. Is the minister also aware 
that in Great Britain, the office of the comptroller and auditor general (which is the same function as the 
provincial auditor or the auditor general in Canada) is, in fact, moving into all of the nationalized 
industries in England? That is the basis of the argument and the movement there. It's not only true in 
Ottawa, and Saskatchewan is not the only province that has Crown corporations. Clearly, they are in 
place throughout the jurisdictions of Canada and abroad as well. 
 
What I'm saying, Mr. Attorney General, is that the whole move, the whole process, is to upgrade the 
function and the office of the auditors, whether it's the auditor general of Canada or provincial audit 
offices, and Saskatchewan, slowly, one at a time, is moving in the other direction away from the 
provincial auditor who is a function of this legislature, not an employee of the government. 
 
You are moving (and I'm sure you are aware with this bill of the royal commission on financial 
management and accountability that brought about the whole question in Ottawa) contrary to the whole 
movement in the parliamentary form of government throughout the Commonwealth, which is moving to 
strengthen that office. You, on the other hand, are moving opposite to that, to take power away, to move 
that control mechanism out of the hands of legislators and into the hands of the cabinet and the people 
who control the Crown corporations. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I simply don't buy that argument. I think you have 
to choose whether or not you want to have the United Kingdom, or House of Commons situation which 
is, as you argue it, that everything is audited by a central auditor. I can guarantee you that there is no 
way that Mr. Macdonell, or his successors, would be able to audit Air Canada, Canadian National 
Railway, Atomic Energy Commission Ltd. — all of the major spending departments of the Government 
of Canada — and place an intelligible, comprehensive audit on the table of the members of parliament 
on each of those every year. It simply doesn't happen. 
 
He picks and chooses, and by necessity, a whole variety goes through unaudited and not scrutinized 
publicly by the members every year. Now, you choose whether you want that system or whether you 
want our system, where every year a Crown corporation such as the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan with $1 billion in assets comes in with an annual report audited, albeit by an outside 
auditor, and answers questions before the members of this Legislative Assembly for one hour, one day, 
one week or one month. Now, you take your choice. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1724 

I'm saying you can't have them both. When you say, "Put it all under the provincial auditor," in effect, 
you are moving toward that kind of audit mechanism with all of its strengths in principle, and all of its 
weaknesses in practice. There is no system that is perfect, but the fact is that we have a unique 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations mechanism which is not moving anything into the cabinet's hands. 
 
With reference to Mr. Haskins, or Deloitte, or the man who was with me this morning (his name has 
slipped my mind momentarily), there can be no suggestion that his audit is at the beck and call of the 
cabinet. Surely not even the member would suggest that. Nobody suggests that. The choosing of the 
auditor is external to the argument of whether it goes in cabinet's hands or not. Unless you pick some 
out-and-out crook who is going to doctor the books the way you want them doctored and if you couple it 
with an annual report, examined yearly by the Legislative Assembly and by the press, you pick and 
choose your mechanism. 
 
I say, to argue yours, you would have to have a massive provincial auditor's bureaucracy and even at that 
you would never be able to just run through the family of Crown corporations plus the big-spending 
departments and tell me how intelligently he can do the audit, and more importantly, how intelligently 
we, as members, could handle the job. It can't be done. The fact that it hasn't been done in any other 
jurisdiction proves my point. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Then what you are saying is that it's too large a job and, therefore, you are going to 
farm that money out to someone else to do it. The more pertinent question becomes this: the mechanism 
that you wish to have in place is basically that you want the same type of audit system as the private 
corporation uses. That's basically what you want. Surely, if on the one hand you are saying, "We don't 
want the private sector people; we want to take that function over by our Crown corporations," the 
argument can be made, in certain cases, for that. I don't disagree with that. If you are going to say, ''We 
want the advantage of a Crown corporation,'' and you want the people of Saskatchewan to own that 
company as opposed to the shareholders on the free market, does it not carry with it a further obligation? 
That Crown corporation belongs to the shareholders, meaning all the people of the province. The board 
of directors or the chairman of the board in the Crown corporation we are dealing with here is, in fact, 
the same as the minister responsible for it, the Minister of Mineral Resources. So you have no effective 
chairman of the board separated from the legislative board. In other words, Mr. Cowley is the chairman 
of SaskOil and he is also the Minister of Mineral Resources. 
 
In your case of Air Canada, the chairman of the board is not Pepin, or whoever it might be. There is a 
division there. Clearly that applies. 
 
But what you are saying to the people is basically this, ''We want to own it for the people of 
Saskatchewan, but because it is now a Crown corporation completely controlled and completely owned, 
we don't have to go through the mechanisms of parliamentary control which the provincial auditor can 
provide.'' The provincial auditor, Mr. Minister (and you are fully aware of this) is the external or 
post-auditor who looks beyond doing the books and doing the audit as an auditor in a private corporation 
does. He has a further responsibility as an employee (if you like) or an agency of the legislature as 
opposed to an agency of government. That's where the whole distinction goes. 
 
That function of the auditor is different from the function of the auditor in the private sector. My point 
is, the auditors in the private sector are going to treat SaskOil exactly the same way they would treat 
Nova or Imperial Oil or any other one. That's where the 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1725 

problem comes, Mr. Minister. 
 
When I say that parliament is losing the control, clearly parliament is losing the control. How many 
times have you seen, for example, a management letter from the Crown corporations that are audited by 
the outside auditors; how many times have you seen mention in the provincial auditor's report of 
shortcomings? And surely there must be. Virtually every other department is mentioned in the provincial 
auditor's report, but you would never see mention of SMDC or you would never see mention of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, because you don't see it in the private sector. What you are getting 
for an audit is exactly the same thing Imperial Oil is getting. That's where the legislature is losing that 
valuable tool — that intermediary if you like — the office or the function that stands between the 
operation of that government and the legislators. Those are people on this side as well as people on that 
side; and that's what we're losing. We will continue to lose it under your system. So if it's SaskOil today, 
tomorrow it will be SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance), and then the next day it will be Sask 
Tel. 
 
So, you are doing two processes. You are taking the power, effectively, away from the provincial auditor 
by not allowing him to go along with all other provincial auditors in this country and deal with the 
question of comprehensive auditing. You are against that. But not only are you against that, you are 
taking away agencies of governments like Crown corporations. You are taking that from his authority to 
the point that someday our auditor will be absolutely irrelevant to the system. And that's going to be the 
legacy, in keeping with the government opposite's view of keeping everything secret, as the member for 
Thunder Creek says. That's the direction of this government, and that's a dangerous direction if we are to 
have a democratic system, if we are to have a parliamentary system that is going to control the spending 
and proper expenditures of money by a government. Surely, Mr. Minister, that is fundamental to what a 
parliamentary system of government is about. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as semi-emotional as the speech may be, it is also 
inaccurate and confused. Mr. Chairman, let's get one thing straight: whether it is a Crown corporation in 
business or a business in business, you can't change the laws of economics. You can't change the laws of 
economics no matter how many times you people would like to represent that you can; whether it's an 
accountant from the downtown world or an accountant from the inside world, the laws of economics are 
essentially immutable. Now, those are facts. 
 
Secondly, you cannot parallel a Crown corporation, which is designed to compete in a private enterprise 
world, with the department whose job it is to provide a service or a function to the community at not 
necessarily economic standards. That's a second factor. 
 
Thirdly, those who argue that the committee, that this government, is secretive simply don't know what 
they are talking about. You visit any legislature in Canada and then tell me you want a better Crown 
corporations committee operation, and I tell you that's the one we should adopt. 
 
The one that I hear about is British Columbia. British Columbia has one Crown corporation a year. I 
don't think it has met once in the last 18 months. In fact, one of the members of the Assembly there, Mr. 
Kempf of the Social Credit, is objecting to the fact that the Crown corporations committee has been 
requested by the opposition to meet. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1726 

There is not one legislative mechanism that deals with Crown corporations as thoroughly, or not as 
thoroughly, as the Crown corporations committee of the province of Saskatchewan. Whether or not it is 
dealt with thoroughly is not the function of whether there is a provincial auditor doing the audit. 
Whether that information is coming out is as much a function of whether or not you people are doing 
your job in Crown corporations committee. You can't change the laws of economics. The auditor has to 
look down at those numbers and report those numbers, whether he is in the public service or a private 
enterprise. And, he has to do it in the business environment. 
 
Now, no one needs to tell this government, or me, about the role of provincial auditor. The provincial 
auditor's positions have increased steadily since 1971. He maintains his position of auditing everywhere 
he can. I'm saying that the combination of the provincial auditor for the departments, plus outside 
auditors and the Crown corporations committee, unique to Saskatchewan, make this government more 
accountable and open in the area of business dealings than any other government in Canada. I say that 
without fear of contradiction. No amount of posturing, or otherwise, can change those bare facts. 
 
The hon. member says, "You want to be a Crown corporation. Why don't you stick with the public and 
stick with the provincial auditor?" That doesn't make sense! That would be the same member who gets 
up and says, "You're not running it in a businesslike way." When we engage a chartered accountant to 
run it in a businesslike way, like all the other businesses, then he says, "The provincial auditor should be 
doing it — the public way." 
 
It's a confused and muddled argument as to where the responsibilities lie. I'm simply saying to the hon. 
member that you come back to the United Kingdom situation, or the House of Commons situation. You 
tell me that you want Air Canada under the auditor general. You put all of Canada's Crown corporations 
and departments under the auditor general and have no Crown corporations committee (which is what 
happens in Ottawa), and you tell me that that is more accountable than our system? I can't believe that 
that proposition is being articulated. If it is being articulated, and you talk about secret government. well, 
we ain't seen nothin' yet if you boys should ever come into power, because we'd see a secret government 
under those circumstances. 
 
You'd increase the provincial auditor, do away with the Crown corporations committee, and allow the 
provincial auditor to do the audit of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, if there were a Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan after you people had your way. Of course, we know that you would do 
away with PCS, SGI and with SaskOil. That is really what is behind all this operation. 
 
The simple fact of the matter is, Mr. Chairman, that the argument is not rational, nor is it logical. It's an 
argument which is, frankly (I say to the member for Kindersley), tantamount to a sloganeering 
argument. 
 
I agree with the provincial auditor; I agree we should be giving him more money; I agree he is the 
watchdog of Parliament; I agree with all of that. But, don't say that because we are allowing external 
auditors in a Crown corporation, which is a business activity in the commercial world, (on a Crown 
corporation committee), that somehow we are undermining that. We're not. If we took away the Crown 
corporations and said you didn't need to audit anything, then maybe we would be undermining it. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1727 

Every year we come before fellows; every year we have audited statements; and every year the ministers 
have to respond. If we're not responding, either you're not asking the right questions and doing your jobs 
correctly. or alternately, perhaps some of the ministers are not doing their jobs correctly. But, don't 
cloud the issue with the provincial auditor. That's a red herring. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The member talks about the Crown corporations committee. Perhaps we could look 
for a minute at the public accounts committee, which is the comparable one with government 
departments. 
 
What happens in that committee is that various departments of government are called. I know the 
members of the press won't be aware of that because they're not allowed in there. That wouldn't be 
because we're a secretive government, I don't suppose. 
 
Every department is called that the committee recommends should be called. They are called because 
the auditor has gone through their books, has made reference to their particular department in the annual 
Report of the Provincial Auditor of the shortcomings of the improper actions by the government of the 
various departments. And, the minister has several before the present auditor's report this year, as you 
are well aware. 
 
Those are then dealt with in a very reasoned way, Mr. Minister. The auditor has all the facts; he has 
access to all the books. Does the member for Regina South have access to the books of the Crown 
corporation SGI? Or Sask Tel? Not a chance. 
 
If the member for Regina South was to go to the auditors for SMDC (Saskatchewan Mining 
Development Corporation), would he be provided with the information which a provincial auditor 
provides to the people of this Assembly because they are who he is working for? That's the problem 
you're addressing. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Surely you don't believe that. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Believe what? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You just said in that last statement that a member could come before a Crown 
corporation and . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — What I am saying, Mr. Minister, is this: the Crown corporations in this province 
belong to the people of Saskatchewan as a department really once removed from the legislature. The 
people of this province, as shareholders, should be able to stand in the position of a shareholder, and 
they don't; you know that as well as anybody. 
 
The provincial auditor is an agency of this legislature. When he raises a concern about the Attorney 
General's department in his annual report, the members of the legislature have a right to go to him and 
ask him what that concern is. In the committee, they have a right to document the concerns, the letters 
and the problem. That same right doesn't exist in Crown corporations. In public accounts, the people 
who answer the questions are the deputy ministers. That's what should be happening in Crown 
corporations as well. I know you are against that because you want to keep it as a political forum. 
 
If you want to address more seriously the shortcomings in management of the Crown 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1728 

corporations, you could upgrade the function of the provincial auditor. The questioning should be to the 
president or the head of that Crown corporation, who is a non-political, non-elected person. There 
should be research provided such as they have proposed and are doing in B.C. In B.C. they have 11 or 
12 management consultants on staff, and these consultants have access to the management decisions of 
the Crown corporations such as B.C. Railroad and whatever the other ones are. They look at the 
management shortcomings of the corporation and report on it. 
 
From the potash corporation's annual report, how could a member know if there were $5,000 or $50,000 
being improperly spent? There is no mandate to report that, Mr. Minister. The problem which we are 
facing is fundamental. It is the question of who is going to control them: the legislature or the cabinet? 
It's a question you do not want to address; it's a question which other governments are now starting to 
address, but you are going in the other direction. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, the member (and I say this with all due respect) is very 
confused in his argument, very confused indeed. 
 
First, on public accounts, let's make something absolutely clear. The current system is a result of a 
recommendation of an intersessional committee composed of, among other people, the late Ross 
Thatcher and the late J.H. Brockelbank. I don't say this in any personal patronizing sense, but they were 
people whose respect for the parliamentary system (with all due respect to the member for Kindersley), 
many of us would adopt sooner than his. And they did so because prior to 1964-65 public accounts was 
public, and you can't have it both ways. You can't have the deputy minister answering publicly about 
expenditures of funds and you cannot expect that deputy to get into areas of policy publicly. If you do, 
then you are going to require the minister or the politician to respond in that area. The choices were very 
simple for the public accounts committee people and for the legislature. Either you get into the detailed, 
specific workings of expenditures in private, in the absence of political and publicity glare (because the 
argument is you get a more detailed and thorough review of the accounts), or you open it up to the 
public. If you open it up to the public, then you at least must have a couple of ground rules: not to get 
into policy questions and to make sure, if you do get into public policy questions, the minister will 
answer those questions. Because if it is public, there will be the inevitable tendency to politicize matters. 
That is a fact. It isn't me who is trying to politicize it. And I wouldn't even accuse you of trying to 
politicize it. Those are the two choices that that committee 15 years ago had to decide between. They 
chose to go the private route. 
 
Furthermore, the transcriptions are all public after the committee is down. The reports are all public. If 
you have identified something, it's debated here in the House. There is nothing limiting you from 
coming in. That system has the best of both worlds. It allows a private scrutiny by the opposition 
chairman (not by us) of expenditures and of the transcript in the case of a big error, with the use of the 
provincial auditor plus the public exposure in a debate of that report. 
 
Now perhaps there needs to be a fundamental revolution on this. I don't know. But I think the system has 
worked fairly well. 
 
I surely don't believe the hon. member when he says that they would like to have Crown corporations 
committee operated the same way. Not only that, but with a provincial auditor that they could go to as 
members. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1729 

For example, I dealt with the potash corporation this morning and yesterday morning. The members 
would have us believe that members of the opposition (be they PC, NDP, Liberal or whatever) would be 
able to come to a provincial auditor (or any auditor) and ask that auditor, without any ministerial or 
policy guidance, to give hard information related to the financial operations of a competitive worldwide 
company like the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. They say there is no distinction between that and 
a department. Well, I say that is nonsense. We don't have another department of health competing 
against us. But we do have an IMCC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation) competing 
against the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan; we do have Imperial Oil competing against SaskOil in 
this world. With all the good intentions of all the members (and I don't name anybody personally here), 
it is absolute madness to argue that one should come to the provincial auditor of the SaskOil and get all 
of the financial detail and somehow not put that corporation at risk with the competitive world. Perhaps 
not through political design for mischievousness, but how about by accident? 
 
Finally the member says, "What about if there is misspending?" He says there isn't any way to find out if 
there is misspending in Crown corporations. Again, that's absolutely false. If there is misspending, the 
auditor's job (be he private or public) is to identify that. And he does. If he doesn't, I ask the hon. 
member to get up and challenge me on that, because what I would like to do is report Deloitte Haskins 
and every C.A. (chartered accountant) right to the C.A. organization. That is its responsibility. Not only 
that. they are committing a criminal act if they don't meet it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If there is 
misspending, who is to report it? I am saying, you challenge me if I am wrong. I am saying, if there is 
misspending in a Crown corporation, it is the obligation of the chartered accountant to report it, just as it 
is of the provincial auditor, and I ask you to disagree with me on that. Because that is exactly the 
obligation he has. For him to fail to do that is tantamount to a criminal act. He is part of an obstruction 
of justice or a cover-up of an illegality. 
 
Now the provincial auditor has nothing to do with that. That's like saying, because I engage a private 
lawyer for the Department of the Attorney General to advise me on the constitutional matter or any other 
case, he can be unethical and cover up in his legal advice to me. But because I use an in-house lawyer, 
somehow a different set of rules applies. I mean it is total, utter nonsense! It is totally fuddled thinking 
as to what the operations and the responsibilities are. 
 
I am saying to the hon. member here (I make this point, and I make it for the last time, because I am 
going around in circles with respect to this argument; I don't know whether he feels the same way or not 
with respect to his arguments): this Saskatchewan system is not perfect. I admit that, but there is no 
system which is better yet. 
 
If Crown corporations isn't working, two parties are at fault — the opposition and the ministers. I don't 
know who is more responsible. But if you can't, out of an annual report of the kind tabled, I will use the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan as an example (you have your outside help advising you, through 
supporters of your party or paid staff) dig up enough research to specifically do the job of accountability, 
coupled with that auditor's responsibility in law to identify misspending of funds, then I tell you, you are 
not doing your job as opposition people. It is as simple as that. 
 
I candidly admit that we tend to resort too often to saying, ''not in the public interest.'' But that's the 
game; that is the nature of the operation. No system will be perfect. But 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1730 

those journalists or otherwise who say that the system is not open, simply don't know what they are 
talking about. They don't know the principles of provincial auditing; they don't know the practice in this 
legislature compared to any other legislature in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
I say to the hon. member, please get your thinking clear, make sure you know exactly what you want us 
to do. Make the role of the provincial auditor vis-a-vis the departments clear. Distinguish in regard to 
Crown corporations that operate in a business environment; then advance your arguments on that kind of 
logical basis. You throw all of them together and you come down about five or six different routes and 
say it is a secret government. 
 
Of course, all my friends in the press gallery will pick that up and say, "Andrew fights for open 
government," and all that kind of stuff, which is a bunch of bunk. It is pure unadulterated bunk! All one 
would have to do is take 20 minutes of analysis of any Crown corporation operation in this province or 
anywhere else, to know it is bunk — if he is doing, a fair job and an honest job in the analysis that is 
involved. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — With regard to the point the minister makes with regard to Crown corporations, 
we'll come back to that later. I want to talk now about your point with regard to the public accounts 
committee. What the minister is basically saying is, "Well, we can't have it both ways." In every 
jurisdiction in this country, in the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom, and the Yukon, the public 
accounts committee is open to the press. Every one of them! The people who appear before those 
committees are not the ministers, they are the deputy ministers. How can you make your point that you 
can't have both ways. You either have to have the minister speaking or you have to have it closed to the 
press. In every other jurisdiction that is not the case. But it is the case here. My simple question in your 
analysis is: why? Why does it have to follow that the logic applies in Saskatchewan but that it doesn't 
apply in other jurisdiction? Let's start with that. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, let's start with something else. Why is it in Saskatchewan 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I will. But I will ask you: why is it that in every other jurisdiction there is 
no active Crown corporations committee but there is in Saskatchewan. You tell me why; you tell me 
why British Columbia hasn't met for 18 months. You tell me that. You tell me why Crown corporations 
in B.C. does no more than one Crown corporation, if that, whenever it meets. It hasn't met in 18 months. 
You tell me what Crown corporation committee meets to look at PWA (Pacific Western Airlines), to 
look at Alberta Gas Trunk, to look at all the myriad of Alberta holdings. The same thing in Manitoba. 
You tell me that; you tell me why. No system is perfect, including public accounts. We are here trying to 
meld two competing objectives: the objective of doing an audit in a non-political environment in a hard, 
cold, detailed, financial analysis versus the public's right to know. 
 
Now, if you tell me that public accounts and Crown corporations should be handled the same way, you 
guarantee me that my president of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan won't be hit publicly (since 
he'll be doing the answering now) with the kind of questions I was hit with by the member for 
Moosomin this morning. And rightly so - questions on policy. Who answers questions about what our 
future acquisition plans are? He doesn't make that decision. We make that decision, and I account to you 
to make that decision. 
 
A Crown corporation is a hybrid creature. It's not a homogeneous legal entity. It is a 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1731 

uniqueness in the parliamentary system. It will not fit into a square hole, because it isn't square, or 
round. We'll always try to put it into a position of public accountability. There's no easy, simple answer 
to it and believe me (I don't want to be personal about this), the hon. member for Kindersley is not 
inventing the wheel. This has been looked at over and over and over and over and over again — in 
Saskatchewan and outside Saskatchewan and in all of Canada. 
 
So I am saying to the hon. member: you have to look at this fairly. Anybody who would look at it fairly 
and objectively can only come back to the conclusion, what other government anywhere has those 
ministers? I'm there for two days. I think that was a fair examination of PCS: I tell you that candidly. I 
could have been there for two weeks. I don't decide when I step down; I don't decide what questions I 
don't answer. If I say it's not in the public interest. it's your job to push me. You don't roll over and say. 
"Oh well, it's not in the public interest. Let's move on to the next issue." Nothing gags you people to do 
it. Because some minister says it's not in the public interest doesn't mean, accordingly, the whole 
government is secretive, falling down, ageing — and all that kind of stuff is going on. What is going on? 
If we're falling down because we're saying it's not in the public interest and we're ageing because of that, 
then you guys are really beyond the age of recovery because you won't push us beyond those questions. 
 
Again, all I'm saying, is that there's no easy answer to this thing. I don't mean to make light nor do I 
mean to be on any personal business with the member for Kindersley; I realize he has a sincere interest 
in this. But I do say that it is extremely important when we deal with this section of external audit to 
realize that the Crown corporation is a mechanism unique and. in this province, more unique than any 
other operation in the country. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I would hope the Attorney General will come back to the question with regard to 
the public accounts. But he has asked a question and it seems to me that we're going to be answering the 
questions or he is asking the questions. 
 
He has asked if there is any other jurisdiction where the provincial auditor or the auditor has done a 
review of Crown corporations, and I can bring him to two (which I think are very significant) 
happenings in Ottawa. One is the AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd.) matter and the other one is 
Polysar Ltd. If it had not been for the auditor general, in those two questions, being able to bring to the 
light of day the kickback schemes in Switzerland, with regard to various nuclear reactor sales, how 
would you expect parliament to address that question? The only reason parliament was able to address 
the questions of Polysar and AECL was because they were brought to the light of day by the auditor 
general of Canada, and it was brought to light by the public accounts committee. 
 
I would suggest that is the same type of system which we should be looking at here, because those 
things could exist in our Crown corporations just as much as they exist in the federal Crown 
corporations. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, I'm not going to prolong this. If the members to prolong it, 
it's up to him but I don't intend to. I make two points in quick rebuttal. 
 
The first time AECL and Polysar Ltd. were audited 4 or 5 years ago was the first time in 25 years or so. 
It will be the last time they're audited for another 25 years or so. That is 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1732 

the system which you advocate: one provincial auditor for everything under government. It just can't 
audit Air Canada, even if you doubled its staff, let alone adding Polysar Ltd., AECL, CNR, health and 
welfare and all of these operations. That's what happens, point number one, I think my system is better 
on a yearly basis. 
 
Point number two: you assume that a kickback scheme in Crown corporations will be covered up by a 
private auditor and not by a public auditor. You are wrong in law. You are wrong in practice. Wrong! 
That is not the responsibility nor the liability of any auditor, either professionally or legally. If there's a 
kickback in PCS which Deloitte Haskins and Sells spots, it has an obligation in law to bring that to the 
attention of the shareholders and the board of directors. You can test me to see if I'm wrong on that. If 
they don't, then we have the wrong auditors. 
 
Finally, point number three: I simply say that this is the arguing point. In Manitoba, the Conservative 
government has eliminated, in the last couple of years, all of the roles of the provincial auditor in Crown 
corporations. I don't want to use them to support my argument, necessarily, because I think I'm really 
coming down to the bottom of the barrel if I have to. But they've done it. Not only that, they don't even 
have a Crown corporations committee. Those are your friends in Manitoba, your friends, the Tories. It's 
the same thing in Alberta. That's what you want in Saskatchewan. You want to say, at the same time, 
that somehow it's more open than our system. I say baloney to that argument. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I have a comment with regard to Manitoba. The Attorney General left out a couple 
of fairly significant questions as they relate to the province of Manitoba. Manitoba had a provincial 
accounts committee up until last year (when, I think, it sat for two days). Before that, when chaired by 
the NDP opposition, do you know how long that public accounts committee held its meetings? The 
Attorney General is sitting here saying we should have gone on for two weeks on PCS. The NDP in the 
public accounts committee in the province of Manitoba held their meeting for one half-day — two and 
one-half hours. That's the entire system. 
 
Now he goes to the question of comprehensive auditing in the province of Manitoba. I believe that the 
Attorney General, if he checks the facts, will find this: when the Lyon government came into power in 
the province of Manitoba two years ago, it introduced into legislation comprehensive auditing. This is 
the system which is being developed now in B.C. It's in place in Alberta. It's in place in Ontario. It's in 
place in Ottawa. It's in place in Newfoundland and New Brunswick. It's moving into Great Britain. In 
fact, through the actions of J. J. Macdonell, it is being introduced into the United Nations. It is 
recognized as a great system. But what happened in the province of Manitoba when it was introduced 
there? The NDP fought to get rid of it. They didn't want comprehensive auditing. So, your example of 
the province of Manitoba is far from being a very good example, Mr. Attorney General. 
 
Now, we can come back to the other question I asked you. Surely, in the committee of the whole, the 
function of the opposition is to ask questions of the government, and the government's function is to 
reply. Can you tell me why the rules apply to public accounts where they have to be closed and, if 
they're not closed, then the minister must answer the question? Why doesn't that rule apply to every 
other jurisdiction when it's so important to the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — It applies that way because it was unanimously recommended by an 
intersessional, joint parliamentary committee of this legislature in 1964 (as I 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1733 

said when the Leader of the Opposition was out of the House) by parliamentarians who, with all due 
respect to all members on the opposite side, I respect a little more than those on the opposite side — 
people like Ross Thatcher and J. H. Brockelbank. They recommended it unanimously. They studied both 
the pros and the cons. There are other jurisdictions which are also considering going the same way. That 
is why it is applied. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have listened to you in this House in 
the last two or three years deliver some very eloquent speeches which, in some cases, have made a lot of 
sense. Probably most of the time you have, and you were very intelligent. I have also heard you deliver 
some very eloquent speeches which included a lot of drivel. Today, the drivel I heard coming out of you 
on Crown corporations had to top it all. 
 
Mr. Minister, you say that the argument put forth by the member for Kindersley is not rational. You say 
that every year. Every year we receive from the Crown corporations financial reports, at which time we 
have an opportunity to research, debate them. and ask questions of them. Well, let me tell you what we 
received this year — something like 20 Crown corporation financial statements within the last three 
weeks. You talked about the PCS which (in your own words) has a billion dollars in assets. We received 
the statement last week and it was brought up in the Crown corporations committee on Wednesday 
morning of this week. You know how many researchers we have. You expect us to be able to do the 
work, which takes your auditing department and your whole corporation three months to put together, in 
two days. 
 
I want to talk about the Crown corporations committee and the way it is established. You say we can 
pursue or push the minister. Let me give you an example of a question which was asked in Crown 
corporations committee this week to the minister sitting right over there, the minister in charge of Sask 
Minerals. When there is $16 million in sales, you tell me what is against the public interest in asking 
him to give me a breakdown of those sales. You tell me why that question or that answer . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, you did not . . . That answer is not in the public interest: finding out about the four 
areas which the Crown corporation sells, and the amount they sell them for. 
 
If you can stand in your place and tell us that we can push the question and pursue the question, then you 
tell me how I can ask that minister that question and in what way, because obviously I am not very smart 
in asking the question the way I did. Now, you tell me how I can ask the question of the minister, the 
one I wanted to ask. He says to me that it is not in the public interest. And he repeats it five or six times. 
Do you expect me to continue with the question? Do you expect me to sit there and wait? Do you know 
what the next move will be? There will be a motion submitted, and the 10 members versus the four we 
have, or the 11 versus the five (whatever the numbers are this year) will vote us wrong, and we will be 
stonewalled again. That is the kind of answer we get in Crown corporations committee. You are telling 
me it is not secretive; you are telling me that it is open to scrutiny! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Of course it is. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — You should talk, with the answers I got out of you about SaskTel. Of all the 
ministers who should talk — you are worse than the minister in charge of Sask Minerals in most ways. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1734 

You very effectively attempted to turn around (in your debate with the member for Kindersley) the issue 
which he has been presenting to you all afternoon by saying that if opposition members don't know how 
to ask a question, why should you do their job or words to that effect. 
 
Mr. Minister, the problem which lies in Crown corporations committee is as I have outlined. It is that 
your government is secretive, that your ministers do not want to provide answers, that your ministers, 
for one reason or another, decide that it is not in the public interest to answer a simple question like, 
'What was the breakdown of your sales?' Now, you tell me why that question was not in the public 
interest. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don't think you can answer that question. In three weeks time we received 20 financial 
statements. And you expect three researchers, and the critic of those Crown corporations to be able to 
come up with a complete report (and a complete review) on the year's activities of that Crown 
corporation and, particularly, with what information is not printed in that report. 
 
As I pointed out to you in the Crown corporation committee on the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, that information is not provided in that report. I'm not saying that the auditor did not 
provide it because he was hiding it. I'm saying he did not provide it because it wasn't comprehensive. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, central to this argument is whether or not anything would 
change from the member's argument if we had the provincial auditor there. I don't think very much 
would change. We'd have the same problems of 20 reports, and everything else tied into the whole 
operation. I don't think anything changes in that regard. 
 
May I make one last point, Mr. Chairman, in response to the member. Take this from a guy who has 
been around a few years, or dismiss it. Now, I don't want anybody's nose to be up . . . And now we will 
dig in until July, etc. We all have to figure out what our role is. I feel, from my two-day experience in 
Crown corporations, that some of the members (I'm not naming whether opposition or government) 
think that their role as members (the member for Kindersley thinks this) in public accounts is to be an 
alternate accountant. 
 
They get into all kinds of details about expenditures and hedgings and all these kinds of operations. With 
all due respect, our role is policy alternatives. There are four or five policy issues which are central to all 
Crown corporations. Pick them out and make our policy differences and elaborate on them. 
 
Now, if your view is like the member for Kindersley, then you need an armada of accountants to check 
the armada of accountants that we have, hoping to uncover (as he says) the Polysar Ltd. scandal. 
 
I think there has to be a common-sense blend of the two. Finally, you can't do a job (I readily admit) on 
all 20 Crown corporations all the time. You can't do that. You have to pick and choose your cases. You 
know what the issues are in any one year on policy. Advance the arguments that go there. It's an 
imperfect system; it's difficult and awkward. I'm not saying that you're not doing your job. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Yes, you did. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1735 

HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, I'm not saying it. If I did I withdraw it. I'm saying it's a complex 
system which is more difficult than simply saying that a provincial auditor's audit will solve it. It won't. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I wonder if both sides of the House will try to get back to section 9. We've had a 
really interesting discussion for about one hour now on whether the opposition is doing its job, and 
whether the minister answered the questions, etc. If we could confine our arguments to this section 9, 
rather than the question as to whether or not outside auditors should be used in Crown corporations . . . 
That is what we should be talking about, and not about all these other things under section 9. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I'll attempt to try and tie it in, if I possibly can. 
However, I just want to reply to the minister in this respect. He says that the system is imperfect; that it's 
a complex system, and whatever else he called it. That's the point that we're trying to make to him. 
We're trying to make you realize that it needs improvement. That's what the whole argument of this 
debate is, the whole point of it. 
 
You suggested a minute ago that the job of the opposition in Crown corporations is not to argue the 
accounting points, and perhaps I would agree with you. 
 
Let's look at the potash corporation in the last two days. The member for Moosomin spent one hour this 
morning discussing policy. I spent 15 minutes this morning talking about figures in the accounting. If 
you recall, I made recommendations about the working capital requirements of the potash corporation, 
as well as the cash on hand. I don't care whether the dollars added up or whether they were the actual 
figures. We were talking policy this morning in Crown corporations, as we did yesterday. We spent two 
days talking policy, and very little time talking about the balance sheet of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, other than to point out to you that you have five times the amount of working capital and 
six times the amount of a cash in there that you require, that you are borrowing money on one hand and 
paying it back on the other hand, and crisscrossing huge sums of money in loans. That, in my opinion, 
Mr. Minister, is policy. That is not scrutinizing the dollar figures or the operation of the potash 
corporation on a day-to-day basis, or on a year-end basis. 
 
If you want to talk policy, that's exactly what we've been doing. That's exactly the point that the member 
for Kindersley has been trying to make to you that that's the kind of auditing of Crown corporations we 
want to see, and perhaps a little more concern for the opposition in presenting us with financial reports 
at the time that you do. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The Attorney General advances this argument: that the function of the legislature is 
not to talk, not to hold the government to account for its expenditures, but the function of the opposition 
and the legislature is to deal simply with wide-ranging policy concerns. That's exactly what you're 
saying. If that's what you're saying and if that's your rule, then fine. That's great. But what I learned in 
school, Mr. Minister, (and I think anyone else) was that the function of parliament was to hold the 
government to account for its expenditures, and its estimates. Is that not what is really fundamental 
about the parliamentary system of government? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Yes. it is. 
 
Section 9 agreed. 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1736 

The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
 
Sections 1 to 3 inclusive agreed. 
 
Section 4 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Chairman, this amendment does not change the effect of the law. It is 
necessary because the thing we are trying to do in the main part of the bill is to allow discrimination 
based on religion for colleges, but it turns out that the colleges are not colleges as defined by the 
universities commission. They are, in fact, private colleges defined pursuant to acts of the legislature. 
Therefore, the amendment strikes out universities commission reference and goes directly to, "a college 
established pursuant to an act of the legislature." 
 
Section 4 as amended agreed. 
 
Section 5 agreed. 
 
Section 6 agreed. 
 
Enacting clause as amended agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Local Improvements Act 
 
Sections 1 to 6 inclusive agreed. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Community Colleges Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 45 — An Act to amend The Registered Nurses Act, 1978 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read a first and second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — By leave now, I move this bill be now read a third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1737 

Bill No. 32 - An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Corporation Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read a third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 34 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move the amendments be now read a first and second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — By leave, I move the bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 42 — An Act to amend The Local Improvements Act 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — I move the said bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 
 

ENVIRONMENT 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 9 
 
Item 1 (cont'd) 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — When we closed the other night, I was discussing drinking water with the 
minister. I wasn't here yesterday. My concern is the drinking water quality in Regina, Moose Jaw and 
the intervening towns. What are you going to do to assure that we will have an improved quality of 
drinking water for Regina, Moose Jaw and the intervening towns for 1981? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, it is not the responsibility of the Department of the 
Environment to deal with, or to assure, the quality of water in urban communities such as Regina, 
Moose Jaw, and whatever other towns he mentioned. We have municipal drinking water quality 
objectives. We've been over this on previous occasions. We have published those particular qualification 
objectives, and I could send the member one of the brochures if he wishes. We don't see it as our 
responsibility to assure water quality once that water is into the system or that it is then a matter for the 
Department of the Environment. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well then, Mr. Minister, can you tell me why you showed so much 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1738 

concern when there were PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) in the drinking water? You sure became 
involved in an awful hurry. Now that we know this water in Regina and Moose Jaw is not good drinking 
water, that people can't drink the slop (you know they can't ) and 1981 is going to be . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, but look, it doesn't do you any good when it goes down. 
 
Now, tell me why you aren't involved. The quality of water in this city of Regina is low and you know it 
is. As we discussed the other night, when you get the water tested, it just nicely passes all requirements, 
but it's not fit for drinking because of taste and odour. This is where environment should be involved. I 
know I'll have to ask these questions again during the urban affairs estimates. 
 
Environment can involve itself when it comes to the quality of the drinking water in any town. You've 
done it before; it's environment which sets the rules and regulations for the bacterial tests. You've 
admitted this before. You said one year ago that you would do your best; it is right here on record that 
you agreed the towns should be required to do a complete analysis of their drinking water. 
 
If you can be involved, why haven't you any concern? If, as Minister of the Environment, you have no 
concerns over the low quality of the drinking water in Regina and Moose Jaw, then who is going to be 
concerned? Somebody on that side is going to have to have some concern; either you or the Minister of 
Urban Affairs will have to be involved. 
 
Mr. Minister, you have always slacked off when it comes to discussing anything about drinking water. 
There are eight of you on that side who are members for the city of Regina and two are members for the 
city of Moose Jaw, yet none of you seem to want to do anything about the cities' drinking water . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
No, we're not agreed. I want an answer as to why the minister is not involved. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, the Department of the Environment does not treat the 
water for urban supply. We license the treatment plants, but we are certainly not accepting any 
responsibility for water treatment. It is not the responsibility of the Department of the Environment to do 
so. The hon. member may well think it should be. With all deference to the hon. member's point of view, 
I say that it is not the role of the Department of the Environment to treat urban water supply systems. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — You must have discussed this in cabinet; I know you had a request for this 
carbon filter they put in at Buffalo Pound. What are your views on the carbon filter which the city wants 
to install at Buffalo Pound? You must have views, as Minister of the Environment, and you must 
express them to the government. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, we expressed no views to the city. It proposes to put in a 
filtration plant of this kind. As far as my discussions with the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina are 
concerned, I made no comment with regard to the detail or the technology, other than to make a general 
inquiry as to what the cities were proposing. I say again that the Department of the Environment's 
responsibility does not include a responsibility for treatment of urban water supply systems. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, if you have no responsibilities and you don't want to answer any 
questions concerning water, why did you issue a press release not too long ago, saying that your 
department is doing a study into the quality of the drinking water in Regina? The release said that this 
study would continue until 1983 or 1984, and that 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1739 

you hoped to have some results by 1990 You showed some concern by putting out the press release and 
setting up the study. I think you should explain to this Assembly what this study is all about and why 
you say that you hope to have something done by 1990. It's double talk to say it has nothing to do with 
you, and still send out a press release saying that you are involved and that you have set up this study. 
Would you please answer that? 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Mr. Chairman, the study which we were talking about, and over which 
there were some press and public statements made, was relative to the water supply to the urban centres 
of Moose Jaw and Regina. I wouldn't doubt that there was some discussion or comments made with 
regard to the taste and odour of the present water supply in the city of Regina; it certainly is a matter of 
conversation to the citizens who live here. But, Mr. Chairman, I don't see the direct relationship or direct 
responsibility of the Department of the Environment to treat urban water supply systems. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Would you then tell me whose responsibility it is? Who's the cabinet minister 
over there responsible for answering these questions, if you're not? Inform me then. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — The urban municipalities have that responsibility. The city of Regina 
recognizes it has a responsibility to treat and deliver to its citizens a water supply which has as good a 
quality as it is able to produce, and is in sufficient quantity. That's a responsibility of the urban 
municipality itself. In addition to that, the Department of Urban Affairs, I would suspect, in its dealings 
with urban municipalities will . . . In fact, there are programs for delivery assistance for water and sewer 
systems and so on. So, urban affairs has a responsibility in that general area as does the Department of 
the Environment, because of the water management act and the water pollution control act. We have 
those kinds of responsibilities. 
 
As far as the treatment and the delivery of water to the citizens of an urban centre, that is not the 
responsibility of the Department of Environment. I don't think that's the responsibility of the Department 
of Urban Affairs — the detail of delivering and treating it. We do license the water treatment centres. 
They are part of the licensing, and part of the authority is in the act for the licensing of those treatment 
plants. But again, we don't assume any responsibility with respect to what level of treatment is being 
applied to water which is being delivered to the city. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, I was asked to come to a meeting in Craik about the upper 
Qu'Appelle. You know what I mean by the upper Qu'Appelle? They tell me they were dealing with 
urban affairs, municipal affairs and environment. Their concern was about where the water was coming 
from, where the pipe was in Diefenbaker Lake. Do you know, Mr. Minister. where the water comes 
from, from Diefenbaker Lake? I want to clarify that question, because you're just going to get up and say 
that the water comes from Diefenbaker Lake, but it doesn't. There's a pipe installed in Diefenbaker Lake 
which flows out into the open ditch and brings water to Buffalo Pound. Do you know anything about the 
installation of this pipe in Diefenbaker Lake? This may not be under your department but someone has 
to know. It's either your department or urban affairs. I do not want to get to the estimates of urban affairs 
and have the minister tell me that it's your responsibility. So, I'm not letting it pass until I get your 
answer on this. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — My officials tell me that there would likely be works built into the 
Qu'Appelle Dam which would be what the hon. member is talking about. I'm not 



 
April 2, 1981 
 

 
1740 

sure that I heard the additional question, other than that it is our responsibility under the licensing 
authorities and so on to provide for water supply. Part of the agreement with regard to Diefenbaker Lake 
and the dam project was that they would be for domestic uses, irrigation purposes, power and so on. So, 
the distribution and use of water is a matter for the Department of the Environment to be concerned 
about. Therefore, we would have the responsibility of releasing certain water from Diefenbaker Lake 
into the Qu'Appelle Valley system. That would come down via the Buffalo Pound Lake and on down the 
system, if sufficient water was released. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Now, Mr. Minister, the request made to me at that meeting was this. Their 
concern was about this pipeline from Lake Diefenbaker to Buffalo Pound. Before we spend this type of 
money (which there has been a lot of talk about) maybe up into the millions of dollars — the last I 
heard, it was estimated at $100 million and probably, while we're talking about it here, it is going up 
more — they would like someone in command (whoever is responsible) to take a look at their 
suggestion. And I want to throw it out to you, Mr. Minister, and perhaps I'll have to do the same thing in 
urban affairs. Their concern was that the pipe was installed in the lake bottom and before the lake filled 
with water the dirt went right over top of the pipe. So they are taking the water from the bottom of the 
lake where all the sludge is. 
 
Now, we all know that it's recommended that anyone taking water from any source, whether it's a 
dugout, a dam or a lake, take it from the highest sources possible. The dam at Craik where we take our 
water from for our source had to be raised about 15 feet to get away from that sludge. If it were deeper, 
we'd naturally be going higher but we would have to worry about the frost in the wintertime. Their 
concern was that we were taking water out there right off the bottom of the lake — right out of the dirt. 
We also pull water out of Buffalo Pound where the farmers there tell me that dogs and animals are 
supposed to have died from drinking this stagnant water. That's where the bad water is coming from. 
And they say that where the pipe is also taking water from Buffalo Pound is where there's no moving 
water. You go a mile to a mile-and-a-half farther down the lake, and cattle have good drinking water to 
drink with no problems. 
 
To help the situation in Regina and Moose Jaw and to improve the quality, their suggestion would be 
that before we spend a lot of money, at least check this out to see if this water is being taken from the 
very bottom of Lake Diefenbaker, and at the bottom of Buffalo Pound at a stagnant spot. It sounds to me 
that they may have a suggestion that's worth while looking into. Because if you go back, there's 
constantly moving water a mile up the lake. 
 
I want to know if you know anything about this, Mr. Minister, or who could check into this to see if this 
is actual fact or not. The farmers who live in the Riverhurst area have checked it out and they say it is a 
fact that they saw the pipes lying in the lake bottom before the water filled up into the lake. Now I don't 
know whether it's fact but I want somebody to check into it to make sure. 
 
HON. MR. BOWERMAN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don't know whether the pipes were laying on the 
bottom or whether they are still laying on the bottom. All I could indicate to the hon. member is that the 
water quality coming out of Lake Diefenbaker is not the problem. The quality is good. With the amount 
of water that comes into that system, I would suspect that if there were a pipe there six feet in diameter 
and the gates were opened to let it come through, if there were any fill or any sludge, it would have 
cleaned out that particular situation that the hon. member talks about. 



 
April 2, 1981 

 

 
1741 

With regard to Buffalo Pound and the intake for the city, that's not a responsibility of this department. 
It's a city waterworks system, and is not a system about which the Department of the Environment has or 
should have any knowledge in my judgment. It's just not our responsibility. I know the member keeps 
wanting to get the Department of the Environment involved in this, but I think it's not a matter for us to 
concern ourselves with. It's a city waterworks system. 
 
The problem associated with water quality is that Buffalo Pound is a shallow, warm lake. Therefore, you 
get algae growth and it has a certain process of stagnation to it. As a result, you are obviously going to 
get taste and odour problems. We know that. Regina has had that experience. It's unfortunate. We would 
like to see it different. 
 
There is a study, to which the hon. member refers, where my colleague (of urban affairs) and I have 
been dealing with the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw. We have been attempting to deal with this 
subject and come to grips with it, in both a short- and long-term study. 
 
With regard to where the intake pipe, which belongs to the city water distribution system (or the water 
works system) is in Buffalo Pound, I have no knowledge. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


