






















































Hansard: March 10, 1981


691 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 10, 1981 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Radio Broadcasting 
 
THE CLERK: — Mr. Mostoway, as chairman of the select standing committee on radio broadcasting of 
selected proceedings, presents the second report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has had under consideration the division of 450 minutes of radio time arranged for the 
current budget debate. Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the time be shared as follows: 
323 minutes to the government members, 112 minutes to the opposition members and 15 minutes to the 
independent members for the budget debate. Your committee further recommends that the allocation of 
time to the individual members be arranged through the usual channels. 

 
MR. MOSTOWAY: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the second report of the select standing committee on 
radio broadcasting of selected proceedings be now concurred in, and that is seconded by the hon. member for 
Moosomin. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce a group of 
students from Rosthern High School, 46 in number, who are here with their two teachers, Mrs. Harms and 
Mrs. Ens. They are here to join us in the Assembly and watch how it goes today. I know the member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley is going to have a few comments to make about a Sunday hockey that he watched. 
We welcome you here and hope you enjoy your day. I’ll be meeting with you later. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Rosthern juveniles who on Sunday night 
won the Provincial C Juvenile Championship against a team from my constituency made up of the Combines 
from Montmartre, Wolseley and Glenavon. My son was a member of that team. I must say that you have a 
fine hockey team and congratulations on your victory. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ALLAN: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to introduce to you and to other members of the 
Assembly a group of 50 students who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery, they are from Rosemont School in 
Regina Rosemont constituency. They are 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
692 

accompanied today by Mr. Cameron Thomas and Mr. Russ Zalinko. I’m sure all members would want to 
join with me in expressing our wish that their stay in the Assembly this afternoon will be educational, 
informative and enjoyable. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Dismissal of Elton Marshall 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Minister, a question to the Minister of Social Services. One Elton Marshall, 
assistant director of program development of your home care program, bachelor of science in pharmacy, 
master in hospital administration, with 15 years experience with million dollar budgets in major hospitals in 
various parts of Canada, on February 12 of this year was fired effective immediately with no notice. He was 
denied access to his office. In fact, I believe it was the very same day he had the locks changed on the door. 
Could you explain to this House why he was fired, if the position has since been filled, and if so, by whom? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the details of this at my fingertips. I will take 
notice of the question and report back. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s generally accepted that the home care program has had 
trouble getting off the ground, for whatever reason. I have been here, Mr. Speaker, a confidential document 
called an increment annual rating form in which Elton Marshall in every category meets requirements. In the 
narrative which follows, it seems that his only sin (and if I could quote, Mr. Speaker) is that: 
 

Elton is usually co-operative, though his co-operativeness is often influenced by his assessment about a 
request. For example, if he believes it is valid, he will co-operate, but if in his opinion it is not, he 
displayed a reluctancy to co-operate. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that Mr. Marshall’s only sin seems to be that he does have a mind, and in 
light of the fact that the field . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I’ll take a new question. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — In light of the fact that the field staff and the field directors of the home care program 
have indicated that Mr. Elton Marshall is the only ray of light in that program, would you not admit that in 
fact Mr. Marshall has been singled out as a scapegoat for a program which has been largely dominated by 
hacks of your particular party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I would, Mr. Speaker, like to comment on the last half of the question 
first, where the member opposite insinuates that the home care program is in great difficulty in 
Saskatchewan. Contrary to what he says. the home-care program has boards set up in 39 home care districts 
out of 45. They are providing service in 13 home care districts. The volunteers who have set up the program 
and are working very hard and diligently to get the program on the road will be very interested to know the 
opinion of the members opposite about home care. To do with the person mentioned by the Leader of the 
Opposition. I mentioned earlier I will take notice of it and report back. 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
693 

MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I have here a letter from the deputy minister of social services, Duane 
Adams, in which he indicates that there will be a home care status review conducted by Access Consulting 
Ltd. of Saskatoon. Item 7 of the terms of reference of this particular review indicates that: 
 

The review should perform specific assessment of both the development officer concept and the 
development performance to date with an indication of positive alternatives to existing procedures, if 
required. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that report is to be filed with the minister on April 1. I wonder if the minister can explain how 
in fact he could possibly terminate the employment effective February 12 of an individual whose 
effectiveness was not to become known until April 1 when this report is filed. 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, the report which has been asked for by the deputy minister 
is in fact in the process of being done. The report will be given to me on April 1. As far as the consideration 
of a member of the staff who has been dismissed or otherwise, I cannot be sure what he is referring to from 
the documents which he has in his hand over there unless he tables them. But I will take notice of that part 
and report back. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In a further letter from Mr. Duane Adams, it is 
indicated that in accordance with article 37 of The Public Service Act, you may appeal this action to the 
public service commission within 30 days. I wonder if the minister can explain why Mr. Marshall has been 
denied access to his personal files within your department so that he may in fact prepare for an appeal. It is 
now March 10. The termination, I believe was February 12. He had 3 days to file his appeal. Can you square 
that with the people of Saskatchewan and with Mr. Elton Marshall? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure of the fact he refers to, of an individual being 
denied access to his personal files. It seems very strange to me, but I will check and report back. 
 

Home Care Program 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — A question to the Minister of Social Services. I want to ask the question right off, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Minister, would you agree with the following facts: 
 
1. Up until now, and possibly yet, the expenditures by your department into the in-home care program have 
been primarily on administration and have not reached the service level to the senior cities of Saskatchewan 
who much need that service. 
 
2. Would you agree that you have deliberately, through bureaucratic ineptitude, made it very difficult for 
local boards to gain approval of their application for an in-home care board and subsequent service to our 
senior citizens? 
 
3. Would you not agree that your total concept of a in-home care program in the province of Saskatchewan 
has been perpetrated on the backs of our senior citizens as nothing short of your government’s determination 
to use in-home care programs to keep from making much-needed major capital expenditures into the nursing 
home program that we have in existence today in Saskatchewan? 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
694 

HON. MR. LINGENFELTER:: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is interesting that the member for Moosomin, 
opposite, would say that the boards are having great difficulty in being set up and approved when 39 out of 
45 are set up and have been approved. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I think, as well, the senior citizens of Saskatchewan will be very 
interested to know the position of the member for Moosomin on the home care program. People in places 
like Kincaid and Shaunavon, where the home-care service is being set up, are very anxious to get on with it, 
and they will be interested to know that in an article the member had placed in many of the local newspapers, 
he attempts to undermine the home care program through innuendoes and insinuations that the government 
is attempting not to set the home care program up. I think this will come back to haunt the member for 
Moosomin, as have other irresponsible statements which he has made in the House before. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Price of Gasoline 
 
MR. LANE: — I would like to direct a question to the Minster of Finance or the Minister of Revenue, 
supply and Services. A check, as of yesterday, indicates that the price of gasoline at nearly all levels — 
regular, diesel, unleaded, self-serve and full-serve — is considerably cheaper in the city of Toronto than in 
the city of Regina. I can give specific examples if the minister wishes them. For example, regular in Toronto 
is 31.8 cents a litre and 32.7 cents a litre; full serve is 32.9 cents a litre in Toronto and 33.5 cents a litre in the 
city of Regina, diesel is three-cents a litre cheaper in Toronto than it is in Regina. Would the minister be 
prepared to: (1) admit that the Government of Saskatchewan is in fact gouging the gas consumers of the 
province of Saskatchewan, and (2) be prepared to announce today that the revenue levels of the gasoline tax 
will be frozen at today’s level and will not be increased in the future? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, no. I would not agree that we are gouging the consumers. The 
answer with respect to the price of gasoline in Toronto in relation to Regina is a simple answer: simply 
because the federal government is taking revenue off our oil and subsidizing the people down there. It is a 
fact of life. 
 
MR. LANE: — Supplementary question to the minister. The fact is Saskatchewan is a producing province. I 
can give you a comparison with the city of Edmonton where it is 8 cents a litre cheaper. Your argument that 
the federal government is subsidizing the East and not the province of Alberta is a fallacious one, a specious 
one, and the minister knows it. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Would the member get to his question. 
 
MR. LANE: — Would the minister be prepared to give some immediate relief to the consumers of 
Saskatchewan? Your budget didn’t do it. Would you be prepared to announce some immediate and drastic 
relief to the gas paying consumers of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government gets 50 per cent of the 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
695 

export tax on oil. There is nothing on Alberta oil. 
 
MR. LANE: — Final supplementary. The minister often talks about taxation on ability to pay. The gasoline 
tax, of course, hits the low income earner; it hits the person on assistance in this province; it hits the senior 
citizens. Would the minister be prepared to admit today that the NDP gasoline sales tax is regressive taxation 
and not progressive taxation. 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — Mr. Speaker, the first government to introduce an ad valorem tax was a 
Conservative government in Prince Edward Island, where the tax is 30 cents a gallon today. The second one 
to institute it was the province of Manitoba, where the gasoline tax is higher than ours today. British 
Columbia introduced a budget yesterday and its tax is higher and our tax. In fact, Prince Edward Island . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How much do they produce? They don’t produce one drop of oil. 
 
HON. MR. ROBBINS: — How about Newfoundland, for the member for Qu’Appelle? The province of 
Newfoundland has a higher gasoline tax than we have. In fact, five provinces in Canada have higher gasoline 
taxes than we have. All of those have Tory governments, with the exception of Quebec. It is the only one 
which does not suffer that burden. 
 

C.M. Fines re CCF-NDP History 
 
MR. COLLVER: — There has been some mention of hacks in this Chamber today; perhaps this question 
will be in that line. My question is to the Premier. What would your comments be to the fact that Mr. 
Clarence M. Fines is returning to the city of Regina to produce a history of the CCF-NDP in Saskatchewan at 
a cost. 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order, order! The question is out of order. I’ll take a new question. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — I’ll ask it another way, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Would the Premier be prepared to 
comment to this Assembly about some member who, at a cost to the people of Saskatchewan, is to produce a 
history of the CCF-NDP — a man who left the Government of Saskatchewan under some cloud some years 
ago? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any proposal for the former minister, Mr. 
Fines, to produce a history of the New Democratic Party in Saskatchewan. My understanding is that Mr. 
Fines has been solicited by the Saskatchewan Archives Board to record his story of the times when he 
participated in political activity in this province in the late 1920s and ’30s . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I will carry on when the member for Qu’Appelle gets a hold of himself. My members don’t clutch 
me. I don’t know whether the member for Qu’Appelle is in the habit of clutching his members. 
 
It is, to my knowledge, the policy of the Saskatchewan Archives Board to ask all former members to record 
their experiences in the public life of Saskatchewan. I believe that requests have been made of other former 
members of all political persuasions to record what they recall about the early political history of 
Saskatchewan. No doubt, members opposite have been asked by the archives board to file their papers with 
the archives board; and, no doubt, the member for Nipawin, after some careful selection, has filed his papers 
with the archives board. 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
696 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. COLLVER: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker,. Undoubtedly the Premier is aware that I will 
have filed many papers in many places over the course of time. The Premier will be aware, however, that 
although other members have been asked by the archives board to file their papers, they are not being funded 
by the people of the province of Saskatchewan, as is Mr. Clarence M. Fines for the work that he is about to 
do. I’m sure the Premier will be aware of that. I therefore ask the premier: in what possible way can the 
people of Saskatchewan benefit from the expenditure of funds on what must be the most prominent political 
hack in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll not comment on the hon. member for Nipawin’s 
characterization of a man who has had a very distinguished career in public life in this province as an 
alderman in the city of Regina, as a member of this legislature, as a minister of her Majesty’s and His 
Majesty’s government (as provincial treasurer as he then was), and as an active participant in a number of 
political organizations prior to his election to this legislature, including, in a party sense, having been 
chairman of a meeting in Calgary which led to the formation of a new political party — and the member for 
Nipawin will know about the formation of new political parties. 
 
In my judgment, it is good policy to get persons who have had a distinguished career in public life in 
Saskatchewan to record their reminiscences. It is also good policy for the archives board., if it has done so in 
this case and I am not personally familiar with it, to assist them with the preparation of those reminiscences 
by providing research staff. I know I have urged the archives board to do this with respect to the former 
minister of mineral resources, Mr. Alex Cameron, who I think has been in the public life a long time in this 
province. I have no doubt that efforts were made with members of Mr. Thatcher’s government. There 
weren’t a lot of records, as it happened, for that period, and I know that efforts are being made to reconstruct 
those years of the public life of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. COLLVER: — My final supplementary is quite simply this: The people of Saskatchewan are funding 
Mr. Fines; the people of Saskatchewan are funding the direction in various constituencies, including the 
constituency of Nipawin, to request all of the former members of the NDP to record their recollections and 
reminiscences of what happened during the ’20s and ’30s and ’40s, with regard to the NDP and the CCF. 
Why are the people of Saskatchewan being asked to fund this when the NDP had so many people and so 
many of its own members on the payroll of the Government of Saskatchewan that they could eminently use 
their services to get the same information and not have a double cost 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the hon. member for Nipawin is apparently of the view 
that the political activities of our party are not part of the history of Saskatchewan, but that the political 
activities (I wouldn’t say of his party) of the party of members opposite are a part of the history of 
Saskatchewan. I know that if anyone has any reminiscences of, let us say, Dr. J.T.M. Anderson, and can offer 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, indeed, I am sure I can convince the Saskatchewan Archives Board to 
provide a researcher to get into many papers of Dr. J.T.M. Anderson, if you have any around, and indeed pay 
the person — that’s the whole point. The Saskatchewan Archives Board is, in fact, engaged in research, 
engaged in hiring a great number of 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
697 

people to go around getting oral histories of all manner of people of all political persuasions. They have done 
this for years. They are going to continue to do it. And if anyone knows where there is some material which 
will assist in the reconstruction of the political history of Saskatchewan, of whatever political persuasion, 
please present that material to the archives board. I venture to think that they will provide some assistance. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Archives Board. 
Will you inform this Assembly how much public money is being paid to Mr. Fines to come forth with the 
revisionist history of the CCF Party? How many dollars is it costing? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, as I think the hon. member knows, the archives board is 
administered by a board which is made up of representatives from the two universities as well as the 
Legislative Library, with me as chairman. I do not have, but I certainly can obtain a detailed accounting here 
of money spent on the political history program. But as the Premier has so ably indicated, the Saskatchewan 
Archives Board has a political history program. Part of the activities under that political history program 
involve attempting to identify papers and other documents related to our political history, and attempting to 
put into the files recollections done orally, where they supplement the documents. The exact details of those 
expenditures are left to the provincial archivist. They are not decisions that are made by me. I must make that 
very clear. I certainly can undertake to obtain the information on those expenditures, and we can deal with 
the estimates some other time. 
 

Tobacco and Junk Food Advertising Campaigns 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — My question is to the Minister of Health. We have seen an increasing trend in recent 
years for the tobacco companies across Canada to step up their advertising campaigns. In light of the clear 
connection now between cancer and smoking, would the Minister of Health be prepared to introduce 
legislation in this province that would make tobacco advertising illegal and would eliminate the tobacco 
advertising billboards and other forms of advertising by the tobacco industry we see in the province now? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, certainly I am very interested in that particular area, being a 
converted non-smoker. Anything that we can do in safeguarding our young people in the province of 
Saskatchewan should be given serious consideration. Last week the assistant surgeon general of the United 
States, speaking in Regina, called smoking the smallpox of modern time. I think it is imperative that we have 
a look at how we can stem the flow of our young people, particularly our young females, starting this very 
serious habit. Certainly I will look into the possibility and discuss it with my officials to see if we can bring 
in some legislation in the future which would prohibit the advertising of smoking, either in the papers, or on 
the billboards or wherever we could possibly reduce this advertising. 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. My question is that since we have seen a similar tend 
with respect to the food retail companies, in terms of encouraging people to consume junk food, whether he 
would also consider introducing legislation that would prohibit junk food advertising in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I think this falls pretty well in the same category. I have indicated 
before, as Minister of Health, that I am concerned about the glamorous 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
698 

advertising that is being done by the companies, and the influence that the ads have on the lifestyles of our 
young people. Certainly, this is contrary to the impetus which we want in the Department of Health in 
preventive services. I would certainly look at that and see if we can bring in some legislation. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski, “That 
this Assembly do now resolve itself into the committee of finance” and the amendment thereto moved by 
Mr. Rousseau. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the opportunity to speak in this debate on behalf 
of the people of the Athabasca constituency. I would like to congratulate the Minister of Finance on his 
presentation of the budget. I would also like to congratulate the Blakeney government to the continuing 
attention paid to the North in this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to take a few minutes to point out to the members opposite that the province 
of B.C. presented its budget yesterday. The members opposite should be informed that their colleagues in 
B.C. have increased the provincial sales tax from 4 per cent to 6 per cent. This will cost the people of B.C. 
an additional $387.7 million this year alone. That increase is greater than the entire revenue the Government 
of Saskatchewan received from sales tax. The increase means Saskatchewan now has the second lowest sales 
tax in the country, behind only Alberta. 
 
The sales tax was only one of a host of taxes, ranging from gasoline to hotel rooms, designed to raise an 
additional $552 million in revenue for the Bennett government. It’s one more case, Mr. Speaker, of a 
self-styled, small ‘c’ conservative government preferring to raise taxes from the people instead of getting a 
fair return on their resources. 
 
When I look back over the past 10 years at the great amount of progress which has been made in the North, it 
is almost incredible. It is a tribute to the people of the North who have had the courage and the initiative to 
undertake new projects. It is also a credit to this government that it has provided the financial assistance and 
support services. 
 
Since the establishment of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan in 1972, we have seen many changes 
in the North. Through the DNS (Department of Northern Saskatchewan) over 1,200 new homes have been 
built. More than $34 million for school construction has been provided. One hundred and ten million dollars 
has been spent on other capital facilities. The number of jobs in the North has greatly increased. Mr. 
Speaker, the dependence on social assistance has been reduced from 47 per cent to 14 per cent of the 
population. The number of homes served with electricity has been doubled. Access to telephones and 
television has jumped from 20 per cent to 96 per cent. 
 
When DNS was formed in 1972, only 50 per cent of the people in the northern administration district had 
some form of municipal government. Only two schools, at Uranium City and Creighton, were under the 
jurisdiction of elected school boards. 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
699 

Today, 100 per cent of the people enjoy the rights and the responsibilities of local government, and 100 per 
cent of the schools are under the jurisdiction of elected school boards. The elected school boards have also 
served with distinction and have established an enviable track record breaking new ground in a number of 
areas. 
 
The local communities have taken on a great deal of additional responsibility and have demonstrated their 
willingness and ability to evolve new approaches and to tackle problems of ever-increasing complexities and 
difficulties. A situation of unprecedented growth has shown that they are more than capable of meeting the 
challenge. 
 
But perhaps most importantly, many people throughout the North have gained a great deal of valuable 
experience in local government and in running their own affairs during a period of tremendous growth and 
change. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see that increased responsibility for local government is a continuing 
policy of this government and funds are in the budget for this purpose. I look forward to the Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan’s white paper proposing changes to the structure of local government in the North. 
 
I know it is vital that revenues keep up with responsibilities. I believe the five-year $38 million 
revenue-sharing program to provide operating grants to local governments announced in this budget speech 
will ensure that this occurs. I note that the budget contains $5 million under this program for 1981. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also of importance to the North is the $17 million northern capital grants program. This 
program, as the Minister of Finance has announced, will be funded by a combination of provincial grants and 
local taxes collected by the province including property taxes on mining companies. I am glad to see this 
program implemented because it will provide Northerners with a direct return from the resource 
development. We have seen how successfully that has worked in the South. I am confident it will be equally 
successful in the North. 
 
In 1981, $1.2 million will be available under this program for local capital projects. In total, Mr. Speaker, 
these programs will make $55 million available to local northern governments over the next five years. 
 
The rapid expansion of the northern economy means that the labor force, as well as local governments, must 
be able to meet the challenges that lie ahead. 
 
I am pleased to see that the budget places a high priority on training. Over $3 million has been added to the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan’s training budget. Approximately $2 million will go for new skill 
training courses to be delivered in co-operation with the northern community colleges. Another $1 million 
will assist Northerners to train for employment for the public service. These new measures combined with 
continued support by NORTEP, local government training, on the job heavy equipment training and other 
department programs will provide training for 1,000 Northerners during the next year. 
 
Increased mobile training modules, a new chemical technology lab planned for La Ronge, and greater use of 
existing facilities including northern schools will permit the provision of new training programs across the 
North. Apprenticeship programs are also a priority, as Northerners become certified trades people through on 
the job and classroom training. 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
700 

The new Buffalo Narrows training centre and residence recently completed in my constituency of Athabasca 
has improved training facilities in the North a great deal. Some of the courses being planned for Buffalo 
Narrows include mill operating, surveying, motor vehicle and heavy equipment repair, truck driving training, 
and millwright training. 
 
The residence will accommodate up to 40 students from the northern administration district. The kitchen 
servery will also double as a training area for commercial cooking classes. Most of the actual training 
programs will be held in the adjacent training centre which also serves as a repair and supply depot for heavy 
equipment operated by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and the provincial Department of 
Highways and Transportation. The centre will play a key role in providing training for northern residents so 
they may take advantage of new employment opportunities, particularly in the mining industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many jobs for Northerners have been created by new employment agreements between the 
provincial government and the mining companies. The creation of the manpower secretariat in the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan to administer these agreements has led to many opportunities for 
northern people in the non-renewable resource sector. As a result of these activities, one mining company in 
the northern administration district has hired more than 50 per cent of its labor in the North. 
 
I am also confident that people of the North are very pleased that the province is prepared to participate in 
the economic development of the North through the new economic development foundation. The expansion 
of small businesses is a very desirable goal. The economic development foundation will be set up in 
co-operation with northern and southern native groups. It will provide financial services and encourage the 
involvement of individuals, co-operatives and private companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the programs announced in the budget show that this government has a very good 
understanding of the North. The programs announced in the budget recognize the special needs of the North 
and seek to meet these needs in co-operation with the people of the North. 
 
I would like to take a few minutes to turn from the discussion of northern programs in general. and look at 
some of the projects that have already begun and others that are planned for my constituency of Athabasca. I 
have discussed at length the development plans for the North contained in the budget. That does not mean 
that this government has forgotten about the health care of senior citizens. In my constituency, projects in 
support of senior citizens supply handyman and homemaker services to the elderly and disable at Pinehouse, 
Beauval and Green Lake. Handyman services include minor house repairs and such northern necessities as 
wood and water hauling. Activities such as house cleaning and meal preparation will be included in the 
homemaking services. Recreational activities will also be offered. 
 
In Uranium City the project activities also include health maintenance services in addition to handyman and 
homemaker services. These will include personal care, hygiene, bathing, feeding and dressing. The projects 
employ disadvantaged or otherwise marginally employable persons from the communities to supply these 
services. Training is provided for the project employees to enable them to continue in 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
701 

the workforce following termination of the projects. These projects are a positive step toward a 
comprehensive home care program for senior citizens in the North. The new program requires local 
governments in the North to identify their needs for senior citizen housing and to submit their proposals to 
the northern housing branch. Once units have been allocated to a community, DNS arranges for their 
construction. When completed, the department assumes responsibility for the management until a local 
housing authority is formed that can assume control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that three northern communities in my constituency will receive low rental 
housing units as part of an experimental program and special arrangements between SHC (Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation), CMHC (Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation), and DNS. Construction of 10 
unites in Green Lake, eight units in Buffalo Narrows and 12 units in LaLoche have begun with occupancy 
expected in mid-1981. These units are being cost shared, with CMHC paying 75 per cent and the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation paying 25 per cent. The Department of Northern Saskatchewan is 
responsible for their delivery. Forty-six low rental units have been requested by northern communities for 
allocations during the 1981-82 fiscal year. These allocations are in response to an increasing demand for 
senior citizens housing in the North. Communities in my constituency requesting these units include 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, Pinehouse, LaLoche and Uranium City. These units will be cost-shared also. All of the 
low-rental units constructed will be available to local residents over the age of 60 at a maximum of 20 per 
cent of their monthly income. One, two and three bedroom units will be available. 
 
New sewer and water facilities are also being provided to several communities in my constituency. Major 
expansions connecting new lots to existing sewer and water systems are near completion in Buffalo narrows 
and Ile-a-la-Crosse. Last fall a contract was ordered for construction of a sewage lift station in LaLoche. 
 
Another area of importance to my constituency, Mr. Speaker, is transportation. Two projects have recently 
been completed in Buffalo Narrows which will greatly improve transportation service in the northwest area 
of the province. These are the new airport and the new Buffalo Narrows bridge. The new airport, built at a 
cost of $3.38 million, will provide a grater opportunity for commercial and recreational development. The 
Buffalo narrows bridge replaces a ferry which has operated at Kisis Channel since 1957. Construction of the 
bridge began in 1979 and was completed in late August. 
 
Equally important, too, for improving transportation in my constituency is the Beauval to Pinehouse access 
road now under construction. The road will cost $6.4 million and is scheduled to be completed by the fall of 
1982. Once finished, it will substantially reduce the highway distance between many of the province’s 
northern communities. I am also pleased with the new initiatives for northern roads announced in the budget. 
In 1981-82 $3.3 million will be spent on forestry development roads and $2.5 million will be spent on 
Highway No. 155. I would also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that $1.6 million from the heritage fund will 
be spent on the Beauval to Pinehouse road and $1.9 million from the heritage fund will be spent on the Key 
Lake Road. both are good examples of how the Blakeney government is including the people of the North in 
the benefits from the resource revenue. 
 
There is still a lot of work to be done in the North, as we have to make sure that progress we have now 
continues, so that a solid economic base is in place for generations to come. Mr. Speaker, the wealth of 
programs that I have discussed today should make it clear to anyone, even the members opposite, why I 
support this budget and will look 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
702 

forward to supporting this government in the future as together we build a truly strong North. Mr. Speaker, I 
will be supporting the main motion and opposing the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am delighted to rise in support of this budget, and join 
my cabinet colleagues and my colleagues in caucus who have supported it. 
 
I find, Mr. Speaker, many positive features in this speech — too many to mention. I’ll therefore try and pick 
a few highlights, things that I think would be of importance to the people who I represent. Perhaps one of the 
most attractive features of the budget was the tax decreases. Mr. Speaker, these perhaps provide some relief 
to a group which feel that they are forgotten. There are a group of middle-class people who feel that the 
government looks after the poor, the rich look after themselves, and no one is much concerned about them. 
These tax decreases provide some positive relief to the middle class, the bulwark of our society. 
 
Regina Centre, as well, includes a large number of businesses, the bulk of the business community of 
Regina. I know many businesses welcome the tax deductions for small business corporations. Many people 
will wonder how we can provide the tax decreases and sill maintain programs. We are able to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, because of our resource policy and because this government gets a larger percentage of its revenue 
from resources than any government in Canada with the exception of the Government of Alberta. Apart from 
Alberta, we get a larger percentage of our taxes from resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to compare Saskatchewan’s budget with the budget of a government which 
many political commentators call conservative — the Government of British Columbia. It is probably a 
Conservative government with the B.C. flair for a difference. It is interesting to note the member for Regina 
South found the tax decreases to be small and of no significance. I wonder if that would have been his 
reaction had we increased the personal tax by 2 per cent? I wonder if he would then have found it to be so 
small as to be of no significance? Mr. Speaker, there is a government in Canada which could use the 
member’s genius for explaining tax decreases of small percentages as being of no significance, and that’s 
British Columbia. Mr. Speaker, the British Columbia government has increased the sales tax from 4 per cent 
to 6 per cent — a 2 per cent increase — and no doubt they could use the member for Regina South to explain 
why that isn’t really a very significant tax increase. 
 
There are other highlights of the B.C. budget which no doubt the members opposite will want to acquaint 
themselves with. Taxes on cars have increased by 2 per cent as well. One tax increase, which I know the 
members will be particularly proud to associate themselves with is the introduction for the first time in 
British Columbia of a gas tax on family farms. And, no doubt, the Conservative members here will want to 
associate themselves with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of items of particular importance to me as the MLA for the Regina city core. 
One of those items of special interest is day care. Day care needs to be approached from two sides. We need 
to view day care from the vantage point of the children and from the vantage point of the parents. 
 
Beginning first, Mr. Speaker, with the parents, the demand for day care has risen very rapidly in recent years. 
Some women are simply exercising their option to pursue a 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
703 

career in addition to, or in lieu of a family. this is a right which society has long recognized in men and is 
only slowly extending to women. Many women are not exercising any option at all. They’re working out of 
necessity. Some simply find the family income inadequate in these inflationary days. Others find themselves 
victims of another phenomenon, a most unwelcome one, the tendency of families to break up, with husbands 
being separated or divorced. I therefore applaud the enrichment of day care. 
 
Of particular interest to working mothers and the occasional working father will be the increases in parental 
subsidies. And they have increased, Mr. Speaker, very substantially. I’m told the increase in expenditures in 
this area is in the vicinity of 87 per cent. But of greater importance to many day care centres is the supply and 
equipment grants which have increased manyfold. As the Minister of Social Services pointed out, a centre 
with 40 licensed spaces would have its equipment and supply grant increased from $500 to $4,000. This may 
well make day care in Saskatchewan the most enriched program in this budget. And it may also make 
Saskatchewan’s day care the finest in Canada. We greet these resources enthusiastically. They go a 
considerable distance to meeting the burgeoning needs of a society undergoing rapid change in the role 
accorded to women. 
 
I want to touch briefly on a couple of other items in the budget, Mr. Speaker. One item is the budget of the 
Department of the Environment. A growing number of people take the view that the quality of the 
environment is a major component in the quality of life. Foul air and foul water critically impair the quality 
of life in the most desirable of communities. (I might add, as the residents of Regina can testify, at least with 
respect to foul water.) 
 
The key question in environmental control concerns uranium mining. Unlike my colleague from Saskatoon, I 
have concluded the use of uranium, as a source of energy, is inevitable. I do not deny the problems 
associated with its use. I simple see no other alternative in the short run. 
 
Even those in favor of nuclear development must be concerned about the disposal of waste. The wastes are 
undoubtedly the most difficult problem associated with the use of uranium. It was for these reasons that I 
was delighted to see a 16 per cent increase in the funding of the Department of the Environment, with 
particular emphasis on the control of pollution associated with mines. 
 
But the most important addition to the budget of the Department of the Environment may well have been the 
establishment of a mines waste research secretariat. I congratulate the Minister of the Environment and the 
Minister of Finance for recognizing our responsibility in this regard. We are fast becoming one of the 
foremost producers of uranium in the world. Let us also strive to be leaders, world leaders, in research into 
the problems associated with uranium. That’s our minimum responsibility. I look forward to the mines waste 
research secretariat becoming a well-financed, well-staffed and prestigious research body. 
 
On the subject of energy, I was delighted to see the increase in funding for urban transportation. It can be 
fairly said that automobiles were not developed to meet the needs of our cities; rather, our cities have 
developed haphazardly and very imperfectly to meet the needs of the automobile. So many of the problems 
in our cities, and particularly in the city of Regina, can be attributed directly or indirectly to the automobile. I 
could mention problems such as narrow streets, decaying downtown 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
704 

core, air pollution, and on and on. Notwithstanding the myriad of problems caused by the automobile, 
notwithstanding the increased shortage of energy and its escalating costs, we remain a slave to the 
automobile. 
 
It was in recognition of this conundrum that funding for urban transit has increased by 160 per cent in the 
budget. Although details of the proposed funding are still sketchy, I understand that at least some of the 
money is in the form of matching grants. I hope the city of Regina will respond early and enthusiastically as 
they assess our needs to tackle the problems caused by transportation. 
 
I want to raise, Mr. Speaker, a couple of issues touching on the city of Regina. In the throne speech, I 
referred to the Union Station and the concept of a multimodal transportation centre. This concept would 
convert the Union Station into a transportation centre for rail, bus, and air travellers. I won’t repeat the 
arguments I made at that time in favor of such a multimodal transportation centre, but it would go a long way 
to rationalize the use of various modes of transportation. I would make them all more efficient and make 
them all more convenient. 
 
Shortly after the throne speech, it was announced that the project had taken two important steps forward. 
Firstly, VIA Rail and Canadian Pacific Railway announced an agreement whereby VIA Rail purchased 
Union Station. Somewhat later, a second step was taken when the federal treasury board gave approval to the 
project. I now await with eager anticipation the final step — an agreement between the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company and VIA Rail over the use and disposition of the station. I know that officials of 
both governments are doing their utmost to reach an agreement. I wish them good luck and urge them to 
continue to make every effort to finalize the details of a project which would mean so much to the city of 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a recent event of considerable importance to downtown Regina was the closure of Simpsons 
department store. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, just in passing, that few were impressed by the comments of the 
member for Regina South who saw in the closure of Simpsons department store signs of a faltering 
economy. One who was not impressed, I may add, was the editor of the Leader-Post on March 9, 1981. The 
word the editorial found to describe the comments of the member (and I quote) was “surprising.” As the 
Leader-Post correctly pointed out, the comments of the member flew in the face of the obvious, and were all 
the more surprising considering the member himself was a former businessman. The correct reason, Mr. 
Speaker, undoubtedly lay in part with the association of Simpsons and The Bay. Those two associated 
companies undoubtedly saw an opportunity to enhance their profits and they showed an absence of concern 
for the community of Regina, an insensitivity that has unfortunately come to characterize multinational 
companies. 
 
But those companies were not the only ones to blame. An additional reason for The closure of Simpsons had 
to be the immense increase in retail shopping space in this city. Everyone from the Regina municipal New 
Democratic Party to the chamber of commerce has been warning about the effects of the spread of urban 
shopping malls. Those same voices have warned of the consequences of building an endless amount of 
shopping space. Regina seems to have been oblivious to the dangers of spreading the shopping dollar too 
thin. Perhaps we won’t be so oblivious, Mr. Speaker, to the right of Regina’s oldest department store 
standing vacant. It is to be hoped that empty shell on the corner of Hamilton and 11th Avenue will jar us into 
discharging our responsibility to regulate and guide Regina’s economic growth. 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
705 

Finally on the subject of the city of Regina. I note that Heritage Regina has voiced concern that the city of 
Regina appears to be taking no steps to set up a local heritage advisory board under The Heritage Act. 
Regina has many find buildings which we of this generation have a responsibility to preserve for the next. 
Surely Regina city father are not pursuing development in such a mindless fashion that they don’t even want 
to be bothered considering the value of buildings to our heritage. I don’t believe they are that mindless. I 
expect the worst fears of Heritage Regina will be groundless and I look forward to the early establishment of 
a local heritage advisory board under The Heritage Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the press release of the Minister of Finance stated, this budget strikes a good balance in 
attempting to reach both social and economic goals. Given the nature of my interests, and given the nature of 
my riding, I have concentrated primarily on the social goals addressed in the budget. I know, however, that 
there are many businessmen men in Regina Centre, and many others whose interests are economic, who 
would applaud this budget for the way it supports and bolsters Saskatchewan’s already strong economy. 
Those businessmen, and those business-minded people, would join the single parents, the low-income 
families, the natives, the environmentalists and the others on whose behalf I have spoken, in saying to the 
Minister of Finance and his colleagues in cabinet, “Congratulations on a job well done.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — From what I have said, Mr. Speaker, it will be obvious that I will be supporting 
the budget and voting against the non-confidence motion. 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have this opportunity to speak in support of the 
budget presented by the Minister of Finance last Thursday. 
 
This budget, when you compare it with the budget handed down by the coalition government in British 
Columbia of the Conservatives and Social Credit, stands in real contrast to the concerns which we have, as 
opposed to the government of British Columbia. The government in British Columbia substantially increased 
the taxes to B.C. people to the tune of $625 million. This budget which we have presented, Mr. Speaker, 
takes some very positive steps in the social and economic areas of the province. I think the Minister of 
Finance has shown some real leadership which, of course, has always portrayed the New Democratic Party 
government since we took office in 1971. 
 
The budget we are considering in this debate is responsive to the current needs of Saskatchewan people. But 
it is also a forward-looking budget. It will ensure that public programs continue to develop and function 
effectively so that Saskatchewan residents will receive maximum value for their tax dollars and from the 
province’s resource revenues. 
 
I am particularly pleased that the new budget retains the high priority which the NDP government has 
consistently placed upon a comprehensive and high-quality health care delivery system for Saskatchewan. 
The health budget for 1981-82 is $604.5 million. This represents an increase of $80 million over last year 
and in percentage terms, Mr. Speaker, a whopping 15.3 per cent increase. 
 
This very substantial increase is in itself clear evidence of the government’s 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
706 

commitment to health care. But it does not tell the whole story. The way in which the health budget has been 
divided reflects this government’s thorough understanding of the health care needs of the Saskatchewan 
people. The budget provides for maintenance of the existing high standards while making substantial 
provision for initiatives in a number of important areas. 
 
It has become almost a commonplace saying in health care that less emphasis must be placed on institutional 
and treatment services and that more attention should be focussed on community-based programs and 
preventive health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is firmly committed to the development of preventive programs. But it also 
recognizes its responsibility to maintain our traditional in-patient services in both acute care hospitals and 
long-term care facilities. It is with this responsibility firmly in mind that two major steps have been provided 
for in this budget. 
 
First, funding has been provided through the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan to increase the average 
daily census in the three Saskatoon hospitals by a total of 24 beds. Because of the rapid growth in 
Saskatoon’s population, the demands placed upon its hospitals are becoming even greater. These additional 
funds will assist the Saskatoon hospitals substantially in increasing the volume of services they are able to 
provide to Saskatoon residents. In particular, Mr. Speaker, the funds will alleviate the need to reduce 
occupancy levels during the summer months and will assist in maintaining a higher level of services on a 
year-round basis. The increased amount to the equivalent of 8,760 additional patient-days — put it another 
way, approximately 875 more patients can be admitted for care during the year. 
 
The second major initiative in the field of institutional services is the approval for construction of a new 
level 4 facility in Saskatoon at an estimated cost of $12 million. The new structure will replace the Frank 
Eliason Centre and the old sanitorium and will provide 238 beds, compared to the 174 currently available. 
These additional 64 beds will represent an increase of 37 per cent in the number of level 4 beds in 
Saskatoon. 
 
In addition to these two major projects, construction and renovation will be carried out in hospitals in 12 
Saskatchewan communities, as part of the on-going program to maintain modern, up-to-date hospital 
facilities throughout the province. These 12 projects are apart from the Regina hospitals regeneration project, 
which is now well under way. For 1981-82 we have allocated $15 million to the Regina regeneration project 
which will be open very shortly. 
 
I am pleased at this time, Mr. Speaker, to announce that the first phase of the Regina regeneration project 
will officially open some time in May. It will provide a new and expanded dietary area, clinical laboratories, 
intensive care accommodations, and delivery suite and in-patient accommodations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is sometimes stated that little can be done in the way of implementing new community and 
preventive programs because maintenance of traditional hospital and medical services consumes nearly all 
available financial resources. This budget shows that through sound fiscal planning and management it is 
possible to achieve both objectives within reasonable financial limits. This budget contains over $1 million 
for new initiatives and for the continuation and expansion of existing community programs in the field of 
prevention and health promotion. I would like to mention these initiatives individually, so that the hon. 
members opposite can see how the government backs up its commitments with concrete and innovative 
action. 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
707 

There are three projects directed specifically to our senior citizens: a volunteer program to be known as 
Seniors Helping Seniors, a neighborhood health centre in Regina, and a sheltered housing project, also in 
Regina. These new projects will continue the expansion of services to senior citizens by this government. 
These have included such innovative measures as a day hospital in Moose Jaw, and more recently the 
geriatric assessment and placement unit in Saskatoon. 
 
This NDP government has already pioneered in the field of dental services through the establishment of the 
Saskatchewan Dental Plan for children. In 1981-82, the dental plan will again expand to cover 15-year-olds 
so that all children and youths, ages 4 to 15, will now be eligible for preventive and treatment services at no 
direct cost. 
 
As another of its initiatives, the government is now providing $300,000 to establish a dental centre in rural 
Saskatchewan. this centre will be operated in conjunction with the College of dentistry, University of 
Saskatchewan, and will use a team approach in providing dental care. Extensive use will be made of dental 
auxiliaries and the centre will provide an opportunity for senior dental students to obtain experience in a 
rural community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1979 was the International Year of the Child. In recognition of this important worldwide event, 
the Saskatchewan government conducted a major review of health services for children and youth in the 
province. The review has now been completed and the reports of the child and youth study team have been 
released for public consideration. While it will no doubt be some time before the findings and 
recommendations of this comprehensive and detailed report can be thoroughly digested, I am pleased to see 
that this budget makes provision for two initiatives aimed at improving the health of Saskatchewan children. 
 
The first of these is a child accident safety project. We will be inviting agencies in the safety field, in the 
urban housing design fields, and in the health professions to participate in an interagency child safety 
co-ordinating committee. This committee would be asked to identify and address matters of concern in child 
safety, and to work with their own members and others to improve prevention and education in this area. 
Establishment of the interagency committee would be the first step in an effort to reduce deaths and 
handicaps due to accidents among children. 
 
The second project relating to children is a prenatal nutrition demonstration program for high-risk mothers to 
be set up in the North Battleford health region. This project is intended to determine the effect of expert 
dietary counselling on decreasing the percentage of low-birth-weight babies in Saskatchewan and, thereby 
reducing one of the major causes of death and handicap in infants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Aware program and the Feeling Good program have been highly successful in increasing 
public awareness of issues such as alcohol use., physical fitness and nutrition. It is most important that we 
continue to encourage individuals to take an active interest in maintaining their health and assuming more 
responsibility for a healthy lifestyle. I am pleased, therefore, that the budget provides funds for the 
continuation of the Feeling Good program and for the development of a new health promotion media 
campaign. 
 
I am sure the hon. members will agree that all of these initiatives will make a valuable contribution to the 
development of health services in Saskatchewan. They emphasize 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
708 

community services; they provide an important role for the individual and for community groups, and they 
focus on the special needs of particular groups of people — the elderly, the disabled and children and youth. 
 
Furthermore, these initiatives reflect a prudent and responsible approach to program development. In many 
areas of preventive services, there is relatively little experience on which to base major decisions with regard 
to funding. Hence, the new thrusts which I have mentioned are being carried out largely on a limited, pilot 
project basis so that the feasibility and acceptability of various services and delivery methods can be tested. 
It will then be possible to develop more broadly-based programs in a rational and cost-effective manner. 
 
Substantial as this package of initiatives is, it does not represent all of the new health programs being funded 
by this government in the 1981-82 budget. 
 
Further expansion of community-based services will be encouraged by funding of two new projects: a 
satellite clinic for the Saskatoon Community Clinic to be located in the Lawson Heights area of that city, and 
a health and social centre in Raymore, Saskatchewan. A total of $96,000 is being provided for these projects 
which will enable residents of the communities involved to receive basic health services close to their own 
homes. 
 
In the field of mental health services, a day vocational rehabilitation program will begin in Regina at a cost 
of $115,000. The program will provide training in community life skills to persons with chronic mental 
conditions, or emotional disorders, and will thereby enable these individuals to function more independently 
within the community instead of being hospitalized for long periods. The day vocational program is another 
example of this government’s efforts to provide mental health services without disruption of the daily 
activities of individuals and families, and without removing patients from their normal community 
environments, except when essential. 
 
Community health services will be further strengthened by the addition of resident health professionals in 
Melfort, Tisdale, Lloydminster and Meadow Lake. The decentralization of programs to these communities 
will enable residents to receive services more conveniently, and the reduction in travel for health workers 
will allow a higher proportion of staff time to be devoted to patient care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new projects I have mentioned in the community health and preventive programs are not 
being introduced at the expense of any other existing health services. We are not cutting back our established 
hospital or medical services, or any other of the many health programs the NDP government has introduced 
over the past decade. We are building on these past achievements and continuing to be responsive to 
changing needs. 
 
I would like to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to two other major areas in which the budget provides substantial new 
funds for health programs, cancer treatment and rehabilitation. 
 
In 1978, this government commissioned Dr. T.A. Watson to conduct a review of cancer services in 
Saskatchewan. since that time the government has implemented all but one of the recommendations of the 
Watson report. In 1979, the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation was established. Also in 1979 a linear 
accelerator was approved for the Regina cancer clinic at a cost of $1.2 million. A $1 million renovation 
program at the 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
709 

Regina clinic began last year and will be completed in 1981-82. 
 
I am pleased that the new budget provides funds for implementation of the one outstanding recommendation 
of Dr. Watson’s report — installation of a new cobalt simulator in the Saskatoon cancer clinic at a cost of 
$405,000. The simulator will be of great value to the clinic in the planning of radiation therapy treatment. 
The prompt and substantial response by this government to the Watson report recommendations is indicative 
of its desire to see that effective cancer treatment services continue to be available to Saskatchewan 
residents, in well-equipped up-to-date facilities. 
 
To further ensure that this goal is attained, the budget provides two other substantial funding increases for 
the cancer foundation. Firstly, in recognition of the need for additional resources for cancer research, 
$285,000 is being provided for the development of a cancer research program. Theses funds represent only 
the first step in this field. Further funds will be provided over the next three to five years so that a substantial 
and continuing cancer research program can be established in this province. 
 
Secondly, the total grant to the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation for 1981-82 has been increased to $10.2 
million. This is an increase, Mr. Speaker, of 30.1 per cent. 
 
Health experts recognize that cigarette smoking accounts for approximately 20 per cent to 40 per cent of all 
cancer in Saskatchewan, and yet consumption of cigarettes remains high. As I mentioned earlier in this 
House, I listened to Dr. Foege, the assistant surgeon general of the United States, say here in Regina that 
each day 1,000 people in the United States die prematurely due to smoking. He referred to smoking as the 
smallpox of modern times. He referred to the slick advertising of the tobacco industry which promises our 
young people a good and glamorous life if they become smokers, but nowhere are our young people are told 
of the close relationship between cancer and smoking. Nowhere are they told that with each cigarette 
consumed they are signing their own premature death certificate. 
 
In light of these glaring facts, the government will be considering ways to promote a substantial reduction in 
cigarette smoking — especially among our young people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to rehabilitation. Last weekend we have a very successful fifth Telemiracle. 
I want at this particular time to congratulate all the people of Saskatchewan who once again showed their 
generosity to the handicapped people in this province. At the same time, I also want to congratulate the 
Kinsmen for the work they did in making this Telemiracle, once again, a tremendous success. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this years this Saskatchewan task force on rehabilitation 
submitted its final report to the government. The report contains over 100 recommendations and was 
released, just last month, for public discussion and comment. I am pleased that this government has taken 
immediate, positive action in response to one of the report’s major recommendations. I am referring to the 
inclusion in the budget of $300,000 from the heritage fund for initial planning and organization for a new 
rehabilitation centre to be located in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1981 has been designated by the United Nations as the International Year 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
710 

of Disabled Persons. I can think of no better way to recognize the needs and the aspirations of our disabled 
citizens in this special year than by the establishment of a modern, up-to-date facility to provide a 
comprehensive range of rehabilitation services. The new rehabilitation centre will provide services, primarily 
on an out-patient basis. It will be developed in co-ordination with other facilities in Regina, and will serve an 
important outreach role to provide linkages with every aspect of the community service network in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
A second new project in the rehabilitation field is a sheltered housing demonstration project for the disabled, 
to be administered at a cost of $75,000. This project is designed to provide disabled persons with special 
services while retaining an atmosphere as normal and home-like as possible. The rehabilitation centre and 
the sheltered housing project are both concrete examples of this government’s concern for the special needs 
of certain groups within our society, and also of its commitment to meeting those needs with a minimum of 
disruption in individuals’ daily lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this particular time, I would like to inform the people of Saskatchewan that the financial 
critic of the opposition, yesterday, I believe, deliberately tried to deceive the people of this province when he 
stated, and I quote from Hansard: 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan has benevolently allocated $1.9 million for the rehabilitation of the 
disabled — a mere pittance considering what they have spent in the last three years researching and 
preparing the report of the task force for the rehabilitation of the disabled, and he is still sitting on it 
today. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the finance critic that he deceived the people of the province on two counts. 
First of all, I made the report public about two weeks ago. We have already acted on it on two or three fronts. 
Secondly, if you look at the budget, there isn’t $1.9 million in there for the disabled, but $82 million 
allocated for the handicapped. I cannot conclude other than to say that the financial critic was deliberately 
deceiving the people of this province. 
 
For the last few minutes that I have, I would like to comment about my city of Saskatoon. As the MLA for 
Saskatoon Buena Vista and a resident of that city, I am particularly proud of the manner in which the 
Blakeney government has provided for Saskatoon and its citizens over the last decade. The Saskatoon of 
today is a far cry from the Saskatoon we knew in 1970. Sound NDP resource policies have instilled 
confidence in the economy which has resulted in a thriving industrial, commercial, and manufacturing 
sector. Generous revenue sharing has helped the city of Saskatoon to provide first-rate services and facilities 
for Saskatoon citizens. 
 
As one approaches Saskatoon from any airway or highway, the skyline speaks for the economic enthusiasm. 
Dominating the skyline of the downtown core is the new 15 storey Saskatoon Square, an architectural design 
once reserved for economically vibrant cities such as Toronto, Vancouver or Montreal. The square is the 
home of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, a success story in itself. Across from that is the majestic 
Sturdy Stone Centre, home of many government agencies, including the Saskatchewan Mining and 
Development Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on: office buildings, apartment complexes, senior citizen high rises and retail 
malls. There was approximately $80 million of commercial and industrial construction in 1979 along. This is 
a considerable change from 1970 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
711 

when there was only $3 million of construction — a 2,500 per cent increase. In 1970 there was no new office 
space constructed; in 1980, 344,000 square feet of new office space became available. Mr. Speaker, there are 
also plans of a new $100 million development scheme for the south end of Saskatoon’s downtown district. 
This provincial government has agreed in principle to assist in the city financially in the land assembly. 
 
With respect to general commerce, Saskatoon merchants expect a 15.4 per cent increase in business this 
year. In 1979, 171 new companies were established. In 1979 retail trade amounted to approximately $664 
million compared to $197 million in 1970. Saskatoon’s economic vitality has also attracted many new 
residents. Since 1970, Saskatoon’s population has increased by approximately 24,000. With the increase in 
population, this NDP government recognized a need for increased spending in our municipal grants and 
social programs. Mr. Speaker, a pittance of $147,000 was allocated in 1970-71; approximately $60 million 
in this coming year. 
 
In the public services such as health care, education and recreation, this government has stood by its 
principles that people matter more. In 1970, Mr. Speaker, $20 million was allocated; in 1981-82, $101 
million. 
 
In education, in 1970, there was approximately $7.3 million. In 1981-82, we have approximately $101 
million for the university, plus $28 million for our school boards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on, but time will not permit. I think that from my remarks, it is easy to see 
that Saskatoon has, and is, prospering from a decade of NDP policies and commitments. Life for the average 
man, woman and child is good. Ten years of NDP government have ensure first-rate facilities and services. 
Fiscal policies have lead to an economic boom that has meant jobs and a good standard of living. The people 
of Saskatoon have confidence in this government. And indication of this was in the 1978 election results 
when all eight city ridings elected NDP candidates with an unprecedented majority. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I am honored for having had the opportunity of serving Saskatoon Buena Vista 
during the 1970s. Equally, I am looking forward to serving in the ’80s as the future holds promise, prosperity 
and vitality. This is a responsible budget. It continues the NDP tradition of providing progressive health care 
planning and management. It provides for increased activity in day care. It gives confidence and security to 
our working people. And it provides for substantial new initiatives in agriculture. Our hospitals, universities, 
school boards and urban centres have been provided with substantial increases in funding. Still the Minister 
of Finance was able to submit a balanced budget with increased tax cuts and significant moneys set aside in 
our heritage fund. 
 
On behalf of the constituents of Saskatoon Buena Vista, I am pleased and proud to support this excellent 
budget. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the opportunity to enter this debate and speak 
about the budget which offers so much for the people of Saskatchewan. I would like to compliment my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, for his fine presentation of the budget. I would say that the form of the 
minister’s speech reached the same high level and standard as the content. 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
712 

There is much good new in the budget for the people of my constituency. We have made great strides 
forward in social programs and I will have much more to say about that in a few minutes. 
 
Residents of southwest Saskatchewan who pioneered medicare will welcome the continuing strong 
commitment to the most comprehensive health care system in Canada. As well as the large increases in 
funding for hospitals, cancer research and the dental plan, the decentralization of psychiatric services to 
include the Shaunavon-Ponteix area will be welcome. 
 
There is more good news for the people of Shaunavon constituency in the 30 per cent increase in funding for 
the Department of Agriculture. The new $25 million co-operative research demonstration program will 
tackle the problem of soil salinity moisture conservation, optimum crop rotation and weed control which will 
greatly benefit the wheat producers of southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
The major increases in this year’s budget for highway construction will encourage and continue the 
unprecedented level of construction which took place on highways in the Shaunavon constituency in 1980. 
Last year over $4 million was pent on projects, including the extension of Highway 13 from Govenlock to 
the Alberta border and the paving of Highway 37 north of Shaunavon and the building of Highway 37 south 
of Shaunavon. This year we will build 10 miles south of Shaunavon from 10 miles south to 20 miles south 
on Highway 37 and continue the 10 miles constructed last years with that being capped. Two major paving 
projects will take place on Highway 13 this year — one from Shaunavon to Eastend and the other one from 
Lafleche to Kincaid. These projects are a part of the overall plan to upgrade Highway 13 into a third 
interprovincial route. 
 
Nearly $3.5 million will be spent this year on improvements for the safety and comfort of motorists on 
highways in Shaunavon constituency. 
 
Another noteworthy highway project for the people of southwest Saskatchewan is the plan to construct a new 
four-lane section of the Trans-Canada Highway west of Swift Current to Webb. The Trans-Canada Highway 
does not run through my constituency but it is the most important thoroughfare for people in my corner of 
the province whether they are going east or west. 
 
As well, the residents of the Shaunavon constituency will benefit greatly from the long-term plan to expand 
and diversity our provincial parks. Cypress Hills Provincial Park is very popular in our part of the province 
and the announcement that development will be undertaken in the park is, indeed, good news. I am sure my 
colleague, the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources, will be providing details on the park 
development in the near future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am sure residents of my constituency will welcome many other features of the budget, 
including personal and small business income tax cuts and the sound financial management which has let to 
another balanced budget and a health surplus for the heritage fund. 
 
I do not wish to dwell on the budget in general because I have much to say about many programs which have 
been strengthened and many new initiatives which have been 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
713 

undertaken in the Department of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the priorities of our new expanded programs in 1981 will be more and better services for 
Saskatchewan’s senior citizens. Now that we are receiving substantial benefits from this government’s 
successful fight to win a fair return on resources, we in Saskatchewan have a great opportunity to 
demonstrate our gratitude to those who built the province and worked to lay the foundation for the prosperity 
we enjoy today. 
 
The most exciting development in the service for senior citizens over the next year will be the rapid 
expansion of the home-care program. Of the 45 home care boards, 39 are organized now and by March 31 of 
next year we expect that 42 home care boards will be operating and providing services. The three remaining 
boards are in urban areas which are presently being served by existing agencies and funded by home care. 
Total funding for home care through boards and existing agencies over the next year will be $13.6 million. 
 
I believe home care is a program that will become as important to many of the province’s senior citizens as 
medicare. I also use the example of medicare because those volunteers, who have been involved with setting 
up home care services in my constituency, have worked with the same enthusiasm and co-operative spirit 
that marked the establishment of the Swift Current Health Region and the pioneering of medicare. The 
success of home care in Kincaid and the excellent group of people working to get the program rolling in 
Shaunavon are but two examples. The importance of people helping people to make our communities a 
better place to live is something the residents of rural Saskatchewan have always understood very well, and 
they are proving it once again with home care. The goal of the program is simply to ensure that as many of 
our senior citizens as possible are able to stay in their own homes, near their families and friends. I am sure 
that all members of this Assembly will agree that it is a laudable goal, and will welcome the efforts the many 
home care volunteers and workers across the province are making to attain that goal. 
 
Our role as a government is to provide funding and organizational support for home care. Now that much of 
that careful organizational work is completed, we have good sound boards n place which will do an excellent 
job in providing Meals on Wheels, handyman service, nursing care, visiting homemakers, and other services 
to senior citizens. 
 
Home care is by no means the only major advance in social programming for senior citizens that we will 
make this year. Total nursing home funding will increase by nearly 30 per cent to $45.8 million. We have 
started discussions with concerned organizations on how to improve the present long-term institutional care, 
and develop a continuing care program. An integrated institutional and community-based continuing care 
program will be developed to ensure that our senior citizens get the kind of care they need, while living as 
independently as possible in their own homes. 
 
Another exciting development is a Seniors Helping Seniors program, which will be set up in 12 home care 
districts. The program will involve counselling by senior citizen volunteers to ensure that senior citizens are 
fully informed, and able to use the variety of programs and services available to them. The programs I have 
mentioned and others which are being started or expanded will help to provide a better life for many of our 
older and wiser citizens in the years ahead. 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
714 

Mr. Speaker, in the area of persons with physical and mental disabilities, my department’s first priority is to 
further develop community-based services. This will mean a decreasing reliance on institutional care, and a 
steady increase in the options available to the handicapped children and adults in their own homes and 
communities. There was a time when those who needed long-term specialized services had to leave their 
homes, and move to where the services were available. This was true of the physically and mentally disabled 
persons as well as the elderly. By bringing the services to the community and, indeed, right into the homes of 
the handicapped person, we are strengthening both the families and the community. 
 
I am therefore, Mr. Speaker, pleased to announce the introduction of some new programs, and the expansion 
of a number of existing programs, which will further enhance this community-based network. 
 
First, I would like to announce the introduction of a supportive independence program for mentally disabled 
adults. This program is designed to provide support and assistance to enable these individuals to live in their 
own homes or apartments in their community. In 1981 this program will cost approximately $177,000. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, in the area of support services for families with handicapped children, I am pleased 
to announce the expansion of a home-based early intervention program. In the past year, my department has 
funded project help of the Alvin Buckwold Centre in Saskatoon, and the early intervention project of the 
Prince Albert Association for the Mentally Retarded. In the coming year 85 more spaces will be funded in 
parts of Saskatchewan at a cost of $107,000. This represents approximately a 300 per cent increase in 
funding for early intervention programs. 
 
Further, we will see expansion of the Outreach component of the community resources home program with 
respite services being made available to more families requiring this service. 
 
My final point on the services to the disabled, Mr. Speaker, is to assure members that we are always prepared 
to review existing programs, and to make sure they are doing the job they were intended to do, and to see 
how we might make them better. We have, therefore, Mr. Speaker, very early in the International Year of the 
Disabled, taken a leadership role in establishing an interdepartmental committee on the International Year of 
the Disabled. During the course of the coming year, I expect this group to develop further means for our 
government to respond to such areas as affirmative employment programs for the disabled, accessibility to 
government buildings and the critical area of involving disabled persons in the development of services they 
and an need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my department now supports 71 local non-government agencies which provide direct social 
services. Fourteen of these agencies are native organizations including eight friendship centres. I am pleased 
to announce that the friendship centres will be receiving $165,000 additional funding for 10 family workers. 
This increased funding reflects the department’s continued support for the concept of services provided to 
natives by natives. 
 
Several other new initiatives are planned in this area in the years ahead. We plan to introduce, on a trial 
basis, a family support services program which would enable our department: 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
715 

1. To provide more intensive counselling services to families experiencing child protection problems. 
 
2. To be able to contract for a range of support services such as homemakers, parent education services, or 
respite services so that families could more adequately care for their children and thereby prevent the 
children from having to be removed from their homes. 
 
Another innovation will be the introduction of a program to assist the parties involved in the adoption 
triangle, thereby aiding the natural parent, the adoptive parent, and the adult adoptee to search out each other 
and to facilitate a reunion where there is a desire by all parties. This is in response to a tremendous increase 
in demand from natural parents and adult adoptees for us to help them make contact with each other. The 
requests at the present time are averaging about 50 or 60 per month. 
 
Yet another exciting step forward will be the expanding community-based residential services for youth. We 
see this community-based alternative to be much preferable to expanding institutional services. The 
expansion will be through the establishment of one additional family-style group home and the establishment 
of a treatment cottage staffed on a shift basis. This latter approach is an innovative one for Saskatchewan and 
is intended to test the feasibility of dealing with youth with more serious problems in a community, but 
controlled, setting, rather an in an institutional setting. 
 
Also, the department, in co-operation with the Department of Education, will be developing a community 
treatment college for the deaf youth who are experiencing problems and are involved in the school for the 
deaf program in Saskatoon. 
 
All of these residential services will be developed and delivered through community-based, non-profit 
groups. Total provincial funding in 1981-82 is close to one-half million dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I turn now to one of the most important areas of activity for the Department of Social Services 
— the provision of income security. The budget we are debating today is another milestone in the 
development of economic stability and prosperity in Saskatchewan. It is our goal to ensure that all of society 
share in the good life that most of us take for granted. The goal of our income security program is to ensure 
adequacy of benefits, provision of rehabilitation services, adequate incentives to work, improved 
understanding of the programs at the local level, and a more humane administrative system. 
 
As a first step in this direction, effective July 1, 1981, the basic social assistance allowance under the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan will be increased by $10 a month for a total of $2.7 million. The rates will 
increase 10 per cent for adults to $110 per month, 11.1 per cent for each of the first three children to $100 
per month, and 12.5 per cent for the fourth child and additional children. The average increase for the food 
component is 11.5 per cent, and the clothing component is up 20 per cent. This ensures that social assistance 
recipients will maintain their purchasing power and will not suffer from increases in the cost of living for 
basic needs. The maximum monthly allowance provided to social assistance recipients for board and room 
will be raised from $125 to $150 effective April 1, 1981. This represents a 16.7 per cent increase over last 
year. This increase, combined with an increase in the basic social assistance allowance, amounts to an 
estimated $3.1 million 1981-82, and will represent a major step in ensuring adequacy of benefits. 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
716 

The family income plan will be enriched to provide an increase of $20 in the maximum monthly benefits 
effective July 1, 1981. The new rates will provide benefits of $70 a month for each of the first three children 
in a family, which is a 40 per cent increase, while the new rate for the fourth child and subsequent children 
will be $60 a month, which is at 50 per cent increase. The annual income exemption point for establishing 
eligibility will be increased by $800 to $7,000 effective July 1, 1981. The maximum gross market value of 
assets for establishing eligibility will be increased by $50,000 to $150,000 effective July 1, 1981. The 
increases are designed to assist low-income families to meet the rising costs of living, and in particular, the 
costs related to the needs of children. 
 
I believe the long-term solution for many people is to provide rehabilitation and re-training services. These 
have a great potential to ensure long-term employment and thus facilitate full economic independence to the 
greatest extent possible. Our employment support programs are aimed at that objective and will continue to 
be a high priority in my department. 
 
The approval of $160,000 to fund Regina Work Preparation Centre is only one example of the government’s 
support for projects of this nature. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the Assembly of changes which will take place in the day care 
program in Saskatchewan. Action can and will be taken to rectify the most urgent problems which are here 
in Saskatchewan. This government recognizes that day care must be accessible to those who need it, at a 
price they can afford to pay. We also acknowledge that day care must be a quality service because parents are 
entrusting their most precious possession, their children, to the care of other for long periods of the day while 
they are at work. Not all changes in the day care programming can take place immediately, therefore, we 
plan to make improvements in stages. 
 
Our first stage concern is to stabilize the existing program. We will implement these improvements on April 
1. Other stages will follow us quickly as input from the day care public on how best to carry out the 
long-term structural changes, and we will attain that as soon as possible. 
 
Our subsidy program will provide the greatest assistance to families most in need. The maximum subsidy 
level for children in day care centres will increase from $150 to $210 per child per ;month. We are also 
equalizing the subsidy levels for centres and family day care homes by increasing the maximum subsidy 
levels for homes from $120 to $210 per month. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — The income level at which full subsidy is available for both day are 
centres and family day care homes has been increased by 54 per cent. This means a maximum subsidy which 
was previously available to people with an adjusted family income of $875 or less, will now be available to 
those with an adjusted family income of $1,350 or less per month. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — To clarify what this change means to families, let me give 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
717 

a couple of examples. First, a family with one child who is in day care — the day care fee for that child is 
$200 per month. The family has income of $17,000. this family would be eligible for a full subsidy and 
would pay only $20 per month out of their own pockets. 
 
A second example is a family with three children whose income is $24,000 per year. Two of the children are 
in day care centres, for which the total fee is $380 per month. This family would have to pay $125 per month 
on their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes which I have just outlined should provide substantial assistance to parents who 
are having difficulty paying for the day care services they require. These changes will all be effective April 1 
of this year. Our government is sympathetic with the financial difficulties day care centres and family day 
care homes are facing because they, like others, face continually increasing costs. Supplies and equipment 
would rise from $500 per years to $4,000 per year. Family day care homes were not previously given supply 
and equipment grants. Approved homes will now receive an annual grant of $50 for each occupied space. 
 
Some licensed day care centres provide care for development activities for children with a variety of special 
needs, such as children with mental retardation, cystic fibrosis, reduced sight, impaired hearing, delayed 
speech, and so on. This type of care frequently requires special care and supervision to meet a child’s special 
needs. To assist centres in providing the care and activities for these children, the grants to centres for 
provision of special-care need will be increased from $150 to $200 per month. Several approved homes have 
expressed an interest in providing care for children with special needs as well. Therefore, a special-need 
grant will be established for day care homes equivalent to the grant for centres. 
 
The changes I have outlined to assist day care centres and family day care homes will also be effective April 
1 of 1981. To encourage the development of new day care centres and homes, we have increased the start-up 
grants for centres from $400 to $600 per child-space, and for homes from $100 to $200 per home. Our 
government is very concerned about the need for native day care services and their slow development. A 
special project team is being established to work with tentative groups in order to speed up the development 
of native day care services. Our government has decided to move swiftly to provide financial help. We will 
have a stabilization grant of $50 per child-space per centre plus an additional substantial grant to stabilize 
those centres currently in the greatest difficulty. To assure that we have a healthy day care program, my 
department will continue to monitor the effects of the financial assistance package. Our government is 
committed to helping parents develop and sustain the kind of day care centres they want and need. To assist 
parents in this task my department will place development workers in every social service region of the 
province. The decentralized approach will provide close contact between development workers and 
community services. 
 
Many parents have found that they have little or no time available to serve on day care boards. We want to 
explore ways of relieving this burden on parents while retaining parent control of the centres. We will 
provide greater assistance from department development workers. We will make provision for proxy parent 
board members or trustees who will assist mainly in the development phase of the centre. We will explore 
ways of encouraging more members of the community at large to participate on day care boards. We want to 
explore the possibility of establishing pilot projects for group day care homes, satellite systems consisting of 
one day care centre with a group of 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
718 

affiliated day care homes, and various ways of encouraging senior citizens to become involved in day care 
centres. 
 
Other matters which will be studied further include the need for centres to provide care for children under 18 
months of age, ways of expanding lunch time and after-school care for school-aged children, and the 
feasibility of work-site day care centres in both public and private sectors. 
 
The report prepared as a result of the review of the day care program in this province, which I tabled 
yesterday, outlined a great number of recommendations. Stage one of our program plan meets with the 
majority of the recommendations and our stage two program will probably answer the remaining 
recommendations. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, my government will stabilize the day care program immediately by providing an 
87 per cent increase in subsidies and 330 per cent increase in grants with an overall budget increase for the 
day care program from $3.7 million to $7.5 million, an increase of 101 per cent. Over the next few months, 
we will work out and implement further improvements in this program. I am convinced, Mr. Speaker, that 
with the initiatives I have announced, the Saskatchewan day care program will become superior to any other 
program in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, the many new and expanded programs to be undertaken 
this year by the Department of Social Services provide ample evidence that this budget lives up to its stated 
goal of enriching the quality of community life in Saskatchewan. It is a budget which reaffirms the spirit of 
sharing and co-operation which guided our great province through its first 75 years. It is a budget to which I 
will be giving my whole-hearted support. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SWAN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today to have the opportunity to enter into this 
budget debate. First, I would like to commend the Minister of Finance for bringing in a balanced budget. It’s 
something which we’ve encouraged your government to do for a long time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No, we would like very much if you would start to live within your own means rather than running the 
province into debt. 
 
On first brush, as I look at the budget and as we listened to the Minister of Finance, it would appear that 
everyone has been considered and provided for in this budget. But things are not always as they first appear. 
As you begin to dig a little deeper into the budget to find out where the money has gone, you begin to see 
that what at first looked like a good budget, indeed, is only a budget keeping up with inflation and, in many 
places, dropping behind the inflationary trend. 
 
Saskatchewan people have received some consideration in the form of a modest tax cut in the income tax 
area. It was modest because it only dropped from 53 per cent to 51 per cent for the personal income tax 
payment. But when you take a second look at this item and find that, indeed, it takes place on July 1 and that 
people will benefit by only half of that (not 2 per cent but a mere 1 per cent), it doesn’t seem like much of a 
tax cut. 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
719 

When you see the Minister of Finance moving in this direction to hide his deceitful ways, you begin to take 
second looks throughout the budget in general to see what is happening in the budget of the province of 
Saskatchewan. There’s not big handout being given to the people of Saskatchewan. I would like the people 
of this province to remember that governments don’t have money. They only have the source of taxation to 
raise money. So, anything in the budget, that’s being returned to the people of the province is, indeed, money 
which they have taken from you through taxation to begin with. 
 
We have called, a number of times, for assistance to Saskatchewan’s home-owners. Now, many of our young 
people have gone deeply into debt to buy their first home. Interest rates have spiralled since the time of their 
first purchase. When the time comes for mortgage renewals, many of these people are experiencing great 
difficulty in meeting the interest and mortgage payments. We have requested that this government assist the 
young people in the form of subsidized interest rates, but I don’t see anything in this budget which will eve 
come close to meeting that consideration. Let the people in the homes fight their own way through this 
highly inflationary trend. As interest rises, many of them are going to find that they can’t afford to own a 
home, and they’re going to have to let their homes go back to the finance people. 
 
I would encourage each person who is a taxpayer to look at the budget seriously and decide, “How much 
money does this government propose to return to me? How much will I really put into my pocket at the end 
of this year because of this budget? Take your income tax from and see what 1 per cent would mean to you 
in the Saskatchewan portion of the income tax. And then take a look at the gas pump each time you go to fill 
your car. I want you to realize that 20 per cent of every $1 worth of gas that you put in your car goes right 
back into the government coffers. Today, when gasoline is in the $1.50 range per gallon, you are paying 30 
cents per gallon to the government, and as the price goes up the government’s income from that gallon of 
gasoline will also go up. The government will be smiling every time there’s an increase because it will be 
carrying additional funds into the bank. Now this is a change from a 19 cents per gallon gas tax last year to 
20 per cent of the value of the gasoline this year. It is indeed a powerful increase for our people to face. Now 
people in Regina have to pay more for their gasoline than people in Toronto. Saskatchewan is a producing 
province (producing energy), and Ontario is not. And yet here in this province you must pay more because 
the government tax is more. It doesn’t seem fair to me. 
 
Consider also the increase in your licence and insurance on that same automobile. When you get your 
driver’s licence, if you’ve been a driver who has had no accident, you will find that your white driver’s 
licence has doubled this year. If you look at the insurance side of it, your insurance on your car package has 
gone up a considerable amount. I varies from one type of vehicle to another., but in all cases it has gone up a 
considerable amount. These are things that I think people must stop to consider when they look at the 
operation of the provincial government. You have to realize that there is the legislative side of this 
government and there is the Crown corporations side. On the legislative side, the budget indicates the 
change. On the Crown corporation side, the corporations increase taxes on you for the services they provide. 
Look at the increased cost of your power bill, your telephone bill, your home insurance, and your car 
insurance, and the many other services that this government is providing. You will find that the increases 
have been substantial in all areas this year. So indeed, when we come back to look at this budget we find out 
that our costs as individuals have indeed skyrocketed. There are no big handouts in this budget that will 
make your lifestyle easier this year. 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
720 

To all of you who are taxpayers in this province, the municipal government has increased its revenue through 
revenue-sharing by 10 per cent. This is below last year’s inflationary trend. So I tell you, as taxpayers you 
can anticipate your municipal government will have no choice but to increase your property tax again this 
year. 
 
In education, a very similar circumstance prevails. The government has announced a 12 per cent increase per 
student, but when you realize there is a net drop in the number of students in the province, and then come 
back to figuring the actual dollars, there is about a 10 per cent increase for the education budget. This means 
that boards of education around the province will have to again turn to the property tax base to balance their 
budgets. You can expect that a property tax increase will almost certainly occur in every school division in 
this province. 
 
The Minister of Finance, in his speech to the legislature, drew attention to the 35 per cent increase in the 
agriculture budget, and he said that we are recognizing that agriculture is still the mainstay of our province. I 
would agree with him that agriculture is the mainstay of our province, but I would like to just look for a 
minute at where these increases have taken place. Right off the top, there has been an additional $10 million 
going to the land bank commission, an increase from $25 million last year to $35 million this year for the 
purchase of farmland. This won’t assist the agriculture industry to any great extent. It will mean that more 
and more land moves from private ownership to government ownership — not a really a great boon to the 
agriculture industry. 
 
The next major one was $7.1 million for an ethanol plant. Now, research into the energy situation is 
something that I commend the government for, but it would seem to me that if there is need for more energy, 
it should rightfully have come under the energy, mines and resources portfolio, not in the agriculture budget. 
It’s another deceitful method of making themselves look good in the agriculture field when they have done 
very little. 
 
There was $825,000 additional to the Saskatchewan Hog Assured Returns Program. That’s necessary. The 
hog producers have indeed incurred losses because he price of hogs is down. Perhaps the government has 
made a good move here. But perhaps we could do something to improve our hog industry for example, have 
the hogs slaughtered here in the province. We produce some of the best hogs in the world; our bacon is in 
demand around the world, and even the American prefer Canadian bacon. Why don’t we provide 
slaughtering facilities within the province and handle our hogs here instead of shipping them out? If we 
could do this we would encourage the hog industry and perhaps avoid the need to subsidize the hog 
producers. I am sure that the hog producers would appreciate being able t operate without a subsidy. 
 
Similarly, the government has now moved to a beef stabilization plan, and there is $5.1 million going into 
that. There have been many of our beef producers crying out that a stabilization plan was not needed. At 
least I’m encouraged that the plan is a voluntary one and I hope it remains that way. But I’m also concerned 
that it may have problems that have not even been looked at yet. Some of them will show a year or two down 
the road when it may be too late too correct them. 
 
We rely mainly on the export market to provide us with a place to market our beef. The American border has 
been open for the transfer of beef both ways, but if the American people look at our beef industry as being a 
subsidized industry, is this going to have an effect on whether our borders will remain open? I think it is 
something that needs a lot 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
721 

of discussion, and I would encourage the Minister of Agriculture to enter into discussions with the American 
government to be sure that this is not the effect we are going to experience by having a beef stabilization 
program in our province. 
 
There is an additional $3 million going out to pay for the grain hopper cars that Saskatchewan bought. Now 
the government has taken credit for this $55 million expenditure a number of times over the past two years, 
both in the House and outside of the House. Almost every time I hear the Minister of Agriculture speak to 
any major group, he takes credit for the $55 million that he spent on hopper cars. 
 
Here again in this budget, the Minister of Finance is trying to take credit for this same money again. I don’t 
think the farm people are that easily fooled. They are watching quite closely what is happening in the 
agriculture budget and there is very little new money there for new projects. 
 
We see $750,000 for losses on FarmStart loans. That is not going to improve agriculture to any great extent. 
It simply means that people on FarmStart loans have gone broke, and that this $750,000 was needed to help 
people who have gone into bankruptcy situations. 
 
There is $671,000 additional for the FarmStart interest subsidy. This is the kind of money that I think we 
would encourage the government to spend to improve the lot of the farmer and to assist young people to get 
started in the industry. If they would put a lot more dollars into this area, and get out of the land bank idea, 
we would see the opportunities there for many more people to be in farming than there will be under the 
current program. 
 
There is an additional $3 million being put into agriculture research. Again I say, this has been necessary. I 
would commend the government for its move. I hope that this research will indeed do something to provide 
people with the information on soil salinity and crop rotation and other necessary information that will assist 
the industry to produce more grain. 
 
I am concerned that the farm cost reduction program has been discontinued. For most farmers this meant 
about $300 relief on their fuel bill. Now fuel costs have increased very rapidly and the agriculture sector is a 
very large user of energy. it is necessary on a farm to burn large quantities of fuel. Why, at this very 
inflationary time, does the government see it wise to move in this direction? I just can’t understand it. But I 
can assure you that a $300 loss to many of our young farmers is going to hurt significantly. The established 
farmers, I suppose can handle it because it is not that big an item to them. But to young farmers, that is a 
major concern. 
 
I would like, Mr. Speaker, to touch on the irrigation issue in the province of Saskatchewan. It is an item 
which I have raised a number of times in this Chamber and am very disappointed in the approach the 
government has taken toward irrigation in the province generally. 
 
I had a commitment from the Premier, in the spring, that he would look at the west side irrigation project if I 
could get him 50 names of people who were interested. Well, Mr. Speaker, I was able to bring in more than 
140 names. They were all given to the Premier in July. now I get a letter from the Minister of Agriculture 
and basically he is telling the people out there in the irrigation district that they can use the existing irrigation 
ditch if they are willing to pay all of the capital costs to put the water in the ditch, if they will pay 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
722 

all of the capital costs for the major pumps, the transformers, the piping from the lake to the canal, and then 
protect the canal from erosion, and so on. Now these are the kinds of things that discourage people in the 
province from proceeding to irrigate. 
 
I believe that the capital costs entailed in moving the water from Lake Diefenbaker to the canal should be 
borne by the province and that the farmers should pay the cost of taking the water out of the canal and 
putting it on the land. The farmers are also willing to pay a water users rate for the amount of water which 
they use. The government can, over a period of time, recover a portion of its capital investment in this 
manner. But I believe there is more to this issue than just the handling of water. If the land is put under 
irrigation it’s going to be a real asset to the province. This land will produce more; the province will receive 
more income through the income tax route; it will receive more income from other industries that benefit 
from the surrounding irrigation project. So, over a very short period of time, the government would, in all 
likelihood, recover in actual dollars far more than it would cost them to install their pumps and pump the 
water. So I am encouraging the Minister of Agriculture to take a new look at the thinking on this matter. 
 
This year, in the capital portion of the irrigation budget in the province of Saskatchewan, we see an actual 
reduction of funds by 30 per cent. This is a very unreal approach to the problem faced by farmers in a year as 
dry as that which we have just experienced and a winter with very little snow. 
 
Many of the farmers in the irrigation district which I am talking about have had poor crops for two years in a 
row. If they were covered by crop insurance, then it has been a cost to the crop insurance program because 
they will have been able to collect from this source. I might say to you that many of the crops in that area 
were four bushels and less last years. Given the opportunity to use the water and irrigate the land, it is likely 
many of these people would not need to be covered by crop insurance. Surely, there are other problems 
which can occur to a crop, like hail or wind or frost, but of these natural hazards drought is the most serious. 
 
For the most part, people, who are irrigating in this province and in other provinces have become pretty 
much self-sufficient and have been a real asset to the agricultural industry in their provinces. I believe that it 
is one way which we could improve our agricultural industry. 
 
The minister has said that there is need for an increase in production, that by 1985 the world will need 30 
million tonnes of grain from Canada. Let’s move now to use the land which we have and to use the water 
which is just going down the river and ending up in the ocean. It’s a natural resource which we are wasting. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, the next time we meet with you to discuss the irrigation on the west side of Diefenbaker 
Lake, I want you to come out with a new thought in your mind and a few dollars in your pocket, so that we 
can provide irrigation for the people on the west side of Diefenbaker Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like now to discuss for a few minutes the social services issue. I was indeed, please when I 
looked at the budget to see there has been a significant increase in the allowance for certain residents in 
special-care homes. It is not specific enough, at this point in time, for me to comment very greatly on it, but I 
would like to say that we have encouraged you for the past three years to move to a room and board type of 
charge for people in special-care homes. You had one study after another looking at 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
723 

this particular issue. I would hope this is an indication that you are going to move and do similar things for 
our senior citizens as is now being done in other provinces. 
 
I can tell you that last year our senior citizens did not receive a fair amount of money from the province. 
People in special-care homes were, indeed, neglected by your government when you provided a mere 7 per 
cent increase in their portion on April 1, and then a very, very modest increase again on July 1. These people 
fell far behind the amount inflation was costing them. Remember that they are people on fixed incomes. I 
think this was a shabby way to threat them. I hope that in this year’s budget, you are going to treat them 
differently. Many of the people in our special-care homes have had to go onto social assistance because you 
have used all of their life savings. I trust, Mr. Minister, that you are going to take a responsible look and 
declare, in the next day or two, what you are prepared to do and how this budget is going to be distributed. 
 
I would like to address the day care issue briefly. I was, indeed, pleased to see that the day care budget had 
doubled this year. The report was just tabled last night after 5 o’clock which dealt with the day care issue in 
the province. So, I have had little time to read it, but I did skim through parts of it. 
 
One of the things that I found significantly interesting was that we had just over 3,000 spaces available in our 
province, last year, and the report states that there is a need for over 14,000 spaces. That’s about 4.5 times 
what we have. The budget doubled. Will this provide for 14,000 spaces if that’s what we need? I doubt very 
much if that’s the case. 
 
The report stated that most of the day care facilities were inadequate, that most of the people who were to 
work in the day cares were underpaid and that the amount of money provided to buy supplies for day care 
amounted to $1.39 per student per month. Now, that’s not very much money to buy supplies. 
 
I wonder if the minister feels that he can supply these needs in the manner that he has outlined in the last two 
days. 
 
I was looking back over Public Accounts for the last number of years, and from 1972 to 1979, social services 
has budgeted a given amount each year to put into the day care program. But for each and every one of those 
years, when you add them together, the budget was never spent. They spent 66.4 per cent of the actual 
budgeted amount for that period of time. I hope that’s not the plan that they have in mind this year — to only 
spend a modest portion of what they have budgeted. 
 
Looking a little farther, the government is taking credit for it, but the federal government actually pays 50 per 
cent of the amount provided for day care. So, of anything that you have increased, the federal government 
will be picking up half. 
 
I was somewhat surprised under public assistance vote 33, to see that you have dropped the public assistance 
for the aged from $11.8 million to $7.6 million — a drop of $4.2 million. Now, I don’t know whether you 
feel that the aged can live without assistance. I’m sure that the number of our aged hasn’t dropped but has 
increased. Mr. Minister I hope that very soon you will tell the general public why you have cut back this 
particular subvote. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance went to great lengths to tell the people of Saskatchewan that his tax 
cuts were great, and that now, at 51 per cent, our personal 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
724 

income tax rate is the fourth lowest in Canada. He went on to say, “As you are aware there is no health 
insurance premium in Saskatchewan.” I think that what he should have said was that there were not direct 
health premiums. You must remember that in Saskatchewan we pay a 5 per cent education and health tax. 
This is a major cost to every citizen in this province. And as the price of goods rises, through the inflationary 
process, everyone buys more dollars worth of goods. In each year that 5 per cent tax is bringing in more 
dollars to the revenue department of the provincial government. You may call it a tax or you may call it 
something else, but I would say that we do have a deterrent fee in the form of an indirect tax to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In our neighboring province of Alberta, which you like to downgrade so much, they don’t have a sales tax. 
They discontinued it a number of years ago. It is a hidden tax that you have imposed, and you have gone to 
great lengths to try to mislead the people of Saskatchewan into thinking that you have, indeed, provided free 
health care. There are no freebies in this society — we must pay and we pay dearly for what we get in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Throughout this budget, there are very few high points where the government has moved funds to provide 
assistance for people. But, overall, the budget is just a budget keeping up with inflation, there is no major 
assistance for most people in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I believe the Minister of Finance 
has been a master of deceit in designing this budget and leading people to believe they have received great 
things from the province. 
 
I will be supporting the amendment and voting against the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — Mr. Speaker, with the permission of this House, I would like to introduce a group 
of students who have already gone out of the House. They were here for one and one-half hours. I met with 
them out in the lobby and had a good discussion. They listened to the debate that was going on in this House 
and they really enjoyed it. I thought it would be fair to recognize their coming to this House and participating 
while they were here today. These students, who are 38 in number and grade 12 students from the town of 
Ituna were with their teachers, Mabel Fleming and John Zatwerniski. I would like the House to welcome 
them on their way home now and I hope they are getting along well. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (continued) 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to be participating in this budget debate on behalf of the 
constituency of Saskatoon-Sutherland. 
 
I think it is a pretty good budget, Mr. Speaker, and I think this budget is especially important because it 
represents some rather major expansions in the social programs that our government is offering the people of 
Saskatchewan. It also marks the beginning of some substantial initiatives in the area of energy conservation 
and 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
725 

biomass energy development. In my view, the budget particularly reflects the government’s sound 
management policies in the oil and potash fields. It is the $600 million that we are bringing from oil 
revenues this year, and the $294 million we are brining in from potash, plus the $50 million we are bringing 
in in the form of potash dividend, that is allowing us to expand our social programs so significantly. 
 
In contrast to the policies of the Conservative and Liberal parties in the past, it has been our government’s 
insistence on nationalizing the potash industry and on getting a fair tax from our oil returns that is making 
these revenues possible — revenues that have gone up from $35 million in 1971, when the Liberals were in 
charge of this province to over $1 billion this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — There are five parts of the budget that I would particularly like to address. The first is 
the area of research and overall funding for the university in this province. I am particularly happy, Mr. 
Speaker, to see an increase of 12 per cent in university operating grants. When we look at the university July 
1 to June 30 calendar year, we will see that it is almost a 13 per cent increase for that year. That should help 
quite a bit to ease the constraints and cutbacks that we have seen in many of our campus programs in the past 
two years. The 19 per cent increase in funding for student bursaries is also going to be something that I 
believe will be welcomed by a lot of my constituents. 
 
The problem we now have to address in the area of student funding, in particular, is the question of funding 
to graduate students in the area of graduate scholarships and fellowships. Right now the universities are 
having a difficult time competing with other universities in Canada on this matter, Mr. Speaker. We are 
having difficulty getting good graduate students into the province of Saskatchewan because we are not 
paying them as much as many other provinces are. That is a problem which I hope we ill resolve in next 
year’s budget. 
 
I am pleased that the budget contained provision for construction of a new geological sciences building at the 
university campus in Saskatchewan. That’s an initiative, Mr. Speaker, that the other Saskatoon MLAs and I 
have been urging for several months. I think it is an initiative which is central to our province’s future in the 
potash and heavy oil area. It is a program which is very much welcomed at this time. 
 
I also want to say that I am pleased with our government’s increasing recognition of the importance of 
research. Our funding in this case is a $7.1 million ethanol plant in the area of energy research, plus a 
$500,000 liquid fuel test program. What this is going to allow us to do, Mr. Speaker, is gain a major 
initiative in the area of biomass energy, something which I have long called for in this House. I want to 
congratulate the Minister of Agriculture on that initiative. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — It is a significant increase, along with the other agricultural research programs that we 
have already been funding over the past two or three years. 
 
In the health research area, I’m pleased to see a doubling of funding for looking at the health effects of 
low-level radiation. I’m pleased to see an announcement of $285,000 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
726 

toward cancer research. 
 
With those comments in mind, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few other comments with respect to initiatives 
which our government should be taking in the area of research. The first point I want to make is that as a 
federal party we have been taking a position for years that research funding ought to be set at least at 1 per 
cent of the gross national product. So I think we should look seriously at implementing this same principle 
here in Saskatchewan. Although we have made a lot of improvements in research policy as reflected in this 
budget, we need to adopt a comprehensive research policy with funding for both pure research and applied 
research projects that are of direct benefit to our government’s social and economic objectives. We need to 
increase research in areas such as the environment, energy conservation, communication, preventive health, 
preventive social policy and Saskatchewan history. 
 
What I propose, Mr. Speaker, is that a percentage of resource revenues should be set aside on an annual basis 
and taken out of the heritage fund as an investment in research, which is really an investment in our 
province’s economic future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also want to make a couple of more specific comments with respect to the crop research program 
announced in the budget and the funding for cancer research. 
 
With respect to crop research, Mr. Speaker, I certainly support the emphasis in the budget on dealing with 
such problems as soil salinity, moisture conservation, optimum crop rotation practices and that sort of thing. 
However, the research program is also founded on another assumption which I think is a lot more 
questionable, and that is that Saskatchewan should be attempting to increase its grain production by almost 
50 per cent over the next five years, since the Canadian Wheat Board is telling us that we will be able to 
market 30 million tonnes of prairie grain by 1985. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the grain production target, I believe, is unwise and unrealistic. I believe it is 
likely to result in further exploitation of our prairie soil. I am very much afraid that a major and very rapid 
increase in grain product is like to lead to increased pressure on marginal soils and other important land uses 
such as wildlife habitat, hedgerows, sloughs and other natural habitat. I am concerned that it could result in a 
further reduction in the organic content of Saskatchewan’s soil, which has already lost half of its organic 
matter. I worry that the so-called improved weed control methods that are going to be researched will result 
in an increased application of agricultural herbicides and pesticides, with the consequent health problems 
this is likely to bring. And finally, I am opposed to the 50 per cent target increase by the mid-1980s. Mr. 
Speaker, because I believe it may lead to an escalation of the trend to increasing farm size. 
 
It seems to me that the easiest way for an individual farmer to increase his productivity is to increase the 
amount of land acreage that he owns. I am afraid that that may very well happen under the policy the 
government is now urging. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would instead urge the Minister of Agriculture to 
abandon the government’s target of a very rapid increase in agricultural production, and instead promote a 
more gradual increase that’s based on sound farm conservation practices, and on the encouragement of 
agricultural self-sufficiency instead of simply focusing on primarily grain production. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, in this area the government should emphasize four things. First of all, the research 
program should include a comprehensive assessment of the 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
727 

ecological and social consequences of a major increase in grain production. 
 
Second, the government should fund research in the area of biological and cultural control of pests. If you 
look at the funding at the national level, for instance, for biological control of pests and weeds, Mr. Speaker, 
you find that it is set at about $400,000 nationally. The Government of Saskatchewan has to take initiatives 
to reverse this trend. 
 
Third, the provincial government should encourage research and invest in the infrastructure that is necessary 
to increase our production of vegetables within the province, and generally to increase our capacity for 
self-sufficiency. In this field I would think that one of the most promising areas for research is looking at the 
potential that our waste heat sources in the province have, particularly our potash mines, our generating 
stations and our compressor stations to natural gas. These are substantial waste heat sources that could quite 
easily provide the capacity that would be required for greenhouses to locate next to them and operate 
year-round. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, pilot greenhouse projects should be established by our government at 
generating stations. SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation) compressor stations, and a study should be 
conducted on the job creation potential that these projects would have. I believe it would be substantial. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, our government needs to expand and make changes to the product development 
program that would allow funding to be provided to small inventors, to individual inventors on the farm who 
are involved in taking new research initiatives. Right now all the research money is basically going to people 
who are involved in the manufacturing industry, involved in the process industry, or involved in research at 
the university. These are very important groups to be funding, but our funding programs are ignoring the 
initiatives that could be taken at a local level on the farm. 
 
If you look at the history of inventions in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, you find that a lot of the innovations 
in areas like energy conversation and areas like farm machinery development were made on the farm by 
individual farmers. I think we should establish a program that would provide financial support for research 
endeavors that those people undertake as well. 
 
Now, I’ve been dwelling on the matter of research priorities this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, because in so many 
ways I think that our research priorities and the objectives that they are based on reflect the assumptions and 
the objectives that we hold as a government. In this respect, the allocation of $285,000 for cancer research 
combined with a 30 per cent increase in the cancer foundation merits special mention. Cancer, Mr. Speaker, 
in my view, has become an epidemic in Saskatchewan. It is unfortunate that no one seems to be prepared to 
acknowledge this, that an epidemic, in my view, is the appropriate description. And the statistics make the 
point, Mr. Speaker. In 1950 in Saskatchewan we had an incidence of 1,292 cases of new cancer. By 1970, we 
had 2,537 cases of new cancer per year. In 1978, we had 3,169 new cases of cancer. And every year 
throughout the 1970s, Mr. Speaker, the number of cases of new cancer increased. This is an alarming 
situation, and in my view it requires more than simply a significant budget increase to the cancer foundation. 
What it requires is a reassessment of our government’s whole approach to dealing with the cancer problem, 
and I want to comment on some changes that I think are required. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that the fundamental cause of cancer is really the environment 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
728 

around us. We know that such things as smoking, exposure to radiation, exposure to some food additives, 
exposure to some toxic agricultural and industrial chemicals, exposure to a number of air pollutants can all 
cause cancer. We are uncertain about the magnitude that any one of these impacts has, but we certainly know 
that they’re all likely contributors. yet, Mr. Speaker, across North American the approach to dealing with 
cancer, in every province, at both the medical level and the research level, has focussed completely on 
treatment. All we talk about, Mr. Speaker, is things like chemotherapy, radiation applications, surgery — 
those sorts of things. The obvious preventive approach of cleaning up our food supplies, cleaning up our 
water supplies, and cleaning up our general environment have practically been ignored. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I want to urge the Minister of Health to allocate the majority of money in the cancer 
research program toward examining the environmental causes of cancer and how these might be eliminated. 
I’d like to give a couple of examples of the sorts of initiatives in this area that could be taken with respect to 
cancer research. All members of this House are familiar with the concerns that have been expressed about 
the hazards of particular agriculture chemicals such as diazanon or 2,4-D, lindane, etc. We have at least 22 of 
these agricultural chemicals on the Industrial Biotest Laboratories list, a list of improperly tested chemicals 
that are widely used in Saskatchewan on a regular basis. 
 
What we could do, in terms of a research initiative, Mr. Speaker, is to record, with each sale of a specific 
suspect agricultural chemical, the health card number of the person purchasing that product. This would 
enable the Department of Health, within the course of a year, to determine if there was a relationship 
between a particular agricultural chemical in an area and health problems in that area that are suspected to be 
associated with that particular chemical. It’s this kind of research, Mr. Speaker, that would put us in a 
position to identify and remove from the market the agricultural chemicals that are, in fact, creating a hazard 
to our farmers, farm laborers, and consumers. 
 
In an urban context, Mr. Speaker, an example of what I believe would be a useful project would be to 
examine the relationship between automobile emissions and cancer incidence. The possibility of an 
important relationship here was identified by a recent research study in Switzerland, indicating that cancer 
rates were substantially higher among residents who lived along major highways than it was for residents 
living further away from heavy automobile traffic. This clearly, Mr. Speaker, indicates a potential 
relationship between automobile emissions and cancer. I think it’s an obvious research project that the 
Government of Saskatchewan could undertake. In general, what I am saying is that the province should take 
a new preventive and environmentally oriented approach to the problem of cancer — and it should take it 
immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these comments have clearly taken me into the area of health policies, and, in this regard, there 
are several important initiatives in the budget that I want to briefly discuss. I want to congratulate the 
Minster of Health for the many initiatives which are taken in this budget, and particularly for the new 
238-bed chronic care facility for the city of Saskatoon. This facility will replace the inadequate level 4 
facilities now in use at the sanatorium. It will add extra beds, which should help to relieve the pressure 
resulting from many level 4 patients now having to stay in our main hospitals. I know this new facility will 
be welcomed by my constituents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also much needed is our government’s commitment in this budget to significantly reduce nursing fees. That 
is a promise we made in the 1978 election; it’s a promise we 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
729 

are keeping in this budget. I am pleased to be part of a government that has now kept almost every one of its 
promises, with the exception of about 2 of the 22 financial promises it made in the last budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — Mr. Speaker, the budget also contains a number of important initiatives in the area of 
preventive health. The Minister of Health, in his remarks earlier commented on many of these. I think the 
increase in funding to dental care, now including children ages 4 to 15, is especially important. also 
important is the pilot project announced for adult dental care. A number of the other pilot projects involve 
senior citizens, particularly the project in which senior citizens are going to be involved in counselling other 
senior citizens in 12 home care districts in Saskatchewan. I want to congratulate the minister for these 
initiatives. 
 
I am very pleased with the 18 per cent increase that has been announced for the community clinics in the 
province. This funding is going to allow the clinics to offer additional preventive services, such as dietician 
services. I have long been urging that such an initiative be taken. I am delighted to see such action. I believe, 
Mr. Speaker, that we should make the community clinics in Saskatchewan the foundation — the vehicle for 
expanding many of our preventive programs. This budget allocation is the first step toward doing this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having made those remarks on preventive programs, I want to touch on some of the preventive 
programs not in this budget, and that I hope will be taken up by the Government of Saskatchewan in the rest 
of its term and in the coming decade. If you look at most of these questions, they are not so much questions 
of financial support as they are matters of structural changes required in the health system, if we are truly to 
have a system which is founded on the principles of preventive health, Some of the changes I think are 
urgently needed include, first of all, a new focus on the planning of the workplace. New regulations are 
needed that would provide for the Department of Health and the division of occupational health and safety to 
have input into the design of workplaces, so that when a new workshop or a new factory is being built, the 
plans for it must be taken to the occupational health and safety division and must be approved with respect to 
safety before such a workplace can go ahead. Right now we are simply dealing with the problems of design 
in the workplace and the hazards which these pose to workers after the fact. That is simply not good enough, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need tougher provisions in our labor legislation to protect workers from technological changes which are 
being introduced in such a way that their jobs are lost, or that these changes are introduced without being 
fully tested for safety. I think an example of that is within our own public service, with the introduction of 
video display terminals which are causing eyestrain among some of our employees and about which 
uncertainly exists with respect to radiation exposure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we need to see the introduction of a nurse practitioner program so that well-trained 
nurses and other health professionals can reduce the patient load which is now being carried by doctors. I 
think a nurse health practitioner program has to be a fundamental part of any focus in preventive health, for 
it is the nurses who will provide an opportunity for patients to spend a considerable amount of time 
discussing their problems and being examined in a preventive way. 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
730 

Also important, Mr. Speaker, I think is the establishment of nutritional standards for all food establishments 
in Saskatchewan, to ensure that restaurants and fast food chains will provide, on their menus, a variety of 
food that is of good nutritional quality. 
 
We need legislation to pout a ban on junk food advertising in Saskatchewan, and we should have all junk 
food removed from our hospitals and schools. The government should remove the junk food vending 
machines from all public institutions in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We should also introduce legislation to ban tobacco advertising in Saskatchewan, and seek to establish a 
comprehensive school lunch program, as has been done in Britain by the Labour government (then cut by the 
Conservative government). We should introduce a school lunch program here that would ensure that all 
children in the province of Saskatchewan have at least one good, wholesome and nutritious meal a day. I 
think this is a program that would stimulate the Saskatchewan dairy industry, the Saskatchewan vegetable 
industry, and would generally be in the best interests of the health of our young people. 
 
If we are going to do anything serious about the problem of car accidents, (in addition to the seat belt 
legislation we have introduced) I believe that we need mandatory safety inspection in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I urge the Minister of Highways to extend the program of inspection that he now has on 
semitrailers and trucks to individual cars. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that we need extensions in the provisions for maternity leave in Saskatchewan, and we 
should provide leave for all parents from their work to look after their children when they are sick. It seems 
to me that this should be a basic human right. It is a right that has been recognized in Sweden. It is a right 
that the Government of Saskatchewan should recognize and so be the first government in Canada to do so. 
 
There are two other areas of preventive health that I want to just touch upon before closing my remarks in 
this area. One is that we need to see the introduction of a pure food policy in the province, which would 
encourage the production of chemical-free organically grown produce. Schools could also be encouraged to 
grow chemical-free food in greenhouses located on the school property. 
 
Special support should be given to farmers who practise organic agriculture. Support should be given in 
assisting them to market their produce, including support for stores to sell only nutritious, chemical-free 
produce. 
 
Many other steps could be taken, Mr. Speaker, but I especially want to mention the need for our provincial 
government to move to eliminate the system of fee-for-service medicine, which is not practised by at least 
two-thirds of Saskatchewan doctors. A truly preventive approach to health care cannot be implemented if 
doctors are constantly paid on the basis of the treatment they provide a patient with. Instead, I believe that 
physicians should be placed on salary, as part of a process of upgrading the quality of care that can be offered 
to patients. 
 
It is now a pleasure for me to turn to the question of day care and the improvements in our government’s day 
care policy. I want to just make a remark on the inaccurate notions that the member for Rosetown-Elrose 
seems to have with respect to the funding of our day care program. 
 
The federal government does not provide 50 per cent of day care funding in this 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
731 

province, as the critic for day care among the members opposite ought to know. The federal government 
provides approximately 35 per cent. And since the federal government will not be cost-sharing a lot of the 
new initiatives that we’re taking, federal funding will be down to 25 per cent. Of overall funding in this 
province, 75 per cent of the cost of the program will be picked up by the provincial government. 
 
Now, members will recall that in the December session of this legislature, I introduced a resolution calling 
upon the Government of Saskatchewan to upgrade and expand its day care program. I am happy to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I can now drop that resolution from the order paper. 
 
The Minister of Social Services has indeed upgraded the program significantly. Through these changes, our 
government has responded to several of the concerns which my constituents in Saskatoon have expressed. 
 
Our government increased the monthly maximum subsidy from $150 to $210 per child. The income level at 
which a full subsidy is available for both day care centres and family day are homes, has been increased from 
an adjusted family income of $850 per month to an adjusted family income of $1,350 per month. Families 
with adjusted incomes right up to $25,000 will be able to receive some kind of assistance with respect to 
funding day care, particularly if they have more than one child. Our day care program is finally going to be 
of benefit to a significant number of middle-income families. We’ve seen significant increases in the 
equipment grants and a $50 stabilization grant per child per month for each centre. All these initiatives, Mr. 
Speaker, I think are significant and I believe that the Minister of Social Services should be congratulated 
heartily on these measures. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PREBBLE: — I’m happy to see that our government is going to be embarking on a consultation 
process with day care users in the province to identify additional initiatives which are required. I’m also glad 
to see that the minister has announced increased organizational support both for regular day care centres, in 
terms of having staff who can work with the parent boards, and for assistance to native people in organizing 
native day care centres. 
 
I want to talk for just a moment about some of the further improvements that I would hope we could see in 
the program. One of the first, Mr. Speaker, is the obvious need for an expansion in the number of day care 
spaces in Saskatchewan. I believe the minister has taken the right course by concentrating first on upgrading 
the quality of the existing program and limiting the expansion in the number of new spaces to about 10 per 
cent. Clearly when you consider the fact that there are over 32,000 children in this province who live in 
homes where both parents work (and these are all children under six years of age) you can see that the 
existing 3,000 spaces we have in the province are not adequate. I believe that as a target over the next three 
years, we should be aiming for at least 10,000 day care spaces in the province of Saskatchewan by 1985. 
 
We should also attempt to reduce the ratio for school-age children, the child-staff ratio, in the day care 
centres. Right now, it’s a ratio of one staff person to 15 children. That’s clearly inadequate if we’re going to 
offer a quality program. I think we need to set a target of 1 to 8. Similar initiatives are required in terms of 
improving the child-staff ratio for children below school-age years. 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
732 

In addition to that, we need to take steps such as upgrading the regulations with respect to nutrition and 
improving the space requirements in the day care centres. Clearly, to have a requirement of only 25 square 
feet per school-age child in a day care centre is not adequate, Mr. Speaker. Such things as ensuring that there 
will be window space in our day care centres, ensuring that there will be proper fencing around playground 
facilities outside day cares, should not be difficult to do and need to be undertaken quickly to upgrade the 
quality of the program. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, I particularly want to urge the Minister of Social Services to look seriously 
next year at providing special funding for families which need to use day care on a part-time basis and 
providing special funding for at least some day care centres in the province to operate on a 24-hour a day 
basis because, especially in urban centres, we have a large number of shift workers who require evening day 
are and who are unable to obtain such services right now. To offer such services, day cares need extra 
funding and special funding, because it is expensive to keep a day care open on a 24-hour basis, and I’m 
confident that the Government of Saskatchewan will recognize that in next year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to a different topic and that is related to the question of energy security and 
some of the provision that we find announced in our energy security fund. I am pleased to see $62 million 
allocation to SaskOil to continue expanding its exploration activities and involvement in heavy oil. I hope 
the provincial government will continue to seek a higher level of ownership in the Saskatchewan oil 
industry. I am especially pleased to see the adoption of one of the proposals that I presented in this House on 
many occasion, namely, the concept of providing interest free loans or grants to help persons who wish to 
build or buy an energy-efficient home to offset some of the extra costs that are involved in that. The 
proposed $1.5 million interest-free loan program will provide a $3,000 interest-free loan to home buyers who 
purchase newly constructed housing that meets specified energy standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that this program will provide a significant incentive to home buyers to opt for 
the construction of energy-efficient housing. As the program expands, I’m also confident that it will 
stimulate extra employment in the house-building industry, and make a start at reducing natural gas demand 
posed by new housing developments, thus saving on natural gas purchased from the province of Alberta. 
Perhaps most importantly, I believe an energy efficient home will be an investment against inflating energy 
prices in the future and a source of personal security to the owner in the time of energy shortages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of Mineral Resources for adopting this program and making 
it part of our expanding energy conservation initiatives. It is my hope that next year’s budget will see even 
further conservation initiatives, particularly a retrofit program which would provide substantially more 
assistance than is currently being provided by the $1,000 interest-free loan the government offers to assist in 
home insulation. 
 
Retrofit assistance should be extended to commercial operators and not just limited to residential consumers. 
Our government, in my view, should look seriously at providing this assistance in the form of a grant, 
instead of simply limiting it to an interest-free loan. In my view, instead of providing millions of dollars in 
the budget to assist the oil companies in exploring for new energy sources, we should instead transfer some 
of that money into a major investment in energy conservation in Saskatchewan. In my 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
733 

view, energy conservation should form the foundation of the Saskatchewan energy policy, and instead of an 
investment of approximately 5 per cent of the energy security fund that energy conservation now represents, 
it should represent an investment of 30 to 40 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will continue to call on our government to implement basic structural changes in energy policy and these 
should include time-of-day metering to provide a financial incentive for industry and residential consumers 
to reduce their electricity demand during peak hours of the day, thus reducing the need to build additional 
generating capacity to meet peak demands. We should see in this province the introduction of an insulation 
code as part of the Saskatchewan building code. it makes no sense to me for us to continue to allow poorly 
constructed, poorly insulated homes to keep going up around the province. I hope the cabinet will see fit to 
introduce such an insulation code as part of the building code in the coming year. 
 
I also want to urge the government to reverse the energy rate structure for both natural gas and electricity so 
consumers would get a lower base rate and would then pay more for energy as they use more, rather than the 
present system in which consumers pay less as they use more. The reversal of the rate structure will not 
apply across the board, but should at least apply within each category of user, and be a basic mechanism for 
encouraging energy conservation. In the area of energy conservation and urban policy, one of the budget 
measures which I am particularly pleased with, Mr. Speaker, is the announcement of a major increase in 
urban transit funding — an immediate increase of 44 per cent and a longer term increase of 160 per cent. 
that’s an excellent initiative, Mr. Speaker. Good urban transit is an essential service in our cities. It’s a 
particularly essential service for those who don’t have access to a car during the day. It’s a major investment, 
in my view, Mr. Speaker, in energy conservation. I’m particularly pleased that the program has been 
designed in such a way that it not only offers a good base of funding but also has a formula which provides 
municipalities with extra assistance as their ridership rates for urban transit improve. I want to congratulate 
the Minister of Urban Affairs on that program. 
 
There are two other points I would like to stress about the urban affairs budget. First, I believe there is a 
great need for an experimental program within urban affairs which would encourage urban municipalities to 
look seriously at alternative forms of subdivision design which would make subdivisions more people 
oriented and would help ensure that subdivisions are not outdated within a few years because of poor 
construction, poor layout and energy inefficient planning. I, therefore, believe, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Department of Urban Affairs should establish a number of important new objectives which municipalities 
should attempt to work toward and for which they could obtain assistance in experimenting with design 
ideas in a new subdivision development. In my view, urban affairs should encourage a new set of urban 
design objectives, Mr. Speaker,. These objectives would include the following examples: 
 
1. Municipalities should be encouraged to design subdivisions which maximize energy efficiency by 
orienting streets and lots in such a way that the majority of houses in the subdivision are south facing to take 
advantage of the sun. 
 
2. Municipalities should be encouraged to implement right to sunlight bylaws for their new subdivisions. 
Urban affairs should draw up bylaws in this regard. 
 
3. New zoning plans should make provision for local corner store facilities so that residents are not simply 
dependent on a shopping centre which is frequently located a 



 
March 10, 1981 
 

 
734 

significant distance from their home. 
 
4. The Department of Urban Affairs should encourage the provision of pedestrian walks and bicycle paths 
(distinct from the main street network) in new subdivision plans to encourage people to travel short distances 
by means other than car. 
 
5. The Department of Urban Affairs should encourage municipalities to make provision in drawing up their 
subdivision plan for the establishment of a health clinic, day care facilities, and indoor recreational facilities 
in a central location in each neighborhood. 
 
6. When designing street networks, more consideration should be given to efficient servicing by urban 
transit. 
 
7. Urban affairs should encourage municipalities to undertake comprehensive tree-planting programs in new 
subdivision areas, and should encourage the establishment of urban allotment gardens. 
 
8. Urban affairs should encourage buffer spaces to be established between residences and major arterial 
roads where the traffic count exceeds 7,000 cars a day. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that special funding and planning support would be needed to get such a planning 
process under way on an experimental basis in various urban centres around the province. However, I 
believe that such design objectives or a modified version of them, could make an important contribution to 
humanizing some of the new areas of our cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have just a few more remarks to make, but I notice it’s just past 5 o’clock. I’d like to call it 5 
o’clock. I’ll be speaking for about five minutes when we resume after supper. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — It gives me great pleasure to announce the Saskatchewan hopper cars will 
tonight enter grain service on Canadian pacific lines in the western division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 108 cars have been issued from the manufacturer’s plant, and 40 will arrive in Winnipeg 
tonight to enter grain service. Official ceremonies marking the arrival of the cares in Saskatchewan will be 
held in Melville on Saturday, April 11, 1981. April 11 is the date of the arrival of the first Canadian National 
cars to Melville, the head office of the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation. 
 
The cars are being manufactured by Hawker Siddeley Canada Ltd., the first 500 in Trenton, Nova Scotia. A 
purchase agreement has been concluded with the Canadian Wheat Board for Saskatchewan to take 
possession of the cars as they leave Winnipeg tonight. An operating agreement has been reached with 
Canadian National, Canadian Pacific, and the Canadian Wheat Board for the operation of the cars. I’ll be 
glad to send the agreements over to the Leader of the Opposition once we have them organized and in place. 
 
The first cars manufactured have been allocated to Canadian Pacific because of the more serious congestion 
problems on CPR lines. The cars represent a landmark for Saskatchewan and I am pleased to present each 
MLA with the mugs you see before you 



 
March 10, 1981 

 
735 

to mark this occasion. All members, along with all farmers of Saskatchewan, are sincerely invited to inspect 
the cars on Saturday, April 11, 1981, in Melville. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister would provide us with serial numbers of the 
people’s cars so that we might depreciate them on our income tax. I agree that there is a need for more 
rolling stock in the grain handling industry. As we have done before in this Legislature, we have commended 
the minister for taking this step, although we had some criticism in the way he did it — setting up a Crown 
corporation and taking credit for a $55 million expenditure in agricultural estimates last year. All other 
jurisdictions, by the way, have had their cars rolling for some time. But I see that in this year’s estimates 
you’re taking credit for an additional $3 million for the same program. I understand that this is a payment to 
the heritage fund for the same $55 million that you took so much credit for in agriculture last year. I wonder 
if these are also included in that particular budget? It will be a pleasure to see the Saskatchewan cars rolling 
across the prairies. I know that it will do nothing but good for all farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


