






















































Hansard: April 14, 1981


(2196) 2197 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Third Session — Nineteenth Legislature 

 
Tuesday, April 14, 1981. 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 

 
CONSUMER AND COMMERCIAL AFFAIRS 

 
Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 4 

 
Item 1 

 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I would like to first of all introduce to the legislature the staff present: Deputy Minister 
Lynne Pearson, Director of Administration Al Dwyer, and Director of Licensing and Investigation Mac 
MacGillvray. We have other members of the staff. I will introduce them as they come forward. Thank you. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I would like to join the minister in welcoming his officials to the Assembly tonight. I am 
sure that they are going to enjoy the proceedings. I suppose the minister is hoping that it won’t take too long. By 
the looks of the smiles of his officials, they’re hoping it will take the whole evening. I hope that we can keep the 
smiles on everyone across the way, although I must confess that I have some things to say which aren’t pleasant 
and don’t warrant a smile. 
 
I want to, Mr. Vice-Chairman, point out the minister obviously isn’t aware that his Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs touches on everyone in the province of Saskatchewan. As a matter of fact, it touches on 
more people than do the co-operatives. It really does, Mr. Vice-Chairman, the Assembly realizes that each and 
every one of us is a consumer in one way or another. In these times of inflation, in these times of high interest 
rates, in these times of rising costs at every level, it seems obvious to me just by your own documents . . . Given 
the fact we’re supposed to be up to our necks in a buoyant economy here in Saskatchewan, what do you see fit to 
allot to the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs? The sum of $4 million! Now, how that makes any 
sense to the poor consumer out there who is right with his back against the wall wondering how he’s going to 
make ends meet the next day, and how your department can justify an expenditure of that nature is beyond me. 
There aren’t any members in this Assembly, bar but a few, who aren’t themselves faced with a difficult situation 
365 days of the year in terms of their financial arrangements, in terms of making ends meet (to use the old 
cliche). So you can well imagine what the plight of the poor individual in Saskatchewan is at this point in time. 
 
I think that that seems to be the very basis of my argument at this time. I say argument because if that’s the only 
amount of money that you have to expend on consumer and commercial affairs, then you obviously aren’t 
concerned. Now maybe you’re like great people of the past and can take that nothing and spread it among 
thousands; maybe you are, I don’t know. But how you take that paltry sum of money from this buoyant economy 
that we’re supposed to have, and spread that out to be an effective means as a department to assist Saskatchewan 
people in combatting inflation, rising prices, rising interest rates, is beyond me. Now, it’s going to be interesting, 
it’s going to be very interesting. 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2198 

I’ll tell you another thing, Mr. Vice-Chairman, and I want you to listen because these are very important 
comments, and you should be aware of them, as well as the minister. It’s a very important thing to note how this 
legislature, in particular the government (and even if we said the legislature, that’s more on your side than ours, 
so we’d be less guilty by a long shot) views the Department of Consumer Affairs – it’s rather a nothing 
department. That’s the attitude – "We’ll hold the big departments back." Just look at what we’re doing. After all, 
we’ve held social services off quite a while. I suppose you’re trying to give the minister all the time he needs. 
He’s trying to conjur up in his mind all the arguments that the government is going to lay on him. Well, I tell 
you, you haven’t a mind big enough to encompass them. And there are going to be a lot. But the point is this: the 
important departments that should be under review are being held to the last. Consumer affairs – "Well, that’s not 
important; we’ll slip that through some evening in the legislature. We’ll just slip that one through. That’s not 
important." That’s what you people are saying. Those are your tactics. We don’t call the shots on this side of the 
House – you people do. 
 
If you wanted to place a priority in the Department of Consumer Affairs, you would have put some money in it. 
You would have put some teeth in it, and you would have brought it before the House at a time when it would 
have been recognized – but you didn’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I’d maybe make a good preacher, and 
you would take a lot of preaching to, too. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I want to sit down and relax and enjoy a cup of coffee and listen to how you are going to 
justify that small amount of money for the Department of Consumer Affairs, considering you are supposed to 
have a buoyant economy. You have all this money, but you don’t have anything to recognize the plight of the 
consumers or the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Well, Mr. Vice-Chairman, I am rather surprised a bit at the opening remarks of the 
member – surprised because it comes from that particular party. When we look across the country and the world, 
we find that there’s a conservative movement going on in the United States under President Reagan. The 
direction that he is taking (and I would have thought the hon. member would have been in tune with that) is in 
fact a total relaxation, an easing of auto regulations and of environmental controls. Exactly the same situation is 
taking place over in Great Britain. I want to say that here in Saskatchewan with the department, I have, during the 
period of time that I have been minister, discovered a very important factor, namely, if the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs has the capacity to work with the consumer and in co-operation with the 
business community, there is no need for a tremendous amount of policing and overregulating. What we need is a 
continuation of what this department has been doing. Of course, there are areas of concern and areas where we 
may, in fact, increase the amount of particular protection. I think that a part of what we have been able to do is 
due to the efficiency and dedication of the staff in mutual co-operation of the department with the business 
community. It is perfectly clear to the member that the new department is in its formative stages and obviously, 
as the pieces are brought together into the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, the emphasis and 
the directions that we’ll take will develop over a period of time and should not happen without planning and 
direction. Accordingly, I feel that the overall protection that we’re giving to consumers stacks up well with other 
jurisdictions. I think that the consumer is generally satisfied and the business community has been able to work in 
conjunction with us. 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2199 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Vice-Chairman, for anyone who listening, they know without a shadow of a doubt 
that the minister just said nothing. He just made a lot of noise and he said literally nothing in terms of answering 
the very serious question that I have addressed to you as minister. It is a very serious question. Again, it just 
highlights exactly what I said. You people don’t take the Department of Consumer Affairs seriously. You don’t 
take it seriously. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Sure we do; sure we do. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — The member for Moose Jaw says, "Yes, sure we do; sure we do." Lip service, that’s all 
you’re paying. The minister who’s responsible for consumer affairs (it should be noted to all hon. members) was, 
in fact, the minister of social services. Prior to him, the Minister of Health was the minister of social services. It 
took the Minister of Health, the Minister of Consumer Affairs and the member for Shaunavon, who is the current 
Minister of Social Services – three ministers – two years to put one program together. Can you call that 
efficiency? I tell you it’s the height of inefficiency and incompetence. That, Mr. Vice-Chairman, is what we’re 
finding on a daily basis with this government – irresponsibility and inconsistency. They have lost their feeling for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve got letters in my office, Mr. Vice-Chairman, right now that are saying exactly that. This government isn’t the 
same government the old CCF used to be, the one that had some compassion for the average individual in 
Saskatchewan. Oh no, and they’re not. For those old CCFers out there who used to support your party (and I can 
say it and I’ve said it many times in this House) the CCF Party has done more for the province of Saskatchewan 
than any other party in the history of this province. That’s the CCF. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — That’s right and I’ll remember the echoes in these hallowed halls of your desk thumping 
when I said the CCF. You boys, the NDP, can’t take credit for what the CCF did, although I note that that’s what 
you do on a daily basis. You’re constantly living in the past and are going over all the old programs that were 
introduced by the CCF – all those wonderful things that happened yesterday. What about today? What about 
tomorrow, I say to you? What about tomorrow? That’s what the people of Saskatchewan want to know. Are they 
looking to the New Democratic Party to form the new Saskatchewan? I tell you, Mr. Vice-Chairman, no they are 
not. They’re looking to the Progressive Conservatives – progressive. Why even your own people in Manitoba 
have caught on that the NDP is a regressive party, one that looks always behind, always to the past. Some of their 
members have broken ranks. Look at what they’ve done. They’ve taken the progressive name; maybe they, 
themselves, intend to be progressive. Maybe they do. 
 
Well, Mr. Vice-Chairman and Mr. Minister, I want to go back to some of your comments that virtually said 
nothing. And that’s what you people do constantly – rhetoric, rhetoric and more rhetoric. I tell you that as a man, 
as a minister, you are full of rhetoric. I tell you and the Minister of Labor that you’re full of rhetoric, too, when it 
comes to dealing with labor problems. Rhetoric – it is nothing short of it. It’s nothing short of a tree with 
branches in full blossom that has no roots. The roots to your party were the CCF that was alive and well and 
strong and had a grip in this province, but not the NDP – not the NDP. 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2200 

Now, Mr. Minister, you have to go back to your old arguments of rhetoric. "Well, we think we’re doing as well 
in this department as the other provinces and other jurisdictions." I tell you, Mr. Vice-Chairman, for each and 
every department in this government, this province and the people in this province deserve better. They expect 
more than the other provinces because you, yourselves, are the ones who say that we have a great potential. But 
your Premier, at least, is honest enough to say that it will be 10 to 15 years before this potential benefit will 
eventually siphon down to the average man and woman on the street. And that’s a fact. I agree with him on that. 
He admits that, when he’s addressing the special joint committee on the constitution. But when he’s here in 
Saskatchewan, oh, it’s a different story. "We’re buoyant; our economy is stable; our unemployment is very 
stable. We don’t have an unemployment problem." I tell you we’ve already proved that, in the Department of 
Labor questioning. You have a labor problem all right – an unemployment problem. That is something to which 
you people haven’t been able to address yourselves. You’ve been sitting there with no people coming in. There 
have been no pressures put on you by an expanding population. And you haven’t, even at that, been able to 
handle the current problems with all this so-called money you’re supposed to have. 
 
For you to get up and say, "Well, we’re doing as well . . ." How well are you doing? In the budget speech, what 
did the Minister of Finance have to say about consumer affairs? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Nothing. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — That’s about it – nothing. He says in 1981 we will take new measures to protect 
Saskatchewan consumers. Recently this government established a new Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs. Now, the minister just said a few moments ago that it’s in the formulative stages. Look, Mr. 
Vice-Chairman, if it takes him that long to put that department together so it’s functioning well for the people of 
Saskatchewan, we can expect that it won’t really become effective for another two years – if it’s anything like 
your in-home care program. That wasn’t the grassroots peoples’ fault; that wasn’t the local boards; that wasn’t 
my constituents and Graham Taylor’s constituents; that was because of the mismanagement and the bureaucratic 
bumbling idiots you had in the Department of Social Services. The same thing is going to happen in consumer 
affairs – the same thing. 
 
Why isn’t the former minister responsible for SGI here? Why isn’t he? Check Hansard and find out – because 
the poor civil servant got caught in a conflict of interests on a mediation board. Yes sir. He was let go – zap, out 
he goes to be replaced by one of that hon. member’s campaign workers. That’s why he went. Now, that’s a fact; 
that’s on the record. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Oh. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — "Oh," – never mind "oh" ing to me. That’s on the record of this Assembly. The Premier 
said, "Hey, we can’t have one of our ministers being trapped up by the opposition like that. No siree." Poor Ed is 
gone. He’s not here now. What about Neil? I often wonder what the member for Kelvington-Wadena did. What 
did he do wrong? You know he must have done something. They tripped him up and booted him out. What about 
the former speaker of this very legislature? What happened to him? You dumped him off at his riding. "Hey, 
enough for you; you’ve had a ride; you’ve had the good times – not any more." It is this kind of political fooling 
around at the senior level which is costing the people of Saskatchewan literally millions of dollars. There is proof 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2201 

positive in SGI and a whole array of other departments. 
 
I should tell you that the stack of brown envelopes which comes with no signatures attached is growing. I don’t 
know what we’re going to do with it all. You may have to allot us new quarters. I understand you are working on 
some; I suppose we will have more room then. It’s coming; it is coming all the time, and at a growing rate. The 
minister is sitting there; he can’t understand, he doesn’t know what I’m talking about. But I will tell you very 
simply what we’re talking about. We are talking about you as minister responsible for consumer affairs. What are 
you doing. 
 
I will tell you what it must have been: it must have been that the competition was too great. That’s what the 
reasoning of the Minister of Social Services was when there were cries that there wasn’t enough money for social 
services. He said, "Well, I have just been recently appointed the minister, and I’m in a competitive position with 
the other ministers of cabinet, and I’m sorry I wasn’t able to achieve the amount of funds that I would have liked 
to have for my department." Now he says there’s lots of money. The Minister of Social Services says there’s lots 
of money for social services. We’ll see when we get to that department; we’ll see how much money you really 
have. 
 
The fact of the matter is that you boys over there in your cabinet are in competition with each other for funds for 
the various departments. And if the consolidated fund of the province of Saskatchewan, which is fed 70 cents on 
the dollar by the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, is being left to a potato scramble – a mad scramble between cabinet 
ministers for those funds – then I say we have come to a sad state in the province of Saskatchewan. You should 
be recognizing which department requires a priority, which one requires adequate funding, and which one could 
do with less funding on a priority basis. It’s that simple. 
 
I’m looking at the Department of Consumer Affairs, and I’m telling you, Mr. Minister, you have short-changed 
that department. And I’m asking you why. Was it because you had too much competition in your cabinet? If 
that’s your answer, I could agree with you on that. No problem there. But I want to go right back to it. I tell you 
for the people of Saskatchewan’s benefit, for the benefit of this Assembly, you have a responsibility to try to 
explain in some reasonable way why this department is entitled to $4 million. Now with that I’m going to give 
you another try. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — The opening remarks again leave me with some humor, really. The hon. member 
indicates the New Democratic Party is not the old CCF. I would like to indicate to him that for a party to be 
elected as one was in Quebec last night, there has to be a meeting of minds with the people. I want to say that our 
electoral success speaks well for us, and certainly we are able to meet the aspirations of a great majority of 
Saskatchewan people and we will continue to. 
 
I want to say that we live in a unique province – unique in its structure, unique in its economic development. We 
have in Saskatchewan, as nowhere else, a mixed economy with a substantial amount of the public sector in 
competition and working along side the private sector. This province is not subject to the uncontrolled free 
enterprise which exists in some other parts of the country. I want to say that with the presence of the public sector 
we are able to work with the labor force. We are able to develop the finest labor legislation. We are, through the 
housing corporation, able to meet some of the needs of the public. Government has not been afraid, through all 
the departments of government in this province, to reach out and meet the needs of the public. If the basic 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2202 

needs of the public are respected and met, it seems to me that the government is meeting the aspirations and the 
purpose for which it was elected. 
 
The department’s overall increase in funds was proportional to that of any other department in government. It 
rose from $3,668,460 to over $4,094,000, which represents 11.6 per cent. We have initiated programs in respect 
to the consumers in a new money management program. We have a greater production of further information 
which is more effective and an extension service helping consumers obtain information in order to function better 
in the market place. We are establishing a P.A. office. In the commercial field, we are reviewing the legislation in 
respect to the securities commission. 
 
I think the member across the way is blowing and blustering but not really making any significant sense because, 
as I said before, what we do not want to do is overregulate for the benefit of the consumer at the expense of the 
business community. Presumably that’s what the hon. member is saying: "Put more stringent legislation into 
place and tie the hands of business," rather than work toward, as I indicated, what we think is a pretty effective 
co-operative arrangement between the consumer and the business community. 
 
I’m not saying that the department will be or is static. I think that there are new problems confronting the 
consumer, certainly as we enter the electronic age. We are cognizant of those changes, and aware that the 
consumer often needs protection. This is the area in which we have been working, and will continue to work. I 
feel that on balance, with the nature and the type of government that we have, he is indicating that we go back to 
the old cliches. In our society in Saskatchewan, the overall protection of government involvement, both in the 
economic and in the governmental aspect, has already given a very great deal of support to the public. I would 
think that in the area of distribution of wealth we have programs in place which will distribute wealth throughout 
Saskatchewan to people at the various levels of income. The record of this government is self-evident. And I 
think that it will be once more endorsed when the election comes. I will be prepared to go on the record of this 
government and the record of this department. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Vice-Chairman, I’d like to very briefly review some of the comments. For the 
member to be so misinformed as to think that the NDP and the CCF are anything alike is totally absurd. I would 
just point out to the minister that I suppose the best analogy is this: to those people who for many years supported 
the old CCF party, the NDP is about as much CCF today as the Liberal Party in this country is a right-of-centre 
party. It isn’t. The Liberal Party is as far left as you people are, which has made it very easy for you to sneak into 
bed with them. In fact, you didn’t even sneak; you jumped in with both feet in broad daylight. 
 
What are the comments of the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg? He says that the Parti Quebecois victory is a 
wonderful thing. Socialist! It’s very interesting that the NDP in Saskatchewan sees itself as a protege of the 
separatist Parti Quebecois. Isn’t that an interesting comment? Isn’t that an interesting insinuation that the member 
for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg left with our Assembly tonight? You know, that doesn’t surprise me any more than 
these people being in there with the Liberals does. It doesn’t surprise me at all. The Premier tried jumping in, but 
he couldn’t get in because Ed got there first. It’s a sickening thing, really, when you think about it. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’re very contradictory. You talk about regulations and you contradict 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2203 

yourself. You say that I’m suggesting that we have more regulations. I don’t remember talking about more 
regulations. I didn’t even say that. Of course, Hansard, again, will verify that. I didn’t even mention the word 
"regulation." You used it as a means of attempting to defend that paltry $4 million. That’s the position you’re in. 
 
At the very end of your comments, what do you say? You say, "We have more programs in place." Well, how do 
you have a program if you don’t have a regulation? Do you have a bunch of programs out there without any 
regulations? Are you saying that your programs in the Department of Consumer Affairs don’t have regulations or 
guidelines? You talk about a concern for regulations, and then turn around and tell me that you have more 
programs in place. There’s no consistency, whatsoever, in your comments, none whatsoever. 
 
I want to lead into a real concern which the consumers of this province have. Before I get into that, though, I 
want to ask you a very simple question. Are you prepared to go on record here tonight and say that the amount of 
money which you have budgeted for the year 1981 in the estimates is adequate in your judgment? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I want to comment, first of all, with respect to the rather superfluous comment which 
was raised in regard to the Parti Quebecois winning the election. I want to say that their victory was evidenced in 
Canada because they were a good government. That came from a large number of sources. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How would you know:? You wouldn’t know the difference. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Good government? Oh, I’ve lived with it since 1975. It’s easy to recognize it when 
you have an opportunity to work within it. 
 
I don’t think there is a contradiction in what I’m saying. I’m saying that, overall, as consumer protection 
increases substantially, it does require more legislation and more regulation. The hon. member is saying that he 
wants more consumer protection. What I am saying is that one of the ways it has been achieved (I indicated this 
by the United States auto industry) was by regulations. What happened there, as I indicated earlier, is that they 
have been decontrolling. 
 
There were 34 regulations to be eased or eliminated. They ranged from auto bumper standards to various 
pollutant emission requirements. The administration also wants to scrap the fuel efficiency standards. All of that 
protection to consumers, in the United States, is the result of regulations. 
 
What President Reagan is doing is taking off some 34 pollution and safety regulations, with respect to the auto 
industry. What I am saying is that we are attempting to meet a balance. Sure, one can move quickly into that area. 
Sure, there is a large number of consumers in society. But one must recognize a balance between the functioning 
of the business community and looking at the other aspect of providing the protection to the consumer. It seems 
to me that there has to be that balance. 
 
I think we have done a good job in reaching that balance. With respect to the size of the budget, I want to say to 
the hon. member, as I said before, the increase in expenditure is relative to other departments. I am confident that 
with this budget we can, in fact, carry on the work. I think we can fulfill our commitment to the satisfaction of 
the consumer. I think that continuing as we have, working with the business community, we can develop a good 
working relationship which won’t require a considerable number of 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2204 

additional staff and additional bureaucracy. 
 
Obviously, what the member is saying is, "Build up the department; get more staff; send them out to check the 
business community; regulate." What we are doing is providing a very substantial amount in providing 
information. We feel that an informed consumer will, in fact, do a considerable amount of his own protection. 
We feel that working in co-operation with the business community will enable us to resolve many of the 
problems which develop between consumer and vendor. This is the basic approach. I feel confident that the 
people of Saskatchewan will be well-served. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Obviously, again, anyone who was listening to the Minister of Consumer Affairs will 
know that this member is attempting to defend the main argument that I am making – you do not have enough 
funds in this department. 
 
I have at no time, to this point, suggested overregulating or underregulating. I haven’t talked about the Reagan 
administration yet. I didn’t discuss the Parti Quebecois. I haven’t been into any of those things yet. I just asked 
you a simple question, as Minister of Consumer Affairs, as to how you justify such a paltry sum of money. It was 
a simple, basic question. 
 
In your very weak attempt to try to deflect the whole matter, what did you say? You said that I was advocating 
more consumer protection, which would mean more regulations, more bureaucracy. That’s what you were 
saying. I didn’t say that. I don’t remember hearing myself say that. Well, don’t put words in my mouth. I have 
enough that come out on their own. I don’t need you to put them in my mouth. But then you turn around, and if 
everyone is listening he says, "ha, ha. What the member for Moosomin is attempting to do is get us on the same 
flight line that the U.S.A. is on. Deregulate. Deregulate." 
 
Well, I might be talented, but I can’t regulate on the one hand and deregulate on the other. Now, you can charge 
me with one or the other. And either way – whichever one you do – it is putting words in my mouth, because I 
didn’t say either one of them. You could take either argument, but not both of them. And I think that’s important 
for anybody who was listening carefully to what he said. He said I was going to (and I didn’t, but he said I was 
going to) build up this Department of Consumer Affairs with an injection of mass expenditures into the 
department, overregulate it, fill it full of bureaucrats. Then he turned around and said, "What the member for 
Moosomin is advocating is deregulation as in the United States." Well, I mean really, how irresponsible! And 
isn’t that the very issue I opened up on? 
 
There is an irresponsible attitude sweeping the New Democratic government in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And it sure didn’t miss the minister responsible for consumer affairs when it swept through. And I’m telling you 
again that on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, we’re very concerned. On behalf of the consumers, we’re 
concerned that you can’t do a heck of a lot effectively with $4 million. 
 
Now, since you brought Reagan into it and the United States, if you want to know what they are attempting to do 
down there, I’ll tell you. It’s very simple. What they’re attempting to do is to broaden the tax base. We have the 
second highest corporate tax here in the province of Saskatchewan of anywhere in this country. We have the third 
highest personal income tax level of anywhere in Canada. But we have that high tax level in Saskatchewan 
because you have narrowed the tax base. There are fewer and 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2205 

fewer people paying more and more taxes. 
 
I gave you the figures a while ago — 70 cents out of every dollar in the consolidated fund comes from hip 
national; 24 cents comes from the great resource policy of the New Democratic government . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 70 cents. Well, you mark that one down. And you try to answer that. What I’m telling you is that 
you’ve taken that wide tax base we used to have and squeezed it right up here like that, and it shot you boys clean 
to the top of a centralized government. 
 
You say, looking down there, "Oh, the folks aren’t raising enough money for consolidated fund. Well, then, we’ll 
have to go into this business to generate capital ourselves." Very simply, Mr. Chairman, what this government 
has done (and it’s reflected directly on the consumers) is removed the individual’s ability to accumulate capital. 
When you do that, naturally an individual doesn’t make any money. And when someone doesn’t make any 
money, he doesn’t pay any taxes. So if they don’t pay any taxes, then the government is looking at their 
consolidated fund, and they’re saying, "My goodness, we’re short. Well, where are we going to get it? The 
people aren’t generating wealth because we took away their incentives, so we’ll have to go in and we’ll have to 
generate it." 
 
That, of course, is all in the master plan. That isn’t something that happened by a stroke of genius or luck. It was 
a design set out on some three decades ago. And you’re very effective at it. You’ve arrived at that point. That 
gives you the perfect reason to say, "Well, we have to generate wealth somewhere, so we’ll have to go in and do 
it." So now you can go in and nationalize or take over businesses and get involved in the capital development, 
which individuals would do on their own if they were given the opportunity. 
 
How does that reflect on the consumers? Very simply, it has removed the ability of an individual in society to 
effectively combat inflation, because he can’t go out and make any more money since the opportunities aren’t 
there. If the opportunities were there, he would be doing it – you can count on that – and you’d have a wide tax 
base. Then you wouldn’t have all the problems in the consumer affairs department that you have. The people of 
Saskatchewan wouldn’t have the problem that they have as consumers in this province, because they would be 
able, as individuals in society, to combat rising prices, inflation and higher interest rates. But they can’t do it here 
in Saskatchewan. If you people were honest with me you would admit that you’ve run into a lot people who have 
just finally said, "Well, to heck with it. I’m not working from January to June just to pay my taxes." And they are 
not. That is the problem. 
 
In the United States, the Reagan administration is going to attempt to broaden the tax base to give individuals in 
society the potential ability, at least, to combat inflation on their own. But you people wouldn’t understand that. 
That is economics far and above what you would have the ability to comprehend. 
 
I’ll come back to my basic question. Obviously we are not going to get an answer as to why you can only see $4 
million as being the proper amount of money for the Department of Consumer Affairs. I asked you a point blank 
question which you didn’t answer. I don’t know whether Mr. Chairman took note of that or not, but you didn’t 
answer it. I asked you to state categorically in this House whether, as far as you are concerned, as the minister 
responsible for consumer and commercial affairs, the funding as set out in this budget is adequate. This is a 
simple question. You can stand up and you don’t have to make a speech. Stand up, look at your mike, and say, 
yes or no. 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2206 

That’s simple – yes, or no. That’s not too difficult. Now I want you to answer that question. Your officials are 
there. Talk to them. Say, "Hey, do you think the funding is adequate?" If it isn’t, say so. Be honest. If you’re 
honest you won’t get into the kinds of problems that the minister responsible for SGI is in. So I want you to 
answer that question. 
 
I want you to answer another question, too. I don’t know whether you like math or not – maybe not – but you are 
a lawyer, so you must have done some studying. Do you have the first question marked down? I do want an 
answer. If I don’t hear an answer I’ll be coming back to ask you again. Now, I’d like to know if you know how 
many centimetres are in a foot. Mark that one down. I’d like to know if you know how many metres there are in 
12 feet. Mark that down. If it was 50 above in Saskatchewan, what temperature would it be in Celsius? Have you 
any idea? If you had 10 pounds of anything, how many kilograms would that be? Do you have any idea? You are 
the minister responsible for consumer affairs. Those are the kinds of problems that the people of Saskatchewan 
are attempting to solve, and it’s not easy. If you are the minister and you can’t answer those questions, how do 
you expect the poor consumer to? There are three or four of them which I’ve given you there, and if you would 
have the answer just like that, then that’s fine. So there are two questions. I want to know whether or not you 
think the funding is adequate. On the other question of metric and imperial conversions, I’d like to know if you 
know those answers. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, I would appreciate it if the hon. member would ask the questions, and 
I’ll determine the answers. I want to go through it very slowly because there seems to be a problem in his 
comprehension. I was saying at the outset that there is an inconsistency in the whole approach; it is inconsistent 
with his being a member of the Tory party. Two principles that they work on are the uncontrolled free enterprise 
system and with that goes a lack of the essential regulation of that business community. I am saying that if you 
are going to have a considerable amount of consumer protection, what results in the development of that is (as 
was found out in the United States) that you have a considerable amount of regulations. Thirty-four alone in the 
car industry are being taken off. 
 
I want to say that I rather resent the member’s comment in saying that here in Saskatchewan what we have done, 
in effect, is taken away the incentive of the people of Saskatchewan. And I want to say that I differ with him. I 
think that the people of Saskatchewan are, and will continue to be, a very ambitious, very independent and very 
determined group – and very wise politically. 
 
He wants to go into the area of inflation without seeking to find the cause. He uses inflation as his example, and 
one of the essential causes, as is put forth by economists, is government spending or overexpenditure. That has 
consistently been put forward. It has been put forward by the Tory party when they were running for office, and 
it has been (as I said) put forward by various economists across the country. 
 
I want to say that under successive Liberal and Tory federal governments, we have had massive deficits in 
Ottawa. That’s the cause of inflation: monetary irresponsibility. And I want to say that in Saskatchewan what we 
have done is have fiscal responsibility. We have brought in a balanced budget and I want to say that we are very 
proud of that balanced budget. Also, we are proud of the method of financing our programs, commensurate with 
that spending ability of this province. I think that in the form of government that we have here, and with the 
responsible manner of the planning and the staging of our economic development, we have been able to alleviate 
many of the 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2207 

problems that have happened, for instance, in Alberta – problems of very rapid economic growth and as a 
consequence, a tremendous amount of social problems and upheaval. I want to say that Barclays Bank recently 
indicated that it wanted to come to Saskatchewan because of the future and prospect of that future. And one of 
the things they indicated was the way in which this government planned and staged its development, rather that 
wholesale unplanned development. 
 
I want to say that as a consequence of the type of government we have in Saskatchewan a great amount of 
economic and social protection is provided to the people of this province. I want to say that in the whole area of 
housing and the programs that we have developed under Sask Housing, the renters’ rebate, the mortgage rebate 
program, the property improvement program – a host of programs which have protected the individual, the 
consumer of services. 
 
I want to say that in health care (and you won’t like that), this is one of the few provinces in Canada where we 
are not charging the consumer a deterrent fee or a surcharge to receive health care. That is a responsible action of 
government and that is why we have been receiving the support the public has been giving to this party, the NDP, 
as it did previously to its predecessor, the CCF. 
 
I want to say that I am confident in the fiscal management of this province. I am proud to be a member of 
treasury board. We will continue to strive to improve our department. I am confident, as I said, that we can fulfil 
the expectations of the public with respect to the budget which we have allotted to us. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — I’m not even going to reply to the member. There are a number of our members who 
apparently want to ask some questions. I will just simply say this: the minister is what I said he was in the 
beginning. He’s totally irresponsible; he’s totally blinded by the socialist myth that prevails over there and all 
that I’ve received in answer to my questions tonight has been a lot of philosophical, socialistic rhetoric that I’ve 
quite frankly heard enough of. He never answered one of my questions I asked here tonight. I’m going to let 
some of our other members attempt to get some answers out of him. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A question to the Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs. I take it that, as minister 
responsible for the consumer, your responsibility also relates to the farming community in the province of 
Saskatchewan which I would assume you would class as one of your consumers. My question to you relates to 
the question that has arisen in the North Battleford area with regard to certain farmers. I’m sure you are aware of 
the situation without my having to lay it out. 
 
Can you advise this Assembly, first, as to whether or not legislation will be coming down to protect those people, 
and I know the Minister of Agriculture has indicated that it would be, and, secondly, whether or not you are 
prepared to pick up some of the costs that those farmers are going to face with regard to the particular 
circumstances in North Battleford? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — As the hon. member has indicated, this question has been raised previously. I want to 
say the essential legislation that we have in the department is The Consumer’s Product Warranties Act, which 
deals with consumer products. 
 
With respect to agricultural products, they have been put under The Agricultural 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2208 

Implements Act. I think you’re familiar with it – it details the type A contract and has other provisions for 
protection and repairs and so on. That is where that essential aspect dealing with the farmers is. 
 
I want to say in direct answer to your question that, yes, as the minister said today (the Department of Agriculture 
is taking the leading role on the premise that I have given) our departments have been in discussion to look at 
ways in which that type of situation could be prevented from occurring again. I know there are various ways that 
one could look at it. You can look at the possibility of bonding the implement dealers. That is a very expensive 
method to reach that high a figure that is involved here – something like a quarter of a million dollars. The cost is 
somewhere between $7.50 and $10.00 per thousand for bonding. The alternative that we have looked at is to 
develop assurance funds, where each implement dealer would make a contribution. This is somewhat cheaper 
than actual bonding. Perhaps it can get to a level higher than that. That is an area to be looked at. The other area 
is in respect to farmers who deal in very high contracts where, as a consequence of something going wrong in 
this nature, their loss is very substantial. 
 
As you know motor dealers are bonded. I’m reviewing that aspect but I doubt if it is high enough. It is $5,000, I 
believe. Relative to the cost of the automobile it is some greater protection. 
 
Certainly, we are looking at that and I am working with my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, and we will 
keep you advised of our progress. I don’t think there is a final decision as to how the remedy is going to be 
brought in but certainly we are hopeful of getting one. 
 
With respect to defraying some of the costs that had been incurred by the farmers, I think that has to be reviewed 
with some degree of caution. First of all, I am not sure that the court cases are completely finished. I know it was 
at the district court and the court of appeal. I’m not sure whether the appeal, if it were possible to go to the 
supreme court . . . I don’t know if they are anticipating that and I don’t know if the time has expired. We have to 
take a look at this. There are some mechanisms put in place already, and you are probably familiar with them. 
 
The Saskatchewan branch of the Canadian Bar Association has started a trust fund for it and I commend them for 
that. Some of you will obviously be aware of the leading figure, Mr. Larry Kyle, vice-president of the branch, 
who initiated it. 
 
I think also there are possibilities that there will be some discussion between the Guaranty Trust Company of 
Canada and the farmers. I understood they were having some discussion relative to the court decisions and where 
the matter stood. Those are considerations that have to be looked at. We would also have to look at the 
implications of getting in at this stage of the game in respect to funding some of their losses. On that one, as the 
minister said today, we have not come to any decisions. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — You tended today, or the minister tended today, to attempt to deflect the question that any 
contribution that would be made would go to Guaranty Trust. I think you, as a member of the legal profession, 
are obviously aware of the fact that Guaranty Trust has a right against the farmers based on the existing law in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and it is a matter of whether or not they are going to execute a given judgment (if 
it goes to that stage) and seize equipment or grain or encumber land or whatever it’s going to be. That is the 
existing legal mechanism. Any contributions 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2209 

would, in the end, end up in the farmer’s pocket and not in the hands of Guaranty Trust or any other trust 
company. Guaranty Trust doesn’t necessarily have to be singled out because it could have been any other trust 
company, and very often in the past has been other trust companies. So I would like you to clarify that point 
because, if you are to follow that suggestion, I think you should be cautioning the farming public of 
Saskatchewan and the lawyers of Saskatchewan not to make contributions because, according to the logic of the 
Minister of Agriculture, these will be going to Guaranty Trust and not to the farmers. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I think that the trust fund was set up by the Saskatchewan branch of the 
Canadian Bar Association and they can make up their own minds. I think that group will determine, without me 
telling them, where it is going. So I don’t think that is particularly a problem. What I want to say is that there 
have been some initiatives set forth, as I said, by the Saskatchewan Bar Association. If my reports are correct, I 
understood there to be an offer by the trust company also, which would in fact match dollar for dollar what came 
to the trust fund. In other words, it would eliminate part of the claim or part of the debt, I guess, owing to them. 
So that, I think, has to be looked at with considerable care for the reasons I indicated: the fact of the precedent; 
the fact of whether it is going to the supreme court (I don’t know if that’s a factor); and thirdly, whether the 
system which is in process now will in fact resolve it. I think it certainly was a very unfortunate situation. 
 
It is very difficult to anticipate as Minister of Consumer Affairs all problems which can be encountered in the 
business community. As you know as a lawyer, too, the court in its wisdom indicated that there was an 
assignment and the dealer in this instance was not, in fact, an agent for Guaranty Trust or for the assignee. 
Clearly, the problem which arose is that there was a trust built up dealing with an implement dealer for years and, 
as a consequence, it went this direction. I might, only as a point of conjecture, indicate that perhaps if you had 
been dealing with a locally based bank or credit union, it is a possibility that the local situation may well have 
been known more readily to the general community. That’s speculation on my part, but it’s a possibility because 
I know from my dealings in a smaller community that there is a fair amount of knowledge as to the general 
situation by local financial institutions. And I don’t know whether Guaranty Trust had an office located in North 
Battleford or not, but I understand that its headquarters is in Toronto. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — One further question. I think the answer you have basically given me is that the legislation 
will be coming forthwith, and that the Government of Saskatchewan will not be making any contributions to the 
fund set up by the law society. The trust company (and the benevolent people of Saskatchewan feel that they 
should) will be the people who contribute. So I take that to be your statement. 
 
Mr. Minister, you are also in charge of the securities commission. There were some cases involving the securities 
commission last year. A constant problem that seems to be occurring with any violations under the securities 
commission is the penalty sections and the enforcement of any of those sections. What I’m talking about is a 
perhaps less than reputable person selling, let’s say, shares of a non-public company – a private company – 
which, as you know, is restricted to 50 shareholders. You can get into various schemes by which they sell the 
shares to various companies, therefore spreading it out to more than 50 and going on quite substantially. When 
those kinds of things are happening, the problem, quite frankly, is that the penalties coming down are almost 
negligible compared to the amount of take the particular person is obtaining. 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2210 

Do you have any comments, as the minister responsible for that, on perhaps toughening up some of the penalties 
for securities commission offences? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — In respect to the provisions of the penalty sections of the securities commission, I want 
to indicate to the hon. member that yes, indeed, we are looking at a revision of The Securities Act, and looking at 
the penalty section in order to attempt to make them probably somewhat stiffer than they are at the present time. 
We hope to be doing that during the course of the year in reviewing it. Some of the other provinces are already 
working on it and we have been monitoring what they are doing. 
 
With the continuing growth and economic boom of the province, there’s much more economic activity. As a 
consequence, we are looking at the whole area of securities. One area that is brought to my mind is the 
commodity futures, and certainly we’re looking in that area also. There was apparently a firm that did in fact 
come from Chicago or somewhere to set up to sell commodity futures. It did not last very long in the province, 
but I don’t think any of the public, as such, were hurt in the purchase of futures, from what I gather. But they 
folded up and left some debts behind, for advertising, rentals, and things of that nature. 
 
Yes, we want to take a complete and comprehensive review in this whole area, and to strengthen the penalties, as 
you indicated. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I take it from what you are saying (and I absolutely disagree with it) that in fact there’s an 
economic boom, and therefore, there are more rip-offs. Is that what you’re basically telling us? Are you saying 
that the amount of scams, frauds and rip-offs is on a substantial increase in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I don’t think that’s quite what I’m saying. I’m just saying that as you get more 
economic activity, many of the things which previously weren’t going on in Saskatchewan now go on. I give 
commodity futures as an example. There was not sufficient legislation governing them. Why do people come to 
Saskatchewan who were not here before? I think it is attributable, partly, to the economic upgrading of the 
economy. And accordingly, new activities come forward. Therefore, what we have to do in the general area of 
security legislation is upgrade it to meet that increased activity and new type of activity. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Okay. One further question with regard to that. Could you provide for us the increased 
number of files that are being investigated by the securities commission in the past year and the year before? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — The significant parts which I have here are in respect to the activities of the securities 
commission for the past year. First, there is an increase in preliminary prospectus receipts from 158 to 252. There 
is an increase in discretionary exemption orders from 40 to 59, an increase in the number of investigations 
undertaken from 84 to 237, an increase in administrative hearings from 1 to 22. Those are the four items which I 
have summarized here. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Chairman, there are a few questions I want to ask concerning the Saskatchewan Real 
Estate Association. Mr. Minister, is it possible to assess fees or to compel a person to adhere to the policies of a 
non-profit association registered under The Societies Act of Saskatchewan to which that person does not belong? 
Now, I can put it another way. Is it the policy of this government, by regulation or order in council, to give an 
association registered under The Societies Act the power to control 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2211 

a person’s activities, that person not having consented to adhere or abide by the constitution, bylaws and objects 
of that society? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I sort of expected that question. As the member may be aware, The Real Estate 
Broker’s Act, section 5(3) provided for bonding of all real estate brokers prior to licensing. Section 23 of the act 
provided for forfeiture for bond and established conditions and procedures for forfeiture. That is what the 
previous act stated. It required, in order for licensing, that the real estate broker would get a bond. Secondly, it 
provided for forfeiture of that bond under certain circumstances. 
 
Last session, 1979-80, there were amendments to the act. Under the provisions of that act, rather than have each 
individual broker purchase bonds, there was established an assurance fund to be paid into what is called the 
association. But the association is the association under the act. The association holds that contribution in an 
assurance fund. The reasons that we went from bonding to the assurance fund is that, basically, bonding became 
very expensive for the individual. Putting it into the assurance fund is much cheaper for the smaller broker. So, 
that’s basically what we have. With respect to the assurance fund, it is held in trust by the association pursuant to 
the act, but any expenditures which are made from it or any payments similar to the bond forfeiture, have to be 
approved by the superintendent of insurance. For the administration of that fund, the association is allowed, I 
believe, 10 per cent. 
 
Basically, what I want to indicate to you is that it’s a removal of the very expensive bonding into a system of an 
assurance fund. I’ll just give you an example. It indicates here that the cost of bonding is $7.50 to $10 per $1,000, 
with a minimum fee of $40. Many of the brokers were bonded very low. It just wasn’t sufficient. Rural brokers 
were only bonded to the extent of $2,000 before. Saskatoon and Regina brokers were bonded to $10,000, and 
brokers in other cities to $5,000. Well, that wasn’t a sufficient amount of protection in the event a problem arose. 
We wanted to establish greater protection but maintain a reasonable cost. As a consequence, what we did was 
establish the assurance fund. The fee for an individual is $100 for an 18-month period ending June 30, 1982, for 
$25,000 coverage, with a maximum of $15,000 on one claim. If we would have stayed with the bonding system 
and had increased it to the level which we thought was reasonable, it would have cost $250. So, we have gone 
from the penal bond into an assurance fund (which is protected in so far as the use of the funds is concerned) and 
have given the individual broker better coverage for less money. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, it’s a little difficult to follow you when you talk in circles like you do, but I 
was following you fairly closely. I still don’t understand the reason. Who requested this in the first place? Did the 
real estate association of Saskatchewan ask for this, or was this just done by your department without consulting 
the real estate association? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — No, I’m advised that there was consultation with the Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Association. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — All right. If they consulted with the Saskatchewan Real Estate Association, would that be 
with the members of the Saskatchewan Real Estate Association? They have members and they also have 
non-members. There are a lot of people in this province who do not belong to the Saskatchewan Real Estate 
Association. Who did they contact? Who was doing the consulting here? 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2212 

HON. MR. KOSKIE: — As you indicated, Saskatchewan real estate people have an association. Of course, it 
has members. It was with that group that the superintendent of insurance, Mr. Saunders, discussed the concept 
and worked and arrived at a position. So, yes, there was consultation. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Do you think it’s fair, Mr. Minister. Going throughout rural Saskatchewan and talking to 
a lot people, I’ve had a terrific amount of complaints from the non-members, who are being assessed and were 
never consulted in the first place. What about the non-members? This is what I’m getting at. If the real estate 
association members have agreed to this and think it’s fine – what about the non-members? This is what the issue 
is about: the non-members. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I indicated to you that the essential discussion was with the real estate association. 
That does not include, granted, all of the members. But I want to say to the hon. member, as I have indicated to 
you, we were going to increase the amount of the bond because we felt that it just wasn’t sufficient – $2,000, 
$5,000, $10,000 in the two major cities. And we had the options: first, simply go ahead and increase it so that 
they have the proper protection, or at least a reasonable protection. We could have done that. I think it encumbent 
upon us to upgrade that protection. Secondly, we could try to get a scheme (and I must say a scheme that is 
working in other provinces), namely, the assurance fund. As I demonstrated on the basis of it, if we had just 
increased the bond, it would have cost about $250 for everybody for the $25,000 coverage and maximum of 
$15,000 on any one claim. But we’re doing this through this collective contribution of all, providing it for $100 
for 18 months. So I don’t know where the complaint is, because we would have gone one way or the other. What 
we were able to do is to give a better deal through the assurance fund than going the other route. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Have you had any complaints or inquiries from any individuals in the province who 
aren’t satisfied with this? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I have to admit I’ve had one that I am aware of. But certainly, I have had one brought 
to my attention. I am not aware of others, but I could check that to be perfectly sure. One, certainly, that I am 
aware of. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — When you get back to talk about the bonding and how important this was, can you tell 
me how much money was paid out in 1980 for bonds? How much money was paid out in 1980? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Are you asking about forfeiture of bonds? 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — How much money did you have to pay out if somebody had a problem and you had to 
pay out on their behalf, how much had to be paid out to cover a person’s bond? There must be a figure here. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — No, I am advised that there was no forfeiture of bonds during 1980. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Well, then, that’s exactly what we’re getting at, Mr. Minister. Why go through all this 
commotion if there is no problem to start with. If it’s correct to do this for the real estate association of 
Saskatchewan, are you now going to do it for the motor vehicles association, the cattlemen’s association, and . . . 
(inaudible) . . . association – there are all kinds of them. Are you going to do it for them all? 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2213 

You never had a problem here. All you’ve done is made one. You have unsatisfied people out in the country right 
now. Do you think it’s fair that a man, an agent by himself, one person, is now being charged $100 minimum – 
$100 is what he’s being charged – while there are groups in the city here or any city in the larger areas where 
there are, I think, 5 to 14 that only pay $250? What you are doing is the opposite of what your government is 
always saying. You’re penalizing the small man and helping the big guy. What has happened to set you in this 
different direction you’ve taken? Why did you get involved? Why did you bring it up? Why is the Saskatchewan 
Real Estate Association even interested if you never paid out a bond? You’re still covered for only $25,000. If 
anyone gets into serious difficulty, what is $25,000 compared to what you had before for $2,000? It has to be the 
biggest joke ever to try to put something through, to put a pot full of money together that you’re not going to 
need. You didn’t need it last year. You admitted you didn’t pay out even $1. 
 
So straighten this out. Give me some good answers. Get to the bottom of why you’re done this. You’re not telling 
me the facts, Mr. Minister, when you say that we’re going to save a lot of money and that this bonding is much 
cheaper for everybody. How could it be cheaper if you didn’t have a problem to start with? Now, give me some 
facts instead of just fiddling around. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I don’t have a full comparison here, but I was just checking to see whether there are 
other provinces which have a similar type of protection. I am advised that, depending on the turnover or size of 
the realtor in Alberta, it goes up to $100,000. In upgrading the bonds, if you take a look at the motor dealers, they 
were set some time ago at $5,000. Perhaps that has to be raised. Obviously, what you do if you decide you should 
have that type of protection . . . I don’t think that necessarily, because you don’t have a forfeiture in a given year, 
you shouldn’t have protection. 
 
One of your members questioned me with respect to the farmer out in North Battleford. I suppose, if we had an 
assurance fund among the dealers, that would have been covered, but I don’t work in law. I don’t remember 
another case similar to the one in North Battleford. I would have thought it to be pretty good protection. You 
can’t have it both ways. You can’t have me bringing something in to protect the farmer and have the assurance 
fund or legislation, or some agent to protect them, while on the other hand you say that just because there isn’t a 
forfeiture that year, we should do away with it and that I did something which wasn’t requested and wasn’t 
necessary. 
 
What I’m saying to you is that we try to work with the industry to achieve a goal at the cheapest possible rate. I 
think it can be demonstrated that’s $100 for 18 months. It’s for $25,000 coverage, I believe, with a maximum of 
$15,000 on any one claim. That’s the rationale. There’s nothing sinister about it. If you want to say that we 
should go to every individual, I suppose that’s the ideal. I don’t think we would get a total consensus even if we 
did. But I think that we have a fair representation of support. To my knowledge I have had, as I recall, only one 
complaint. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Naturally, if you go to the real estate . . . I’ll tell you what they’re saying, because I’ve 
been on the telephone and have talked to many of the real estate firms in the city of Regina. Do you know what 
they are doing? They are laughing at you. They said, "Naturally, we like it, because if we have 20 or 30 people in 
our firm there are is a lot less money and we are not interested in the bond at all." It doesn’t mean a thing. If you 
have 14 people (I have the rate here; I might be wrong but I think it’s 5 to 14), the charge is $250. If I’m wrong, 
you can correct me on that. What is the right fee for that? I understand that for the first five, it’s $100 for an 
individual; then when he gets to five he 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2214 

can have a real estate association with up to 14 people for $250. Well, naturally, they like it. They only have to 
come up with $250 for the whole group, but they are still only bonded for $25,000 for 14 people, so it takes them 
back to $2,000 per person. 
 
I have yet to find a real estate person who will tell me that the bond part makes any difference at all. If there is a 
group of them, they like it; if it’s an individual out in the country, naturally he is against it, because you haven’t 
given him anything with your bond. It doesn’t mean a thing to him. If you really want to do something 
worth-while and have some happy people, why don’t you include the motor vehicle association of 
Saskatchewan? If you’re going to include one, include them too. Tell me why you can’t include them. Why bar 
the motor vehicle association and just take in the real estate association? It’s the biggest joke I ever heard of. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I don’t have the complete schedule here, but the information which I have before me 
indicates that a broker with up to four people pays something like $200 and the majority of brokers would fall 
into this category. Now, that’s the information I have. Normally, in introducing a concept, you walk before you 
run. The department people felt they had a fair discussion with the industry and that they were agreeable to the 
concept. We are convinced that the basic protection is better and cheaper in the long run to the membership. 
 
Concerning the motor dealers, we will be looking at other areas. We will look at the options, whether it’s 
continuation of bonding, as you would propose, or whether it should be insurance funding. But certainly I will 
take a look at it. We are carrying on similar discussions with auctioneers, motor dealers and travel agents. It just 
so happened that we brought in this one first, but that’s not to say we are not intending to look at that concept for 
the others. I think they have the option and will see that the insurance fund makes more sense than the straight 
bonding. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Minister, we want to get off this tonight. I had a few more questions but your last 
statement makes sense to me. If you’ll just proceed that way, I don’t think the people out in the country will feel 
they are being penalized. A single real estate agent won’t feel that way if he knows you are working toward a 
goal. Perhaps this is what we need to move into, because if it’s good for one, it has to be good for another. But I 
still say to you, Mr. Minister, that you started on the real estate association when it wasn’t necessary because the 
people never asked for it. As I said before (and I want it on the record) there were no problems last year. 
 
I’m going to ask you one more question. The superintendent of insurance is sitting beside you. Does your 
superintendent of insurance have any jurisdiction over Saskatchewan Government Insurance such as he has in 
respect to every other insurance agency operating in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, the superintendent of insurance covers these two fields: first, licensing of SGI 
agents; secondly, contracts other that AAIA. I am advised that in the event that it were too harsh a contract for 
insurance with the public, then the superintendent of insurance could review that type of insurance coming out of 
SGI the same way as it could with a private insurance company. So in those two areas, they do. 
 
I just want to make one comment in respect to our priority of who should get into this insurance fund first. You 
said, "You shouldn’t have picked on the real estate brokers." I just want to say that it seems to me that while there 
were no problems, as I said, in 1980, with the property appreciation, land prices are rising substantially, 
transactions are 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2215 

much larger and, while the record is good, the potential of the amount of call on an error or on fraud or whatever, 
would be much larger. So perhaps, from that viewpoint, we were right in our priorities. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — What I’m saying, Mr. Minister, about the superintendent of insurance is: if there is any 
problem with any insurance problem or company in Saskatchewan – we’ll say the Royal Insurance or Wawanesa 
or you name it, any private insurance company – does the superintendent of insurance have jurisdiction to step in 
over any problems they have? What is his jurisdiction here? That’s the question I really want to get across. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — With respect to this, I am advised that the superintendent of insurance licenses all the 
insurance companies in Saskatchewan but not SGI. SGI is exempt under its corporate act. The nature of the 
licensing of all the other insurance companies provides the superintendent with the power, under certain 
circumstances, to suspend a licence but that does not apply to SGI. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Can you tell me why SGI is exempt? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, I would advise you that when SGI was founded, it was provided with the power 
to write insurance in all classes and did not come under the purview or the general operation of the 
superintendent under The Saskatchewan Insurance Act. So there is the difference: SGI has the power to write 
insurance of all classes as set out under the act. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — All right. We can’t let this slip by. We have to ask a couple of questions on cemeteries. It 
won’t take very long; we won’t get into it this year. 
 
I would like to get into it with you, Mr. Minister. If I could handle the Provincial Secretary, I’m sure I could put 
you in awfully deep trouble. Can you tell me how many commercial cemeteries are operating in Saskatchewan at 
this time? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Eight companies operating 10 cemeteries. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — You’re saying eight companies running 10 commercial cemeteries. So there have been 
some added, then, in this last year. Is that correct? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — That’s not what I am advised. Eight companies are running 10 cemeteries. 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Who is the operator at the Weyburn cemetery at this time? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Same operator as last year, Green Acres. Earl Sanderson is the managing 
administrator. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I just wondered on that insurance – you’re saying it was private companies. Is crop insurance 
answerable to the superintendent of insurance? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — No. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — So, if you have trouble there is no one to go to there other than just the department? 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2216 

HON. MR. KOSKIE: — The Department of Agriculture. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — As Minister of Consumer Affairs, I’d like to know: what would your stand be on a public 
utilities review commission? We’ve been pressing for one of these many times. We feel that the utilities are 
going up in this province continually and I’d like you to respond. Do you see any need for a public utilities 
review commission? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I want to say again that in Saskatchewan (as the hon. member knows) we have Crown 
corporations like Sask Tel and Sask Power. I want to say that I feel this area has a public utility review 
functioning. First of all we have a board which is a representative group of consumers who formulate policies, 
and I think if you would look at it, it’s a fairly representative group. I think, also, that in respect to Crown 
corporations I think it was the Attorney General who so elegantly described it the other day saying that in respect 
to the Crown corporation review committee, we have the most effective one in Canada. I listened to that and I 
believe that. I know you have called for that. Some provinces have gone that route. I know one cannot always 
make comparisons but if one does compare rates, one will find the public here is getting their utilities essentially 
next to cost. A utility review board is really in place in Saskatchewan by having that group of representative 
people on the board making those decisions and relating back to the consumers. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — This has been argued many times and I am not going into a long debate with you. I can’t 
accept your statement that there is a representative group of people on the boards of these corporations. You 
know very well that there are a number of appointed political supporters on these boards and they don’t represent 
the public. You say that the utilities in this province are being operated at cost. I question why are you able to 
take $10 million out of Sask Power and put it into Crown investment. As I have said in Crown corporations 
committee, that is nothing more than a tax. I think the profits made by the utility corporations are well known by 
the people in Saskatchewan. I don’t care to enter into a long debate on this. I just wanted to know whether you 
thought there was a need; obviously from your statement you feel there isn’t. I think it is interesting for the 
people to know that the minister in charge of consumer affairs does not feel there is any need for any type of 
public utilities review commission in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to move to another topic, Mr. Minister, one that I have raised before but I would like your input on. I 
see under your subvote that you are in charge of film classification. You are also in charge of the sale of various 
commodities. I would like to ask you what action have you taken, as new Minister of Consumer Affairs, to 
prohibit the accessibility to pornographic reading materials by the young people in our province – materials that 
are available in this province which the government opposite refuses to tax. Have you looked at anything of this 
nature? I understand from correspondence with the Attorney General last year that perhaps this could be done. 
What action have you taken to this date? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to get the last word in, for the record, in respect to your closing remarks of 
the summary of my statement. I don’t think what I said concurs with what you said in respect to the utilities 
boards. I said that consumers are represented. I’m not saying that we can’t look at a further development of the 
boards to further represent them, but certainly I think they are. 
 
It’s true that under my department is the film classification previously under culture 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2217 

and youth. In respect to pornographic books, I want to say that at the present time there are really basically two 
controls in existence. If they’re being imported, there are border checks and, in the event they’re found to be 
pornographic, they can be confiscated. And also, there are certain provisions under the Criminal Code which 
cover this type of material. During the period of time I have been there, which is three or four months, I have not 
really reviewed that in any detail. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I don’t think the border checks are stopping an awful lot. They may be there for very 
lewd types of things, but I think you just have to go down into the bookstores anywhere in the city or throughout 
Saskatchewan and you can find all the dicey stuff you want. I know you’re a new minister and I don’t want to be 
unjust to you. I would ask you this question: would you consider looking at moving these things up so at least 
they are at five feet above the viewing level of the younger people? Or better than that, back in a shelf where one 
has to ask for them if one wants them? Will you give me an indication tonight that you, as the new Minister of 
Consumer Affairs, will certainly consider what I think is a very worth-while consideration? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, I certainly can give you a commitment that we will look at the various options: 
the nature and type of legislation which may be required or whether, in fact, we need legislation. It may be 
possible to deal with the business community and arrive, as I was saying previously, at consensus without having 
to legislate. I share your concern there and certainly we are prepared to review that. 
 
I know that you raised a question the other day in respect to the drug paraphernalia. That issue, as you know, is 
being addressed by the Minister of Justice in Ottawa. He is looking at it. It’s primarily under food and drug and 
narcotics, and perhaps can best be related to that legislation. But as Minister of Consumer Affairs, I will be 
following through on that, too, along with the Attorney General. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Thank you. As you noticed, I didn’t get too hard on you. I asked you to give it consideration 
and I take it you’re giving me a sincere answer that you certainly will give it deep consideration. All right. 
 
What about film classification? That has just been transferred to your department. I’m concerned about 
Teletheatre and these sort of things. We’ve raised that on this side of the House. Are you responsible just in 
regard to the films offered in the movies and the drive-ins? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Exclusively in respect to the classification of films. That’s what has been transferred 
over: movie theatres and drive-ins. Those two aspects. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I have some concerns in that area, too. I think perhaps maybe there could be a serious look at 
some of the stuff being promoted there, but I’ll just leave that as a comment. 
 
One thing I am concerned about is the problem of people. And let me address it perhaps to females in some 
situations – not exclusively to them, but to a large number of them who own automobiles. You take an 
automobile into a garage and you have whatever has to be done to it then. In most cases, you have to pay your 
complete bill then and there before you get your keys back. Now, I address this to the ladies because I don’t 
profess to be a mechanic myself and I am subject to this sort of thing. A lot of ladies operate automobiles and 
they are certainly not mechanical. There is no cooling-off period. It is nothing to get a bill of $150 or $200. You 
don’t get your car unless you pay 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2218 

that bill. Then, you may go for two days and the problem which you brought in may still exist. Many people tell 
me that they have very little, if any recourse. I know that in direct sales in this province you have to have a 
cooling-off period. Maybe this is a legal problem which has to be taken up with the Attorney General. As 
Minister of Consumer Affairs, do you think there is a need for this? Has this been expressed to you? I am sure it 
must have if I have been hearing it. Then, what kind of action can your department take to improve this situation? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — This is an area which really deals with workmanship, that is, repairing an automobile 
or maybe doing other types of work. It is really the performance of the job. We are looking at what is known as 
The Business Practices Act, which may in fact address that area of concern in more detail. All I can say, I guess, 
is that we are reviewing it. We are taking a look and we have already started doing comparisons of other 
provinces. The area again, I guess, which we are looking at (in taking some time in putting it into effect) is trying 
to get the business community’s understanding. But we have been working on it. In fact, I had hoped to come 
with at least a white paper, if not legislation, this term. That may or may not happen because of the scheduling 
and the length of time that I was there. Yes, that area of workmanship and so on, and your idea of a cooling-off 
period or whatever, may be worth looking at. We are addressing that. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Thank you. I am pleased to hear that. I assume if you are looking at this, that you have been 
hearing a number of concerns in your department about the same thing. I know in some other jurisdictions there 
is such a thing as an estimate, but I would think that an estimate would, in the long run, just add cost to the 
consumer. I don’t think that is the answer or the route to be going – an estimate before the work is done. I am 
thinking of taking the work at face value as being, as you say, satisfactory workmanship and then having 
something of a cooling-off period. So just briefly, has your department been receiving a number of complaints 
about this type of thing? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, I think it’s a question of how one defines a large number. I’m advised that in this 
particular area, relative to workmanship, we do receive a fair number of complaints or inquiries as to remedies. 
That’s what we’re looking at. 
 
MR. HARDY: — Well, with regard to that, Mr. Minister, I notice from your information division you had 19 
press releases out, and two of them were regarding gasoline prices and automobile repairs. I just wondered what 
was suggested on those, and about what and to whom and why, and was there anything accomplished by these? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I couldn’t hear you that well, I’m sorry. Are you referring to a news release or 
Buylines? 
 
MR. HARDY: — I’m sorry. I should have spoken a little plainer. In your information division you had 19 press 
releases, and some of them were in regard to gasoline prices and automobile repairs. What they were about, I just 
wondered what they suggested, and to whom they were directed, in general, and if anything was accomplished by 
them? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I take it you don’t have copies. Do you have a copy of the press release? 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2219 

MR. HARDY: — No, I was just thinking of an annual report. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — In respect to gasoline prices and auto repairs, we can find those and supply you with 
copies of them. 
 
MR. HARDY: — That was part of the answer, but I was just wondering to whom they were directed. The hon. 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley was suggesting for ladies, and I just wondered if these were directed toward 
them or just to the public in general, and if anything was accomplished by them. I mean, did you feel any 
satisfaction from the releases? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I’ll briefly summarize it. I think what we do here is, primarily, say, in auto 
repairs, point out certain specific problems. As a consequence, through our communication with the public and 
with the business community, we get some pretty good feedback with respect to it. I suppose in respect to 
avoiding auto repair problems, we set out basically what protection there is within the department and some of 
the obvious pitfalls. I think, perhaps, what you were referring to is Consumer Buylines dealing with avoiding auto 
repair problems, and there it just essentially sets out: 
 

Repair service problems with new and used vehicles cause persistent consumer complaints in Saskatchewan. 
 
I won’t read it all: 
 

Many complaints received concern unauthorized or additional repair work, for instance. 
 
So, we mentioned that one of the problems that we sometimes encountered is that more repairs are made than 
what were initially requested when the vehicle was taken in. And so we say, "Check to see if the manufacturer’s 
warranty is still in effect." So we’re saying to the consumer, "Maybe you’re paying and you don’t have to. Maybe 
the warranty is still there, so you should look at that." It says to be specific when authorizing repairs or service 
and to give written instructions, so you know more or less what you’re ordering, what you’re getting, and 
whether or not you’re using the warranty. That’s the type of thing in the Consumer Buylines about avoiding auto 
repair problems. That’s generally what it deals with. 
 
MR. HARDY: — I see one of your news releases was with regard to gasoline prices. I just wonder what you 
could tell them with regard to that? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I’m not totally familiar with the article but in this particular one in Consumer 
Buylines it gives where your gasoline dollar goes, who gets what, how much for what, and it gives causes of 
gasoline price differences. Those are some of the items that are dealt with in that one. It lists causes in gasoline 
price differences. It relates those to transportation costs and has a little squib on that, to dealer margins and it has 
a squib on that. Dealer margins commonly range from 5 to 14 cents a gallon and as dealer margins increase, 
prices increase to support programs which are sometimes given to dealers through the supplier and, as a 
consequence, you get these price wars going on with respect to the sale of gasoline. So it’s primarily just where 
your gasoline goes, causes of gasoline price increases and of gasoline price differences. That’s basically what’s 
covered. 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2220 

MR. HARDY: — My question was really not so much what was in it but whether you found there was any 
advantage to putting out this press release. In other words, what came back to the department that could help the 
consumer in any way? I know the price of gas is basically set. I don’t think there is any way that the department 
can set the price of gas. I just wonder what comes back out of a release like that which would really help the 
consumer. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — We have people who are concerned about the spread in gas prices from one station to 
another. I know in my own constituency that is a problem and I get some questions with respect to that. The 
department also gets inquiries of that nature. What is the cause? Why is it going up? So what we’re basically 
obtaining is some consumer information and some feedback. 
 
MR. HARDY: — Just one other question. I noticed in your report you had soft drink prices. It said that a branch 
analysis of price differences between Saskatchewan and Manitoba led to correspondence from the Saskatchewan 
minister to the federal Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs. I just wonder what improvements or what 
suggestions you could make that would have any effect on the consumers. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I suppose, in dealing with that particular area, there was an observation made by the 
department that there was a difference in the prices of soft drinks. The way that we dealt with the price in 
Manitoba and the price in Saskatchewan was to contact the federal Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs 
for the purpose of seeing whether, on the basis of facts, there was unfair competition under the Combines 
Investigation Act. That was what was done. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — What did your investigation reveal? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — The investigation would be carried out by the federal government. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, you wrote to them, so you must have had a report back. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — We haven’t received anything from them. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I have a couple of questions which I’d like to ask you. I’ll try to ask them quickly. If you 
give your answers quickly, we can roll on to the next set of estimates. The first thing that I want to discuss with 
you is rent reviews. I raised some time ago in here (I don’t know if you were in that day so I questioned another 
minister) the fact that 37.2 per cent of our population is living below the poverty line. These are unattached 
people; 37.2 per cent of the unattached people. Many of these people have to rent accommodation. They can’t 
afford to own their own homes. Some of these people are out in rural Saskatchewan, and I imagine there are a 
number of them in the cities. What action are you taking, in the Department of Consumer Affairs, to safeguard 
these people against increasing rents? They’re on fixed incomes and they can’t keep up with the increases. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I think the hon. member realizes that, in communities of 2,000 or more, rent review is 
still in effect. In communities smaller than that, what we have been doing is implementing a program across the 
board. If we take a look at the activity of the public housing programs, we’ll see that there has been a substantial 
number of senior citizens and urban-rural housing in the smaller communities. I have some statistics in 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2221 

respect to that. It seems to me that a very substantial amount of housing has taken place in those communities. 
 
I suppose, in conjunction with that (although it’s applicable to all people), there are other ways in which they are 
assisted. There is the property improvement grant (PIG) which certainly assists them. There are the senior 
citizens’ school tax rebate program and the renters’ property tax rebate. The total sum, I’m advised, is 
somewhere in the neighborhood of $74 million for the property improvement grant, the senior citizens’ school 
rebate and the renters’ rebate. Over and above that, we have the mortgage rebate program. 
 
Those are the general programs which are in place with respect to the government as a whole. (I guess I say this 
only because I was in social services.) For those on social assistance, of course, actual rents are paid by the 
department rather than a limited amount. And I noticed the headlines coming out of British Columbia saying that 
many of the low-income people who are on social assistance are not allotted enough to keep up with the rents. 
But that is protected here in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I noticed by your answer that some of the things had to do with property owners. The people 
I was referring to are not property owners, and some of the situations I’ve had did not involve senior citizens. 
Therefore, they have trouble getting into some of this senior citizen housing. But, I’ll accept your answers and 
we’ll move on to the final one. 
 
I have a brochure by Colgate Palmolive – I’ve also been advised that Campbell’s soups are doing the same thing 
– promoting within the school system the consumption of their products as a means for fund raising. In other 
words, if you bring in all the Colgate coupons, you receive so many dollars and the money goes to the students’ 
recreation council. I understand from educators that many of them are upset about this. Have you any controls in 
place to safeguard a very captive audience of consumers – the children in the schools – against what I think is a 
rather unfair advantage being taken by these companies? 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — We don’t have any direct control because it’s primarily the jurisdiction of the school 
board. And I think that a school board could, in fact, take such action as is necessary to prevent that from 
happening through discussion with the administrators of that school. We do have a pretty close relationship with 
the schools in so far as they utilize the information packages that we have. I’m advised that in counteracting this 
type of promotion there is some information which we do disseminate to educators. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — I just had a letter from a school board person asking the Department of Education about this 
thing, in which it was pointed out that The Education Act is a bit silent. We’ll just leave it, having flagged the 
issue with you. Perhaps it’s something that your department could look at if school boards are concerned about 
this. And I think that those are all the questions I have. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Two years ago we had a considerable amount of debate about these licensed schools and 
so forth. Have you resolved the problems now? Are the reportings being done properly and is nobody beaten any 
more. 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2222 

HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I am advised that it is pretty well under control and that there are basically no 
problems there. 
 
MR. HARDY: — I just have one more question on item 1. Going back to the soft drink prices, you said that you 
had not had a letter back from the federal department. I notice that this was made up in June 1980, which is 
almost a year ago. I just wonder why they haven’t answered yet. 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — I really can’t answer for the federal government as to why we haven’t received a reply. 
That’s pretty difficult for me to do. All I want to say is that we took the action as I indicated. I think the basic 
problem there is that they’re having a lot of problems with the deficiency of the anticombines act. It’s evident in 
respect to the so-called exploitation of the public by the major oil companies, where effectively they do not, in 
fact, have the teeth in order to do the job. 
 
Item 1 agreed. 
 
Items 2 to 13 inclusive agreed. 
 
Vote 4 agreed. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW (SUPPLEMENTARY) 
 

CONSUMER AFFAIRS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 4 
 

Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed. 
 
Vote 4 agreed. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY CASH OUTFLOW 
 

SOCIAL SERVICES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 36 
 

Item 1 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to introduce my staff. Sitting on 
my right is Mr. Duane Adams, deputy minister; further to my right is Mr. Gary Brandt, executive director of 
operations; and, sitting immediately behind me is Mr. Walter Charabin, director of administration. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, I don’t propose to start off with a long speech tonight. I would like to get right 
into the questions. 
 
There are a number of areas in social services that have been coming under question. My phone is ringing fairly 
steadily, as a number of yours are, I’m sure. One of the main concerns being raised of late is the home care 
program. I know that you have been working on it for a considerable length of time. You have been having a lot 
of trouble, apparently, putting it in place. We have seen a number of your staff members, who were 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2223 

involved in it, come and go. 
 
I would like to have you start off by explaining what the main problem was that caused you to lose some of your 
key staff members. I refer to Elton Marshall as one staff member, and Ron Hikel as another. I think something 
pretty serious had to have happened when a man of Ron’s capabilities left, and when a man like Elton Marshall 
left. I think there was a serious lack of control, by your former deputy minister, as has been shown in the public 
accounts with which we have been dealing and this particular issue. There is something very serious when you 
upset the whole department the way you have. So, I would like you to basically outline what your problems were 
and what you’re doing to solve them. 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to comment on the first question: what is taking 
so long to get the home care program going? I would like to inform the member that the home care program is 
not taking a great deal longer than we anticipated. The development part of the home care program is what takes 
the time. Many local people are involved in developing the home care plan for each of the districts. We now have 
40 boards up and we are delivering service in 17 boards and we think by the end of the year we will be delivering 
service in all of the areas. To say that we are having a great deal of problems is a misrepresentation of fact. The 
home care program is well on the way to becoming one of the main social programs in Saskatchewan and one of 
the better programs in Canada. 
 
In talking about Mr. Ron Hikel, I didn’t have the pleasure of working with Ron. He wasn’t in the department 
when I took over so I don’t think it is fair for me to comment on that individual and his work ability. On the other 
hand, I think the question of Elton Marshall has been fairly well debated in the House. You are well aware of the 
circumstances surrounding that issue. I think to go into that in any great detail now would just be wasting the 
time of the House. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, I think that you came into the department. You have people around you who knew 
Ron Hikel very well. I don’t accept the answer that you can’t tell me why he left. You can talk to your officials; 
the people are here. Then stand up and tell me, why did you lose a man like Ron Hikel? There had to be a 
perfectly good reason or he wouldn’t be gone. 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, on checking with my officials, they inform me that Mr. Hikel 
resigned, and I’m not sure of his reasons. That’s one of the issues you get into. I think that people have the 
opportunity to resign from a position. I don’t think it’s our place to insist, if they want to resign, that they stay. 
That’s the only point I can make on that matter. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Why on earth do you need an assessment form like this in order to decide whether you can 
provide Meals on Wheels and repair the doorknob for a senior citizen and these minor household things? Now, 
we’re talking about a home care program for people who live in their own homes and, for the most part, take care 
of themselves but need some assistance with minor things. Then we look at a document of this type with a 
number of questions and it’s hard for me to understand why you need answers to questions of this type to provide 
the services under the home care program. Can you tell us why, in Saskatchewan, we need a form like that when 
in other provinces they use about a two-page form that seems to suffice and provides all the answers necessary? 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2224 

HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — The assessment form that you’re talking about is the OARS (older 
Americans resources and services) assessment form. It is a long, involved document. When I first took over the 
department, I was of much the same opinion as you are – that it was much too long, and that we should be doing 
something about it. But having consulted with many of the people who are using it, they’re saying that it’s a good 
way of spending an hour with the individual who is being assessed. By the time you go through the form, the 
20-odd-pages or whatever they are, you have a good idea of whom you are working with, and it’s a good way to 
get to know the person. On the other hand, we are looking at the whole continuing care area. And this form will 
be used in assessing people, not only for home care, but also for entering institutions. I think it’s an area we’re 
looking at. We had many of the same concerns as you do, but we find this form works very well. If that’s the 
case we should reconsider our opinion rather than deciding what is best for the people who are using it. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, you say the form is working very well. We have had a home care program going 
only for a short time in the area where I live, and that’s not the answer that I’m getting. If my phone has rung 
once a week, I would say it rings ten times a week on this very subject. Why is it necessary to fill out a form of 
this length? Why are the questions of the type that you propose to ask the senior citizens necessary? And let me 
give you an example or two of what I’m speaking about. 
 
To begin with, you go into a person’s home, and you ask him, "What is the name of this place?" It’s a town 
where he has lived all his life – is that a sensible question to ask anybody? "Who is the Prime Minister of 
Canada?" Do you really have to know that in order to provide Meals on Wheels? The next question: "Subtract 3 
from 20, and keep subtracting 3, and so on down the line." What purpose do you have in asking that type of 
question of a senior citizen? That’s the first page. Can you tell me how that relates to providing Meals on Wheels 
to an older citizen who is finding it difficult to cook for himself? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — As I mentioned, we are looking at the form in a great deal of detail. We are 
scrutinizing it to see whether a better form could be devised for home care. At the same time some of the 
questions asked may look ridiculous and redundant but you have to be able to check the memory of the people to 
see if they can remember things. For example, if a person is qualifying for levels 2 or 3 and they remember 
things, I think it is very important, so some of those questions have relevance in that sense. I am not adamantly 
defending the form, because I have questions in my own mind about it. I think it is something we will be looking 
at. We will be taking your advice into consideration when we are looking at it. 
 
MR. SWAN: — You’re talking about assessing people for levels 2 or 3. This form was not proposed for that 
purpose; it was proposed for the home care program. That’s the way it is headed up. When you come to levels 2 
or 3, you are looking at a different situation. You are looking at people who need altogether different types of 
care than what we are talking about here. Some of the questions are very embarrassing for older folks. I don’t 
know how many I have to read to you, but I am upset every time I get a call on this form. I think you need to 
review it and review it seriously with a view to providing the kind of questions needed to deliver services under a 
home care program, which is altogether different than the severe health care program that we looked at when we 
got into level 2 and 3. 
 
When could we expect your department to take a look at this and design a new form so that people who need 
these minor services are not going to go through an 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2225 

embarrassing type of thing like we have here, but rather are going to answer the questions needed in order to get 
the very essential services they are looking for? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — When the member says it is used only for home care, that is not accurate. 
We are using the form at the present time for the total continuing care area which includes home care level 1, 2, 
and 3. For that reason some of the questions you refer to do apply in assessing a person who is on level 2 or 3. I 
don’t want to get hung up on this point. We are reviewing the form and we are bringing in people to have a look 
at it to see if it can be made simpler and easier to adjust. I think your point is well made; we are looking at it and 
will be studying it. In the future if it isn’t adequate or proper, we will be making adjustments to it. If on the other 
hand the professionals in the field who are using it like it and find it is doing a good job, it is probably the form 
we should be using. With that, all I can say is we are reviewing the assessment form, and we will be making a 
decision on it in the next couple of months. 
 
MR. SWAN: — You are telling me again that it is used for assessing levels 2 and 3. It doesn’t say this on the 
form anywhere. It says district number and there is a blank for you to put it in and it says home care program 
client identification; then it goes on into the form itself. It doesn’t anywhere in here say that you are going to use 
it for level 2 or 3. This was introduced at the time the home care program started. It was not around for level 2 or 
3 prior to that time, so don’t tell me it was introduced as a form you are using for everyone. It was used for one 
purpose, and I think the facts you are giving me are misleading. You are misleading the House and I would like 
you to withdraw that and come in and tell us the straight facts. 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I think the point is that since the home care program was established, the 
form began to be used in that area. We have had some changes in the department in the area of continuing care 
where we now look at home care and the levels of care, 1, 2 and 3, as part of the same division, and we are, in 
fact, using that form in more than the home care area. We’re using it in, as I mentioned, home care and levels 1, 2 
and 3 and we intend to continue to use it until we have had time to completely review it and see whether or not 
it’s appropriate. At that time, we will be making a decision on whether we continue to use it as it is or whether 
we make adjustments to it. 
 
MR. SWAN: — If this is your case, then I would like you to tell me why on this form you don’t say somewhere 
what it is to be used for. If it is classed as a home care form, fine; if it is classed as a form that you’re going to 
use to assess all people, then it should say that somewhere. But it certainly isn’t saying it at this point in time. 
 
Which questions from this 32-page document do you ask a person who is looking for home care only, not going 
into the level 1, 2, 3, 4 situation, but just someone who needs services at home? Which questions are you going to 
use out of this document? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I am informed that in the continuing care program (which is what we are 
using that assessment form for at the present time) in the near future, if the form is going to be used (and as I 
mentioned, that decision hasn’t been made for sure, but will be made in the next couple of months) the cover 
page will be changed and it will say on the front that it’s an assessment form used for continuing care rather than 
home care. I think that this reflects changes that have taken place over the last couple of months in the area of 
continuing care. So to say that, because the form has "home care" written on the front, it can’t be used in another 
area, is inaccurate and doesn’t reflect the true image of what is going on. We are using the form for home care 
and we are 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2226 

using it for the levels of care and so we will be making adjustments to the front title page, if and when we make 
the decision to keep using the form. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, you deliberately did not answer my question. Would you stand again and answer 
my question? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I am informed that our department as such doesn’t use the form. The 
assessment people or the people in the home care district, if it’s being used for home care as you mentioned, will 
make the decision on what questions are going to be used and, in fact, all the questions that are asked. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, are you telling me that you don’t know what your people are doing out there? 
Whether they are using the whole form or a part of it? Is that what you’re telling me? That’s what I’m hearing. 
 
The information I have from the home care board members and the people who are doing the assessing is that 
you’re asking every last one of those questions. If that’s the case, then at least be man enough to stand up and say 
so. 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I think what has happened here is that the member is a little confused about 
how the home care program is working. They are not our people. The people who do the assessment and use the 
assessment form are not department people. They work directly for the locally controlled boards, the 45 district 
boards which are going to be involved in the province. They are the people who use the assessment form, not the 
department people. And it’s my information that when they’re using the form they ask all the questions on the 
form at the present time. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Are you prepared at this point in time to make a change in your policy so that the complete form 
is not needed for those who are looking for only the home care portion? Are you prepared, as a minister 
responsible for the department, to make that kind of a decision so that these people don’t have to answer all the 
embarrassing questions in that form in order to receive the minor care that they get at home? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes. What we plan to do in the areas I mentioned is to have a very close 
look at the form, how well it’s being used and how productive the answers are. As well, we will be looking to the 
association of home care boards, which is going to be established, to get a recommendation on whether it is a 
useful form or if there are changes that should be made to it. As I mentioned, that decision will be made over the 
next couple of months. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Now, Mr. Minister, I don’t know what you find this form, but I find it just shocking and 
totally embarrassing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yeah, yeah, big joke. Well, you get your two-by-four aerosol 
spray can and go in the back and club somebody. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ll give you as an example my own two parents who are senior citizens applying for Meals on 
Wheels. My colleagues already brought some of these questions up. "What is the name of this place? Who is the 
Prime Minister of Canada now? Who was the Prime Minister just before him?" What has this to do with whether 
they want Meals on Wheels? I’m damned if I know. "Subtract 3 from 20 and keep subtracting 3 from each new 
number you get all the way down." 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2227 

We’re going to go through this, Mr. Minister, the whole thing. "How far have you gone in school?" (And the 
Minister of Labor would have to put in zero, because that shows his intellectual ability in here.) "Now, I’d like to 
ask you some questions about your family and friends." And you can just imagine my parents sitting there. 
"Now, are you single, married, widowed, divorced or separated," (or are you just living common law, I suppose). 
We go on. This can be a quote if you want it. You should be ashamed of sending a form like this out. "How many 
persons do you know well enough to visit in your own home?" What has that got to do with Meals on Wheels? 
"Do you find yourself feeling quite lonely? Sometimes or almost never?" Now imagine those senior citizens, if 
it’s really important as to whether they want Meals on Wheels, answering whether they’re lonely. You’re not 
asking if they want someone to come in and visit, you’re asking if they want a meal. 
 
We’re going to go on, Mr. Minister. The members opposite think it’s quite a joke. "Next I would like to ask some 
questions about what you think about life." Well, do you think they’re going to tell you they’re thinking about 
dying tomorrow? It’s a stupid form. "In general, do you find life exciting, pretty routine, or dull?" Well, I’ll tell 
you after they filled out this, I know what they’ll be looking for, and it sure wouldn’t be heaven – just to get rid 
of the person that was coming to see them. 
 
There’s another one in here, Mr. Minister, which I think just about tops it all off. Now remember, you have 
someone going around to ask them if they want Meals on Wheels. This could be anyone’s mother or father. 
"How often do you wet yourself, either day or night?" Now, what are you trying to do, take their dignity away? 
What do you care about it? You stood up before and said that you thought it was pretty good. That will be in the 
Hansard tomorrow. You tried to weasel out of it afterward. What kind of an attitude is this by the government 
opposite to the senior citizens of Saskatchewan? What kind of question to ask them! Who do you think is going 
to answer a personal question like that? This erodes their personal rights, their freedoms, when they apply for 
Meals on Wheels, and get, "How often do you wet yourself either day or night?" Smile – I notice all the 
government members opposite. It’s a big joke. And this to you is a good form? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He didn’t say it was a good form. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Oh yes, he did. Well, if the Attorney General was tuned in, he would have been in here 
earlier. He did. And then he started weaselling out of it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He did not. He said that he had some questions about the form. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Yes, he should have a lot more questions about it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Don’t get your shirt in a knot, boy. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Oh yes, we’ll talk about getting a shirt in a knot or anything else. It’s upsetting. And if you 
think, Mr. Minister, that you are going to help out senior citizens in Saskatchewan in any way by having them fill 
out a form like this, on who the Prime Minister is . . . About the only thing you most likely don’t have in here is, 
"Do you vote NDP and will you buy an NDP membership?" I’m amazed you haven’t that in here. Degrading and 
nothing but garbage – that’s what it is. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Very dramatic, you are. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Yes, it sure is for you. That just shows, Mr. Minister, how much the 



 
April 14, 1981 
 

 
2228 

Minister of Labor is concerned about the senior citizens of Saskatchewan – believing in this report which is 
nothing more than a piece of garbage. To go out and ask people living in small-town Saskatchewan or anywhere 
in Saskatchewan if they would complete an application like this to get Meals on Wheels! You may think it’s 
okay. The members on this side of the House know it’s garbage; it’s degrading. And, Mr. Minister, you are a new 
minister in this. You have an opportunity to clean up this department a bit. Get rid of that piece of junk and you 
will have a start. 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — It’s a little hard to discover what the question was. But I would just like to 
point out once again that the form is used for more than one thing. It’s used for more than Meals on Wheels, and 
in fact, many people who apply for Meals on Wheels and fill out the form enable us to find out they have many 
other problems and need much more care than, in fact, Meals on Wheels. On the other hand, I have mentioned at 
least five times that we are reviewing the form and a decision will be made whether or not we are going to 
continue to use the form in the future. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, I am concerned about the invasion of privacy of senior citizens. When we talk 
about a form of this type for the small services that you’re providing, there’s no need to ask the kind of questions 
that are being asked. 
 
For the home care program it could be a very brief form, one with a very minimum number of questions and one 
that will not invade the privacy of people to the extent this one does. So I would encourage you to move in that 
direction, and to try and respect the dignity of our senior citizens. 
 
I would like you to tell me how many people are getting service now from home care. How many people on a 
daily basis are getting service from home care? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I am informed that it will take us just a minute to get the answers. Perhaps 
you’d like to ask another one in the interim. I would just like to mention one more time about that form being 
used. You mentioned that it is an invasion of privacy. If anything, the home care program is the exact opposite. 
What the home care program does is offer independence and normalization for senior citizens who would 
otherwise be in nursing homes or institutions. So, to say that the assessment form in home care is an invasion of 
privacy is inaccurate and the form is, in fact, the exact opposite. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Well, Mr. Minister, while they’re looking, I’d like to show you the forms from the other 
provinces. These are carbon-copied, so there are very few pages. In most cases, there are two pages, and the 
biggest part of the form concerns medical history – whether the person has to be have assistance taking his pills, 
and things. So, it’s a very minor type of form in comparison to what you’re using. I hope that you take a look at 
what others are doing close by. You don’t have to go to the States to get everything. You can get some of it from 
the neighbors right beside you. 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — In terms of other forms which are available to us, we do have those forms as 
well, and we are looking at them in assessing the type of assessment form that we are going to use in the future. I 
think it’s fair to say that we are looking at that alternative. In terms of how many people are receiving home care 
in the province, we do have 17 home care boards delivering service. To obtain the exact number we would have 
to go to the local boards and find out how many people are registered. We don’t have that number here, but I 
think that we could find out in very short order. 



 
April 14, 1981 

 

 
2229 

MR. SWAN: — Would you dig up that information and bring it in tomorrow? We won’t be finished tonight, so 
you’ll have a little time to think about it. 
 
I’m informed that as soon as the home care program took over the delivery of service, at least the Meals on 
Wheels portion of it, the cost of the meals delivered to the seniors almost doubled. I’m wondering if you can tell 
this Chamber what the difference is, as soon as you come in. Why do the seniors then experience a doubling of 
the cost of their meals? This is the figure that’s thrown at me every time I talk to people about home care. They 
say, "Last week we were getting the meals for half as much. What happened when the government came in? Why 
has it doubled?" 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I think that it’s not quite accurate to say that the price of the meals has 
doubled across the province. I think that there are areas where it has. There are other areas where it has stayed the 
same. I think the boards, in their own wisdom, have in places made a decision to increase the amount paid by the 
individual in order to subsidize other services. As well, we are looking at the whole area of funding to the home 
care boards to ensure the quality of service and that the price of the service is not out of reach for the people who 
are using home care. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Would you enlarge a little bit on your comment that you are charging more for meals to 
subsidize other things? The person receiving the meal is only wanting the meal. He doesn’t want to be 
subsidizing somebody else. Could you enlarge on that topic a little bit? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — I think that it is fair to say that the meals are not, in fact, subsidizing other 
things but are subsidizing other meals. The program wasn’t universal before. The people in the country now have 
access to Meals on Wheels whereas, in the past, they haven’t. I think it’s also fair to say, as I mentioned, that we 
are reviewing the whole area of funding of home care in terms of subsidies to the home care boards. The other 
point is that the home care boards do have the power to set the level of rates that they want for meals or other 
services in their communities. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 


