






















































Hansard: March 26, 1982


967 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 26, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and to members of the House, a 
group of students sitting in the west gallery from the St. Luke's School in the Elphinstone constituency in 
north-central Regina. There are about 23 in number, accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Jim Frolick. They are 
students in grades 7 and 8 at that school. I trust that their visit to the legislature will assist them in their social 
studies and in their general appreciation of how our government works. They will have had an opportunity to 
tour the building. I will have an opportunity to meet with them later to have a brief discussion, and I know 
that they enjoy the opportunity to be with us here in the Chamber. And through you, Sir, I greet them all on 
our behalf. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome a special group who is here with us this 
morning. They are six young people and adults from the vocational program of the Saskatchewan Council of 
Crippled Children and Adults. It is located at 825 MacDonald Street in the city of Regina. They are enrolled 
in a special program that the council initiated some time ago. The leader of the group is Lynne Demeule. She 
is accompanied here by two staff people and two volunteers. It's good to have you with us and I hope that 
you will keep coming here. We in the government are trying to develop new programs to assist people with 
disabilities, and I think the program is paying off because there is a great deal of concern and awareness that 
has been created in 1981 in the Year of the Disabled. It is good to have you with us, and I hope to meet with 
you a little later. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to introduce to you, and 
through you to the members of this House, a group of 30 grade 8 students from the Ituna school. They are 
seated in the Speaker's gallery. They have come here on this blustery day — quite a little trip — under the 
supervision of their teachers, Mr. Bill Hudema and Mrs. Theresa Karpuk, and the bus driver, Dennis 
Filarczuk. I'm sure, as are the other members who already introduced students, that they will have something 
to learn here today. I will be meeting with them later on to have a picture taken and I know these students, 
after their participation here this afternoon, will be asking me a lot of questions at that time. So, Mr. Speaker, 
I sincerely hope that all of us here wish them well, a good trip and a safe journey home. I hope they enjoy 
their stay here this afternoon. 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
968 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure also to welcome a group of students to the 
Assembly. They are seated in the Speaker's gallery. They are from the Watrous elementary school. There are 
30 grade 7 students who have planned this trip for some time. I am very happy they were able to make it on a 
particularly important day. This is the day on which the budget is voted on and the concluding remarks are 
made. It is a rather special day in the House. The students are accompanied by their teachers and chaperones, 
Vern Rudneski, Pauline Mensch and Rose Reifferschieb, and their bus driver Steve Fuxa. They will stay here 
for the question period. I will meet with them later to take pictures; I look forward to that. Hopefully, if the 
members opposite and the members on this side of the House continue to debate long enough, I might even 
be able to have a drink with them later. Through you, I welcome them and hope they have an enjoyable and 
educational stay in the Assembly this morning. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

CUPE Hospital Strike 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Labor. Mr. Minister, for 
the past week I have stood in my place during question period and asked you to use the offices of your 
department to bring about negotiations in the CUPE strike. Last night I noticed during the debate, you were 
out of the House a for a considerable amount of time. I want to ask you again: have you accepted your 
responsibility as Minister of Labor in this province? Have you taken any action to bring these two groups 
back to the bargaining table? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows full well that some dialogue was 
carried on last night, because he had the member for Rosthern prowling around the corridors, in his 
sleuth-like fashion, attempting to determine what was going on. 
 
The meeting that was being conducted in my office during the period of time when the debate was in 
progress here resulted in a frank exchange between my deputy, me and later Cliff Hagen, the conciliation 
officer, who was aboard in order to determine whether any marked changes in position were to be advanced. 
That did not happen. Late last night, somewhere around 11 o'clock, after some additional costing figures 
were worked on and some additional considerations undertaken, it was concluded that the position of CUPE 
did not vary in any significant way from the position which was assumed when the bargaining table was left 
at 6 o'clock last Sunday morning. So, no significant change has taken place in terms of the outside figure — 
in terms of all of the cost compounded over the two-year period. We were convinced that there had not been 
any significant move from the position taken at the bargaining table at the last hour, at 6 a.m. Sunday. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. I understand that you were meeting with senior 
officials of CUPE last night. Did you meet with the other side to see if they would move toward a settled 
agreement? Have you had discussions with them? I ask you that. 
 
Secondly, there is still today. Are you using your good offices to continue to attempt to  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
969 

bring these two groups back to the bargaining table this morning? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — In answer to the member's first question, we have had firm assurances from the 
Saskatchewan Health-Care Association that the last position which was floated by the conciliator on Sunday 
morning is virtually the end position they are prepared to entertain. Accordingly, meeting with them did not 
have any prospect of producing further movement from them. Accordingly, I did not meet with the SHA 
(Saskatchewan Health-Care Association) last night, having been given assurances that they were not 
prepared to move from a point where they believe they have already overextended themselves. Accordingly, 
I did not meet with the SHA nor did I talk to their representatives last night. 
 
You will know that there still remains a possibility, even with the passage of the bill that is before the House, 
of carrying on with negotiations. I believe the bill provides for a period after the bill is passed when 
negotiations can continue. I would certainly hope that would happen and that there still may be a negotiated 
settlement prior to an arbitrator being called upon to make the final judgment. 
 
MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, so actually what you are telling me is that you did not talk to the SHA last 
night, that there is nothing going on this morning. Is that an admission by you that there is no further 
influence that you, as Minister of Labor, can bring today, this morning, before the passage of this bill, to get 
these people who yesterday said that within three hours (I'm sure it is shorter than that this morning) they 
could be back at that bargaining table? Are you saying that there is nothing more you can do other than 
legislate them back to work? 
 
HON. MR. SNYDER: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate all the theatrics and the dramatic episodes that the 
member engages in. Obviously, I am telling the hon. member that everything that is possible for us to do has 
been done. In retrospect, I can't think of anything further that could have been done by the Department of 
Labor that has not already been done. Obviously, there are going to continue to be contacts made with both 
parties in an effort to get them back together when there is some indication of movement. If the hon. member 
believes there is some advantage in calling people together face to face, when there are firmly held positions 
and no indication by either party of an inclination to move, in order that they may snarl at each other across 
the bargaining table — I have never regarded that as being a particularly productive kind of event. And 
history has proven that. If the member knew anything about collective bargaining, he would know full well 
that an indication of movement on the part of one party or both is necessary in order to consummate any kind 
of an agreement. I think it has to be said that every effort has been made by the department and my officials, 
and the officials of the Department of Health, to bring together the parties whenever anything productive 
could come from it. 

 
Splitting of Bill 45 

 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. In light of the fact that the efforts of the 
Minister of Labor to bring the parties of the dispute back to the negotiating table have failed and in light of 
the fact that the withdrawal of services by this particular union is to be extended this weekend to include 
several hospitals in rural Saskatchewan that haven't yet been touched and may endanger the health and safety 
of the people of Saskatchewan, there may be and in fact is probably a valid argument to pass part 1 of this 
bill. Part 2 of the bill, however, Mr. Speaker, is a different ball of wax and I think deserves considerable 
debate in this House. There is no need for speedy  



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
970 

passage of that particular section of the bill unless, of course, the Premier is intending to call an election 
today or . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a question? I'd like to hear the question. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — In light of what I've just set out, Mr. Premier, would you give some consideration or 
would you in fact indicate to this House whether or not you'd be prepared to split the bill, and bring in part 2 
as a separate bill? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we have no present intention of splitting the bill. The reasons for 
the two parts of the bill, I think, are fairly well known. In any case we'll have an opportunity to debate that 
when the bill is debated, and perhaps not during question period. In answer to the hon. member's question, 
there is no present intention of splitting the bill. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, part 2 of the bill is just awesome and powerful. Is it your intention 
under part 2 of the bill to hold this hammer over the heads of teachers and highway workers and power 
workers and just virtually every working person in the province of Saskatchewan, simply because you want 
to call an election today or tomorrow or whatever? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, once again we are getting into debate on the merits of the bill. 
The point made by the hon. member is that he does not like the terms of the bill. I do not think that it is 
appropriate for me to comment on the terms of the bill and just what they are. I can't answer the hon. 
member's question without a detailed reference to the bill, since he, I would think, has rather clearly 
misinterpreted the contents of the bill. And I would prefer that this debate (and debate it is) take part when 
the bill is before us, and it is already on the order paper. 
 

Ambulance Operators' Protest 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the Minister of Urban Affairs. Yesterday, Mr. 
Minister, you met with the ambulance operators who congregated in front the of legislature from all over the 
province. They presented some very, very deep concerns that they have about the viability of their industry to 
you, and you in turn indicated to them that you would be taking up their problems with members of cabinet. 
Can you indicate to the House at this time whether you presented to cabinet the difficulties placed before you 
by the ambulance operators and what was the result of discussions with cabinet? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I met with the ambulance operators' executive. I did tell them that I 
would be discussing their proposals with my cabinet colleagues. Cabinet has not had an opportunity to 
consider their proposals in detail, but we will be doing that and making our position known in due course. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Minister, the ambulance operators have indicated to you and to the public that as 
of midnight tonight they will be responding to only emergency calls within their own designated areas. Do 
you not think, Mr. Minister, that that is an awesome thing and important enough that you would convene a 
special cabinet meeting to discuss ways of settling the difficulties they have, without having them withdraw 
their services? 



 
March 26, 1982 

 
971 

HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know what concept the hon. member has of the way cabinet 
functions. There are people who make proposals for consideration. Cabinet meets on a regular basis. I do not 
call cabinet meetings. Those meetings are called by the Premier. The only thing that I can assure the hon. 
member of is that we as a department consider the matter serious and so does the Department of Health, and 
we are making contingency arrangements in the event that the position that they have expressed is 
implemented. It has to be kept in mind that the ambulance operators have agreements with the district 
ambulance boards. We hope that they will honor those agreements and provide the service to the people. 
 
MRS. DUNCAN: — What contingency plans do you have in place to transport people from rural areas to 
the major centres of Saskatoon and Regina in the event of the withdrawal of services? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — We have now made arrangements, Mr. Speaker, so that we have two Navahos 
that will be available. We operate an air ambulance service, and two Cheyennes will be available if that is 
necessary. Having four aircraft available, we think we can cope with any emergency situation if it is a matter 
of transferring patients from one hospital to another. We are also making arrangements with the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan to have their aircraft available for transportation in an emergency situation. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, are you saying that, as of midnight tonight, the people of Saskatchewan 
are going to have to rely on an airplane coming from Regina to Wilkie, where there isn't a paved or lit strip, 
to haul sick or injured people to either Saskatoon or Regina? Will you now not admit that because your 
government has not properly funded this program, the lives of people in rural Saskatchewan are in jeopardy 
because of this government? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, for the information of the hon. member, back in the early '40s 
Saskatchewan introduced the first air ambulance service in North America. That service has been very useful 
and is very much appreciated by the people of Saskatchewan. Thousands of patients have been transported; I 
don't know how many lives have been saved. I have confidence in the air ambulance service which we 
provide. Many other provinces in Canada and states in the U.S.A. have come to look at our service, have 
copied it, have introduced it. Mr. Speaker, in answer to the hon. member, we will ensure that the service is 
available to the people in case an emergency arises. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, we could have a car accident and have six or 
eight people injured anywhere out there in rural Saskatchewan and there could be storm here in the city of 
Regina or in any other part of the province and the plane could not leave Regina. What do you expect them 
to do? Do you expect us to go back to the old ambulance system of hauling people in? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I have something to say as well. A 
rule that governs question period is that members cannot set up hypothetical situations. Order, order! The 
members will assist if in setting up their questions, they do not set up hypothetical situations. Then, all that 
can be given is a hypothetical answer which takes up valuable time in the question period. 
 
MR. GARNER: — Mr. Minister, will you take full responsibility for anything which occurs over this 
weekend if your so-called emergency ambulance situation or proposal, as you  



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
972 

have set up in the province of Saskatchewan, does not work and we have serious repercussions? 
 
HON. MR. SMISHEK: — Mr. Speaker, obviously, the hon. member has not even troubled to inform 
himself as to what the ambulance operators are saying. They have said they will operate the ambulances 
within their districts. They are not stopping that service, at least that is what they told me. That is the 
information I have. They have also indicated they would withdraw service in case there was a patient to be 
transferred from one hospital to another. That is the information they have provided us. The member either 
doesn't understand or comprehend what they are saying, or he is trying to inflate the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think we can cope with the problem in the event there are emergencies which are not 
attended to by the private ambulance operators. There is every reason to believe that the voluntary service 
will continue as it has. The same thing in the case of the service which has been provided through the union 
hospital districts — it will continue as it has continued. I have reason to believe that we can cope with the 
problem. 
 

Energy Agreement 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A question to the Premier. The oil industry is not rebounding from the energy 
agreement entered into last November. It seems to be getting more and more serious in the southwest field as 
the field now appears to be shut down, not for a period of two months but perhaps six months or perhaps 
even longer. The Premier of Alberta is presently making a lot of representations about the energy agreement 
and saying that is has to be changed. Are you doing anything, or are you still going to take the do-nothing, 
hands-off policy and accept that the energy agreement is a good agreement and there's nothing that you can 
do about any changes to that? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I must have mistakenly misled the hon. member. The energy agreement in all 
its ramifications has not worked out well for Canada or for the oil industry. I wouldn't want people to feel 
that everybody is happy with the energy agreement. 
 
I would, however, want to say it is my information that the difficulties surrounding the southwest 
Saskatchewan oil field do not stem in any way from the energy agreement but stem from quite extraneous 
circumstances, and if the energy agreement weren't there or were there in different terms it still wouldn't 
provide a market for southwestern Saskatchewan crude. 
 
With respect to the general question of the hon. member, certainly we are looking at the energy agreement to 
see whether or not some joint federal-provincial action might assist the oil industry. The member will know 
that we as a province took no part of the increase in the price last October provided for in the energy 
agreement. That was split between the industry and the federal government. We took no part of the increase 
in the oil price provided for January 1 in the energy agreement, again split between the industry and the 
federal government. We provided some further royalty cuts for low productivity wells so that our total 
royalty cut for low productivity wells in the last six or seven months would be in the order of 30 per cent. 
 
An effort has been made, certainly on our part. We did not anticipate nor I gather did anyone anticipate the 
market problems arising from the oil glut, and I know  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
973 

my colleague, the Minister of Mineral Resources, is studying this matter to see whether or not any joint 
federal-provincial action could be proposed to assist the oil industry. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A supplementary question to the Premier. We have not only the southwest but also the 
northwest region, on which you staked a lot of the future of this province with regard to the development of 
heavy oil and tertiary recovery. What is happening is that since the energy agreement between you and the 
federal government, there has been very little exploration in the northwest region — in the heavy oil field, 
where you suggested there was great growth potential. Are you going to do anything shortly to try to 
stimulate some activity there since the areas of Lloydminster, etc. are becoming very depressed, much like 
the Swift Current area? Have you anything in the near future that will suggest to the industry that there is 
some chance, or is it just going to be left to ride for six months, nine months or a year down the road? 
 
HON. MR. COWLEY: — First of all, I want to say that my officials were in Ottawa this week, meeting 
with the Department of Energy, Mines and Resources, putting forward some proposals with respect to the 
difficulties that we are experiencing in marketing our crude oil in Alberta and in Saskatchewan — 
particularly the medium and heavy grade crude oil. We have put several proposals before them to which we 
expect them to react in the next week to 10 days. Obviously, the sooner the better, as far as we're concerned. 
 
I have been in contact with the Government of Alberta, with Mr. Leitch. My department has been in contact 
with officials of his department and they, too, have put some proposals before the federal government for 
change. I don't know what the federal government's reaction to those proposals will be, but again we expect 
them to be in the reasonably near future. I think both Mr. Leitch and I have made the point with the federal 
government: we feel that speedy redress of the problem of the shut-in heavy and medium grade gravity crude 
oils in Saskatchewan and Alberta is something that needs to be addressed very quickly. 
 
With respect to the heavy oil area, the industry, I think, is awaiting the announcement of our enhanced oil 
royalties. I expect those to come out in the reasonably near future. I want to say that it has taken a little 
longer than we expected, because we have attempted to have full consultations with the industry to float 
some proposals and ideas before them. Those discussions have taken a little longer than expected. I think 
one needs to realize when you deal with enhanced oil recovery that both the industry and the government are 
operating in an area whether neither have a lot of experience in Saskatchewan. There are people in the 
industry who have experience in heavy oil outside the province, but when it's applied in here it's going to be 
difficult to know what the costs, etc. will be. So we've moved cautiously there in putting together the 
enhanced oil recovery royalties. So that, Mr. Speaker, is my response. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — I'd like to beg the indulgence of the House to say that I'll be asking leave of 
the Legislative Assembly, which I'll require later today after the special order, to return to the debate which 
was discontinued last night at 10 o'clock. I'll be asking the leave of the House to so do, including extended 
hours of sitting and other matters as they may arise. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
974 

Motion for Committee of Finance (Budget Debate) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the committee of finance. 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to participate in this budget 
debate. It is rather unfortunate that this budget has not stimulated the opposition to participate to any great 
degree. 
 
My words today, Mr. Speaker, will pertain to many aspects of the health department, but before I get into the 
specific remarks I wish to make I want to direct some attention to the members opposite and the remarks 
they have made in this budget debate which relate to health. I can sum it up very quickly, because they spent 
less than 30 seconds, Mr. Speaker, on their criticism of the health portion of that budget. The health critic 
yesterday spent less than 10 seconds. In fact, Mr. Speaker, she made three statements which were false in 
fact, and I want to say a word or two about her statements. 
 
First of all, she said health and education spending in the province is at a low level, which is false, Mr. 
Speaker, and I'll prove that this morning. Secondly, she said that Saskatchewan virtually has no specialists 
left, which is false. And she said that we have thousands of empty and unfinished hospital beds, which is 
also false. Mr. Speaker, those words come from the health critic of the members opposite. Surely if any 
member on the opposite side should know something about health, it should be the health critic. Mr. 
Speaker, in my address today I want to show to this House and to the people of the province that when it 
comes to health this government gives it number one priority. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I must take this opportunity to advise the people in the gallery that they have no 
opportunity whatsoever to take part in what is going on in this Chamber other than to observe. In order to 
take part in what's going on in this Chamber, people must be elected to this Chamber by someone in a 
constituency. I want to make that adequately clear at this time. 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, I am proud of the support this government has given 
to the health care system, not only in this budget but in the decade that we have been the government of this 
province. And I will show, Mr. Speaker, in my speech today, that not only do we adequately fund the health 
care system but we lead most other provinces in the funding that we provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Minister of Finance for the excellent budget he has brought in. I say 
excellent, Mr. Speaker, from a biased point of view because I happen to be the Minister of Health. The 
Minister of Finance listened to our requests and gave us a tremendous increase in our budget. I noticed that 
the member for Regina South had nothing, Mr. Speaker, to say about the health care system in his speech, 
except to make some very ridiculous charges that we only build hospitals in NDP constituencies and not in 
PC constituencies. I want to indicate to this House that of the 10 small cities mentioned in the budget — 10 
small hospitals that are to be built — three are, Mr. Speaker, in foreign territory or opposition territory — in 
Nipawin, Indian Head and Davidson. I know, Mr. Speaker, that they will probably only be opposition seats 
for a short period of time. 



 
March 26, 1982 

 
975 

Hospitals, Mr. Speaker, are going where hospitals are needed. Expansion of the health care system is going 
where expansion is needed, simple logic based on this government's profound dedication to the principles of 
medicare, Mr. Speaker — the principles of universality, accessibility and premium-free service. 
 
Where do the Tories stand, Mr. Speaker, on these principles? They stand 10 feet short and 20 years behind 
the times. Twenty years after the birth of medicare in this province Tories across Canada are still trying to 
destroy medicare. They say they support medicare. I say that is nonsense. They don't support medicare; 
neither do they support the principles of medicare. I say you can't stand for a concept if you don't believe in 
the principles. But the Tories say they can; I say, more nonsense. 
 
This is what Tories support, Mr. Speaker, — let's look across Canada. They support health premiums of 
$552 per family in Tory Ontario. They stand, Mr. Speaker, for health premiums in Alberta at $228. Mr. 
Speaker, Tories support deterrent fees for hospital and dental programs and they support huge increases in 
these fees in Tory-like British Columbia. Mr. Speaker, what else do Tories stand for? Well, Tories stand for 
a $100 million deficit for hospitals in Ontario. Tories support hospital administrators as Las Vegas-type 
entrepreneurs in Tory Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's look at some of the headlines. These sordid headlines — and you can see, if you look at 
these headlines, what kind of health care Tories support: "Hospital Projects Face Axe," in the Edmonton 
Journal. Another one, Mr. Speaker, "Patients Died While Waiting Surgery" (in Edmonton), The Medical 
Post. Here's another one, Mr. Speaker, "Extra Billing By Alberta Doctors Hits Seniors Hard." the 
Leader-Post. "Waiting Lists have Doctors Playing God," from the Vancouver Province. Here's another one, 
Mr. Speaker, and this one, Mr. Speaker, is very interesting: "Posh Care For The Paying Patient," the Globe 
and Mail in Ontario. In other words, if you can afford to pay, you can have your steak and champagne. If you 
can't afford to pay, then you have to go without — two types of medicare systems for the people of Ontario. 
 
These stories, Mr. Speaker, make good headlines but they don't make for good health care. They do show 
Tory lack of support for medicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is good news for Saskatchewan. It offers the same kind of continued leadership that 
brought to North America the first hospital insurance plan 35 years ago and the first medicare plan 20 years 
ago. It offers the same kind of leadership that gave Saskatchewan a prescription drug plan, the children's 
dental plan and the aids to independent living program. 
 
In the face of federal cutbacks and Tory examples across Canada, this budget offers a 21 per cent increase 
over last year's health spending. The Saskatchewan budget, Mr. Speaker, stands by the principles of 
medicare. It offers accessibility, not financial barriers. It offers expanded services, not cutbacks. It is 
motivated by compassion, not the pocketbook. It offers services, not stone walls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about what this budget means for the people of Saskatoon. Our university 
will be strengthened through a 17 per cent increase, not a cutback. I think I can say, without be contradicted, 
that that will be the highest increase that you will find anywhere in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
976 

HON. MR. ROLFES: — Our home-owners will be protected through increased property tax rebates and the 
mortgage protection act. Our seniors will benefit from the seniors home repair program and any number of 
other programs directed at our deserving pioneers. 
 
Our workers will have jobs because of the initiatives of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. Our 
downtowns will be revitalized and our services will be increased — all because of initiatives taken by this 
budget. 
 
There is a great deal more, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to say, but because of time, I want to outline 
quickly what this budget offers to the people of Saskatchewan in our four health-related areas: community 
health, mental health, hospital operating costs and hospital capital costs. 
 
This budget provides $21 million for community health programs, an increase of 26 per cent over last year. 
This dramatic increase will allow our public health nurses, nutritionists, speech therapists, health inspectors 
and other people to continue providing first-rate service to the people of Saskatchewan through our health 
region structure. It will allow the department to move even more vigorously into preventive health programs, 
building on the number of pilot projects which were announced in last year's budget. What this budget does 
is put to rest, once and for all, the misguided Tory assumption that little can be done in the way of new 
community and preventive programs because hospitals and traditional medical services devour all available 
resources. Last year's budget show, and this one offers final proof, that with sound fiscal planning and 
management, we can have both. We can have both and we can improve on what we have. As an example 
Mr. Speaker, this budget approves 10 additional speech therapy positions. This doubling of the community 
health speech therapy resource will help to meet the demand for assessment and treatment in our health 
regions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Health works very closely with the city health departments in Saskatoon and 
Regina. This budget provides an increase of 73 per cent in the per capita grants to the city health 
departments, from $2.50 to $4.25 per person. This increase will assist the city departments in dealing with 
the rapidly emerging community health problems such as teen-age pregnancies, problems experienced in 
single-parent families, and health problems of Indian and native people. 
 
Native people, particularly those of our cities, experience a unique series of health problems. For instance, 
the infant death rate is double the rate of the total population. To combat this problem a pilot project in 
counselling by Regina Native Women's Association was launched. The project has been well-received and 
new funding will allow them to expand the prenatal and postnatal counselling services. Mr. Speaker, 
$35,000 will be provided for a Native Alcohol Council education program, focussing on the prevention of 
alcohol and drug abuse among the native people in the province. Finally, for native people, $55,000 will be 
provided to fund hospital workers of Indian ancestry to improve communication and understanding between 
native people and the hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spoken often on the need for more and more visible programs in the field of preventive 
health. To increase our preventive services for youth, $72,000 will go to the Saskatchewan Alcoholism 
Commission for the development of preventive programs and counselling services for youth who abuse 
alcohol and other drugs. And  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
977 

we will increase our non-smoking program by developing a major campaign to increase awareness of the 
harmful effects of tobacco and to reduce the percentage of smokers in all age groups. Mr. Speaker, at this 
time I want to congratulate and thank all those citizens who have written to the Department of Health and my 
office to congratulate us on our anti-smoking campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me now turn to our psychiatric services. I want to say a word about this budget, which 
provides, I think, a substantial increase in psychiatric services in Saskatchewan. First of all, it provides $27.9 
million, an increase of 19.5 per cent over last year's budget. That money will be used to strengthen and 
expand our community-based approach to delivery of mental health services. The community-based 
approach was pioneered in Saskatchewan and it has given our province an international reputation as a 
leader in the mental health field. One of the cornerstones of medicare is accessibility, and the strength of this 
system is that if offers both accessibility and flexibility of services. It brings help to people in need rather 
than forcing them to travel long distances. Communities are important, and what makes community life 
amenable is a full range of services close at hand. 
 
Our community-based approach includes a number of support services: sheltered workshops, approved and 
group homes, community service centres, and day hospital programs. Last October, the Battlefords Union 
Hospital opened its mental health centre, and with that opening each of our eight mental health regions is 
now virtually self-sufficient in dealing with its own mental health needs. 
 
With this increase in this budget we can now further improve and expand the services we offer, and we can 
move into the important areas of prevention, early intervention, and promotion. In some areas we will be 
anticipating the final report of the task force on mental health which will be completed later this year. With 
its preliminary report in May 1981, the task force has already created a higher level of public awareness and 
interest in mental health issues. The task force report will suggest ways in which we can improve mental 
health programs. 
 
Certainly one area which demands urgent priority is services to children and adolescents. If we can prevent 
problems from occurring in the first place, or at the very least prevent problems from getting worse, that will 
be a real accomplishment. The whole area of child and youth services presents immense difficulties in this 
direction. Investment in services to young people now pays dividends throughout their entire lives. Because 
this fact is self-evident, we've launched a number of preventive pilot projects for children and youth in 1981. 
There is a school-based health program in the Moose Jaw health region, a prenatal nutrition counselling 
project in North Battleford, a recently announced provincial child safety committee, health promotion and 
counselling for high-risk youth. These pilot projects are proving themselves and the government is 
committed to continuing them in 1982. To strengthen these programs, this budget provides $433,500 for 
expanded mental health services to children and youth. This includes funds for a provincial director, as well 
as 16 new positions to be distributed throughout the regions most in need. In particular, new child and youth 
services teams will be developed during 1982 in the Moose Jaw, Swift Current, Yorkton, and Prince Albert 
regions. 
 
As important as preventive services are for children and youth, they are not limited to the young. Our elderly 
people represent an increasing proportion of our population with mental health needs. This government plans 
to strengthen mental health support services to nursing homes so that they may better cope with the 
increasing demands  



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
978 

made on them. To meet this increasing demand, this budget provides $106,250 for increased clinical and 
consulting support services to long-term facilities and their residents. This includes four staff positions 
which will be dispersed among regions where the greatest need has been identified. 
 
In addition to these programs for our youth and the elderly, this budget provides funds for the following: a 
specialized group home for difficult-to-manage patients; increased efforts to recruit and retain psychiatrists, 
particularly for our smaller cities; the development of a day vocational rehabilitation program at the Yorkton 
Psychiatric Centre. In total, Mr. Speaker, this is 24 new positions and $1 million for new or expanded 
programs. Saskatchewan intends to stay in a leadership position in mental health services. This budget, Mr. 
Speaker, demonstrates that commitment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, let me turn now, very quickly, to hospital operating costs. The 
largest part of our health care budget is for the operation and capital needs of our network of 133 hospitals. 
We are very excited about our initiatives in the fields of community health and preventive medicine. But 
until the day comes when our citizens stop getting sick or having accidents, our hospitals will remain the 
cornerstone of our health care system. A complete health care system needs both the curative and the 
preventive. This government is committed to supporting both. 
 
As proof of this commitment, Mr. Speaker, consider that from 1975 to 1980-81 Saskatchewan has increased 
its spending on hospital services faster than any other western province. Mr. Speaker, I have before me a 
chart which I would let anybody peruse and it will simply bear out the fact that in 1975 we spent $138 
million and in 1982-83, $351 million — a 154 per cent increase over seven years or, on an average, Mr. 
Speaker, a 22 per cent increase. I challenge any province in this nation to meet those increases that we have 
given over the last seven years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me get one more chart here for everybody to see. It says, "Increased Hospital Expenditure 
Per Capita (Acute Care) 1975 to 1980-81." On this chart, Mr. Speaker, I have five provinces and the 
Canadian average. Ontario, over those five years, spent 54 per cent; Manitoba spent 61 per cent; the 
Canadian average was 69 per cent; Alberta spent 70 per cent; B.C. spent 76 per cent. Mr. Speaker, if the 
opposition's accusations were correct, you would think that Saskatchewan would be below all of those. It is 
not so, Mr. Speaker, because on top of all of those is Saskatchewan with a 77 per cent increase, the highest 
of all of them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, the facts as they relate here simply do not bear out the falsehoods 
that the opposition is trying to spread around this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan's 1980-81 expenditure, as I indicated on a per capita basis, was the highest, Mr. 
Speaker, of almost any place in Canada. Also, Mr. Speaker, since 1979 we provided more than 1,100 new 
positions in our Saskatchewan hospitals. Saskatchewan also continues to provide funding for more hospital 
beds per 1,000 than in any other province in Canada — any other province in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are no hospital cutbacks here and there are no hospital cutbacks in this budget. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance has provided for huge  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
979 

increases in the health care system in this budget. 
 
We took a bold move this January by announcing supplementary grants of over $5 million to be distributed 
among all our hospitals. That, Mr. Speaker, is in contrast with what the Minister of Health in Ontario did 
when he asked the hospitals there to simply increase their meal prices, increase parking lot fees, set up shops 
in the hospitals and turn them into business places in order to raise money to cover the $100 million deficit 
that they were facing. We came up with the bucks, Mr. Speaker. Ontario's government simply told the people 
to turn their hospitals into business places. 
 
We are now continuing, Mr. Speaker, in expanding that initiative by bringing in a budget that provides an 
increase of over 20 per cent of the last year's budget. 
 
This government believes our 112 rural hospitals play a vital role in the community life of our province. We 
believe they should expand their role. Community hospitals are the centres for community and preventive 
health. They are the logical place for integration and co-ordination of health services in rural Saskatchewan. 
To help them to fill that role, Mr. Speaker, this budget offers $1,353,000 for the addition of 50 level 4 beds 
to improve local accessibility and $375,000 for a package of demonstration projects to give rural hospitals an 
expanded role in community and preventive health. 
 
These projects may include a respite and vocation bed program, support service through the home care 
program, or other health promotion programs in the community. Base hospitals in Regina and Saskatoon will 
also share increased funding for specialized services such as intensive care services for newborns and cardiac 
services and for newly expanded facilities at the Pasqua Hospital. 
 
Last year I was happy to announce that our grant to the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation was to be 
increased by 30 per cent to enable the foundation to continue its vital work. We are increasing that grant 
another 18 per cent to $12 million. Mr. Speaker, a 50 percent increase over two years is further evidence that 
cutbacks are simply not in our vocabulary. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to announce that this budget provides $200,000 for the operating costs of 
the first of two patient lodges being developed by the Canadian Cancer Society in Regina and Saskatoon. 
These lodges will be operated by the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation and will provide a suitable 
environment for out-of-town cancer patients who must come to the city for radiotherapy or other cancer 
treatment. As well as providing a better environment, these lodges will relieve pressure on hospital beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeat that these initiatives are being launched without asking for hospitals to increase their 
fees for parking lots as in some other provinces. This budget does not ask our hospitals to sell wine with 
their meals or to build curio shops to raise additional money, as in Ontario. This government believes that 
the job of hospitals is to operate as hospitals, and I am proud that we are providing them with the resources 
to do just that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to the last part of my speech today, and that is on hospital capital costs. The 
Minister of Finance announced last Thursday that as of April 1, 1982, a new hospital capital grants policy 
will take effect. This new formula, Mr. Speaker, does two things. First of all, it recognizes the increasing 
costs of hospital construction and the subsequent burden on communities to meet these costs, so the basic 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
980 

 provincial grant is to be adjusted upward. For small community hospitals the basic provincial share of the 
costs of approved construction will be increased to 50 per cent. For large community hospitals the provincial 
share will increase to 60 per cent. For regional hospitals, which provide services to people outside their 
immediate area, the provincial share goes to 70 per cent. Depending on the kind of hospital involved, these 
changes represent increases of from 25 to 50 per cent over previous levels. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this policy includes a new cost protection feature, which provides additional support 
to hospitals undertaking major capital projects and having a limited tax base. For our municipally-owned 
hospitals the new formula will ensure the local districts' maximum contribution will not exceed a principal 
amount equivalent to 5 mills on the equalized assessment of 10 years. For religious hospitals special 
protection for large projects will be provided by means of a further 50-50 sharing of owner costs in excess of 
$500,000. This new cost protection feature provides a greater degree of equity in hospital support, 
substantially increases the overall level of government commitment, and establishes a reasonable ceiling on 
local taxation. In short, Mr. Speaker, this new policy ensures that hospitals will be built or improved where 
they are needed, not only where the local community can afford them. For Saskatchewan communities to 
maintain their traditional way of life, they need accessible hospital service. This government has no intention 
of applying the Pepin plan to health care. As well, Mr. Speaker, for construction projects already under way, 
we will reassess our level of funding so that no community will be penalized for beginning under the old 
formula. 
 
In addition to this bold, new construction grant policy, I'm happy to note that the budget includes grants of 
$6 million for a number of construction projects outside Regina and Saskatoon. Major renovations or 
expansions will take place in Prince Albert and — I want the opposition to note — Davidson, Maidstone, 
Indian Head, Melfort and Yorkton. New hospitals, Mr. Speaker, are being planned, however, also in La 
Ronge, Cutknife, Lloydminster and Nipawin. In Saskatoon, as part of the ongoing renovations at University 
Hospital (a $30 million package), $6 million will be provided this year, as well as funds for continued 
planning at both City Hospital and St. Paul's Hospital. In Regina, a $120 million hospital regeneration 
program will continue with the Pasqua Hospital receiving $10.4 million and Regina General receiving $10.1 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across Canada today we hear the words "cutbacks" and "deficits." We hear of projects delayed 
or axed everywhere but in Saskatchewan. And it should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that except for Saskatchewan 
and Quebec, all the other provinces have Tory governments. We read of $100 million deficits in Tory 
Ontario. We read of an indefinite postponement of desperately needed projects in Tory Alberta. Cutbacks, 
deficits, overruns, user-pay systems — these, Mr. Speaker, are the trademarks of Tory medicare plans. That 
is not the Saskatchewan way. 
 
What do you find in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Well, this budget provides for us a real determination, but 
it also provides money to improve our hospitals without putting a double burden on our taxpayers. 
 
I look at the evidence across Canada and then I read how the members for Arm River and Meadow Lake 
love medicare. All I can say is, thank God there is still one government in this country which still believes 
and acts on the fundamental principles of the medicare system that was founded in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1982 

 
981 

HON. MR. ROLFES: — Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I want to again thank the Minister of Finance and this 
government for their commitment to medicare and to health. And I have no difficulties at all, Mr. Speaker, in 
supporting this budget. In fact, I support it very proudly. 
 
We have seen, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite trying to use the approach of Washington, or Ottawa, 
which is generally referred to as Reaganomics — and that is, Mr. Speaker, you slash the programs that 
pertain to people. This budget does the opposite; it expands and supports programs that affect the very lives 
of our people. 
 
The federal budget was based on despair; it was based on helplessness. That kind of leadership we can do 
without. This budget is built on hope. It is a good budget. It is a beacon of economic sanity which builds 
rather than destroys. It increases services to the people of Saskatchewan. It will build hospitals; it will not cut 
them back. It will expand community preventive and mental health programs; it will not restrict them. It is a 
budget which proudly adheres to the Saskatchewan tradition of providing first-rate health care. 
 
The Minister of Finance, as I said before, must be commended. In these times of conflict and frustration he 
has shown courage; he has taken economic leadership. And, Mr. Speaker, I proudly support the budget and 
will oppose any other. 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a privilege and a pleasure for me to participate in this 
budget debate on behalf of the people of Bengough-Milestone. 
 
Since my election in 1978, I have had hundreds of concerns brought to my attention. I have dealt with each 
and every one of these on an individual basis. While dealing with these concerns the general consensus that 
the people of Bengough-Milestone have been expressing to me is discontent and distrust for the NDP and the 
Allan Blakeney government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, allow me to review a number of major Progressive Conservative proposals that the NDP 
shamelessly adopted in the 1982 budget. 
 
In March, 1981, in the PC budget reply we asked for a freeze on utility rates for one year. The PC Party 
realized in 1981 that utility rates were getting out of hand. The NDP response, from the minister responsible 
for Sask Power, on May 13, 1981, was this: 
 

It is impossible to give any kind of guarantee that there will be no rate adjustments. 
 
Now it is an election year and we see the NDP adopting a freeze on utility rates. 
 
We have been calling, ever since 1978, for a rural farm and community natural gas distribution system — a 
motion put before this legislature in March of 1980. The response from the members opposite, from Mr. 
Blakeney, was, "I regret to say that it is unlikely the provision of natural gas to farmers would in any way 
relieve the financial squeeze." That's taken from Hansard, November 28, 1980. Now this being an election 
year, they are calling for a natural gas network. 
 
Another proposal that we put before this Assembly and asked for on many occasions was to phase out the 
E&H tax. The NDP response was simply this to a question asked by  



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
982 

Graham Taylor: "Mr. Speaker, the answer is no." And that was given by Wes Robbins, the NDP Minister of 
Revenue, Supply and Services in this House. This being an election year, now they are moving the sales tax 
from children's clothes, which we have been asking for for years now. 
 
The PCs proposed a public utilities review commission, endorsed by the Saskatchewan consumers' 
association in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix and the Regina Leader-Post: "This watchdog agency would 
protect the consumer from needless high increases in utilities." The response from the government, taken out 
of Hansard, was and I quote Don Cody, the Minister of Telephones: "What good is a rate review board?" 
That was taken out of Hansard, December 4, 1981. Now we have an election year coming. The NDP says 
now we need a commission to study how to allow more public input into utility matters. 
 
We expressed this many, many times: allow tandem-axle farm trucks to use purple gas, a PC policy 
resolution passed in November 1980. When we asked this question, Mr. Allan Blakeney answered, "I regret 
that Saskatchewan is not in the happy position of being able to have no tax on gasoline." Now we have an 
election year. What do they come out with in the budget? Purple gas for tandem-axle farm trucks. 
 
In an election year, this NDP government suddenly finds it is bankrupt of ideas. The NDP has run out of 
ideas and as the Leader-Post said, "The budget is cluttered with distinctly Tory ideas." Why should the voter 
of Saskatchewan settle for an imitation when you can have the real thing? A Progressive Conservative 
government, duly elected in the next election, would give them that dream. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bengough-Milestone is a rural riding and I want to take a few moments to touch on the record 
of failure in agriculture by this government. They have stooped to an all-time low in deceit in their play to 
make the crowrate an issue. The crowrate must remain statutory and the federal government must pay. This 
is the policy of both parties sitting in this House. 
 
Farmers cannot afford to pay higher transportation costs for their grain because they are being hurt by 
spiralling costs in other areas such as fuel prices, fertilizer and electrical rates, while grain prices are going 
down. The Trudeau government announcement must be viewed with extreme caution and skepticism. The 
proposed changes to the freight rate are unclear and unfair and leave too many questions unanswered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the farmers of Saskatchewan: save the crow; let Trudeau and Blakeney go. The PC 
stand is that the crowrate must remain statutory and the federal government must pay. This is the policy that 
was passed at our policy conventions year after year, and I challenge the NDP to prove otherwise. 
 
And what about the NDP gas tax? Twenty per cent of each gallon of gas goes to the NDP and five per cent to 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). Two years ago the gas tax was 19 cents a gallon. Now it is 20 
per cent. If gas is $2 a gallon, the NDP gets 50 cents a gallon. If gas is $3 a gallon, the NDP gets 75 cents a 
gallon. Again, I would like to go back and say that two years ago the tax was only 19 cents per gallon. 
 
The NDP cancelled the farm-cost reduction program — some help to farmers that is. The difference between 
Alberta and Saskatchewan on a 20-gallon tank of gasoline is $12. I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, that Premier 
Blakeney can no longer be trusted. Let me  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
983 

give you a few examples of the comparison of the Premier to our leader, Grant Devine. From the Ottawa 
Citizen: 
 

Blakeney has lost respect. There is suddenly the impression of a Prairies' pomp politician. 
There is suddenly the spectacle of a ditherer unable to decide whether to bet on the pot or 
walk away from the game. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Also from the Ottawa Citizen — the headline reads "Saskatchewan's Man to 
Watch": 
 

A new and articulate political voice for prairie populism is about to emerge in Saskatchewan. 
 
And again from the Ottawa Citizen: "Blakeney played perhaps the sleaziest role of all the Premiers in the 
constitutional debate." 
 
From the Regina Leader-Post: 
 

By choosing Devine as leader, here is a university professor who could be Blakeney's 
intellectual equal, a man above reproach. 

 
That was by Dale Eisler from the Regina Leader-Post. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Here is another quote from the Regina Leader-Post: "Blakeney bills show blind 
pursuit of dogmatic socialism." 
 
Also from the Regina Leader-Post written by John Twigg: 
 

It's another sign that Saskatchewan Tories under new leader, Grant Devine, are evolving into 
a populist party and moving away from dogmatic Conservatism. The provincial government 
will have to stay on its toes to stay in power. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Another editorial from the Regina Leader-Post: "PCs have earned credibility by 
proposing alternatives." 
 
And, I might add, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the alternatives turned down by the government until this 
election year. 
 
I would now like to turn briefly to agriculture. Agriculture is Canada's largest and most important industry, 
but, if you look at the record of the current government, it makes you wonder whether it believes it. During 
the past nine years the farmers in the province have suffered because of neglect by the Blakeney government. 
The Progressive Conservative Party recognizes the importance of agriculture and advocates programs for 
farmers after we are the government after the next election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
984 

MR. PICKERING: — A PC government will honor all land bank leases. We will also initiate a 
Saskatchewan family farm purchase program. This would provide once in a lifetime $350,000 loans to 
young people who are just getting started on their farms. The interest rate would be 8 per cent for the first 
five years and 12 per cent, or prime, whichever is lower, for the remainder of the pay back period — 
something this government opposite has failed to adopt. 
 
We would also initiate a Saskatchewan irrigation capital grant program to provide family farms with the 
economic incentive to fully capture the benefits of irrigation in this province, and a Saskatchewan agriculture 
and food processing program to provide both investment capital and tax incentives to enable farmers to fully 
participate in the benefits of a growing world market. 
 
We would initiate a program to help cow-calf producers, such as is found in other provinces. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe the Leader-Post summed it up very well when it wrote, "Blakeney's Scare Tactics an Injustice to 
Electorate." Allow me to quote from that editorial: 
 

Premier Allan Blakeney, usually a reasonable man who gets his facts straight, obviously lost 
some reasonableness and a few facts on his way to the Saskatchewan New Democratic 
Party's annual convention in Saskatoon. Blakeney's speech to the party faithful last Sunday 
included a fiery defence of the role of Crown corporations. There were suggestions from the 
Premier that the Tory sympathizers were somehow anxiously waiting in the wings to swoop 
down and peck away at the entrails and dismantle Crown corporations following a 
Conservative win. 

 
This, Mr. Speaker, is absolute hogwash. Rules of the party would ensure that Crown corporations would not 
be dissolved, but we will open the records so the people of Saskatchewan can decide which Crown 
corporations are viable and which ones are not. 
 
In a short time we will be going to the polls, and the NDP of course will give a deathbed repentance for their 
sins, but it will be too late. They will be defeated, and I have given you a number of reasons why. The voters 
of Saskatchewan will recognize that this NDP government will stoop to any level to retain power and that 
this government is not interested in the problems facing the real families of Saskatchewan. What have they 
done for the families of Saskatchewan? Well, if you're a home-owner the NDP will give you 10 cents a day 
as announced in the budget. If you're a renter the NDP will give you a measly 8 cents a day, and if you're a 
businessman, really they don't have anything meaningful at all. For the farmer and rancher, it's the same 
thing — really nothing. For the senior citizens, there is really nothing but big power bills with education tax 
added to them. They say they are helping the real families of Saskatchewan. Now 8 cents a day for renters 
and 10 cents a day for home-owners seems to me to be a great help. It's just a joke, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of Bengough-Milestone I will be voting against this budget, and 
at the same time I challenge the government and the leadership of Allan Blakeney to have enough nerve to 
go to the polls even today. 
 
MR. MacAULEY: — Mr. Speaker, first I want to congratulate the hon. member for  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
985 

Humboldt, the Minister of Finance. I think he has done a terrific job for all of us, not only in the South but 
also in the northern part of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to learn that the budget speech has brought good news to northern 
Saskatchewan. I commend the government for committing itself to working for northern people and for 
looking at our economy and social development in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The strategy is now to provide educational opportunities for Northerners. The training and technical facility 
for La Ronge that is now in the planning stage will no doubt give great encouragement to our younger people 
and assist them to put forth greater efforts in seeking job opportunities. I must emphasize the necessity for 
the strong school system and skill training for our northern people. We have been fortunate since the DNS 
was established in northern Saskatchewan to have three community colleges established across the northern 
part of this province. These three community colleges are playing a big part in northern education, and many 
of our young people are taking advantage of these educational opportunities. 
 
I also want to commend the government for announcing the construction of a new hospital at La Ronge at 
the cost of $5.5 million. The existing old hospital will become the first long-term care facility for our senior 
citizens in the northern part of this province. Because of the good medical services we in our province are 
receiving, many more of our northern people are reaching senior citizen status and our northern people are 
not moving south as they did at one time. Better facilities all around are making the North a good place in 
which to live and raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been very noticeable in the last little while that the Indian and Metis people are seeking 
better opportunities to participate in many areas of economy and life in their communities. This present NDP 
government is to be commended for the opportunities provided in this respect. Mr. Speaker, the CCF-NDP 
government in Saskatchewan has had, since 1944, a long tradition of sound financing and management, and 
it is giving the northern people today a good feeling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although the northeast part of this province, Cumberland constituency, is large, our northern 
people have managed to get closer to one another through meetings and good relationships with one another 
as communities. This is something we never had when the Liberal government was in power in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I say a few words about business in northern Saskatchewan? Considerable planning has 
been done to get smaller businesses going in northern communities. The people of younger generations are 
not following the traditions of their forefathers as they did in the past. The younger people are looking more 
to the modern age, which we expected. Mr. Speaker, this is the result of schools being established for a 
number of years in these smaller communities. Students are now finishing their grades 11 and 12. 
 
Grants must take place to encourage small businesses in these communities, if they and the populations are 
going to survive. The fishing industry in northern Saskatchewan is not producing as well as it was one or two 
decades ago. Mining alone will not absorb all employment needs of northern Saskatchewan. They have to 
have something in that area. Mr. Speaker, when we look at southern communities with the high costs now 
prevailing, and realize that in the North air freighting is much more costly than road transportation, then the 
only thing we can see viable to small  



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
986 

manufacturing and processing is articles that can be packaged in small quantities for transportation south, 
utilizing our forest products in that way. 
 
We also have a large deposit of silica sand that can be used for housing construction in my area. A new 
program by government is under way in this regard, but a great deal must be done by the local people to get 
ideas working smoothly. The program itself is not a handout but an idea to get people on their feet in these 
communities, and we hope to get results from it in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it must be realized that unless industrial progress takes place in this smaller communities, we 
can anticipate unemployment in northern parts. Governments, both provincial and federal, have been 
assisting with housing in many of these communities and in some cases water and sewer. The people in this 
province should take note that the government can just do so much in this area and it is necessary for the 
people of the North, as well as the South, to get up on their feet and help to establish viable businesses to 
keep communities going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now I want to talk a bit about highways. We have some good news for northern people. I know 
they are listening today. The spot surfacing for La Ronge south is 2.5 kilometres, and Highway No. 2 from 
La Ronge to Nemeiben River is 25.4 kilometres, and Highway No. 2 north to Nemeiben Lake, 1.9 kilometres 
for grading. Also, on Big Sandy Lake, Highway No. 106 from Big Sandy Lake to mile 190, 37.6 miles will 
be built this coming year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regarding highway systems in northern Saskatchewan, three main roads, Highway No. 155 on 
the northwest side, Highway No. 102 in the central part, and Highway No. 106 on the Northeast side, are 
now in place, and most have been completed with hard surfacing. This will benefit the northern half of the 
province in the future for easy transportation of goods. 
 
Smaller communities have been grumbling because they have not received paved highways to their 
doorsteps. These roads will take time to complete, because many of them are hard to deal with because of 
rock surfaces and formations. These will take time, with much input of money. Most of these roads are 
standard now and they can be used for pretty well any kind of hauling in those areas. 
 
What I would like to see now is people of northern communities using these roads for the transportation of 
wood-related manufacturing goods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now would like to speak a few words in Cree, naming these roads which I have just spoken 
about a minute ago. I would like to say this in Cree over the air so that the people of that area will know what 
parts of the roads are going to be worked on this coming year. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MacAULEY: — Mr. Speaker, when I presented my first speech in this House in 1975, you allowed me 
to speak a few words in Cree, and it was the first time Cree was spoken in this House. I thank you for 
allowing me that departure from the norm because it allowed the Indian people of this province to know that 
at least the Cree language had been spoken in the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my closing remarks on this budget speech, may I thank my colleague,  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
987 

Mr. Pepper, who has been so kind in assisting me to learn my duties as a member of this House. I also want 
to thank all my colleagues who have been supporting me in many ways. I thank the people of the 
Cumberland constituency also, who have been so generous in helping me to support their efforts, on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I conclude by saying, I support the new motion, and the budget speech of 1982. I thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — You know, after 14 years of political experience, I'd love to give some sound 
advice to the Conservative opposition and, Mr. Speaker, there are only three of them sitting in the benches. I 
suppose that's par for the Conservatives in showing their interest in the affairs of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is a great honor for me to participate once again in the budget debate, as I have done many times before. 
Mr. Speaker, it is most likely the final budget speech I will be making in this House, as there is every 
indication that we will be having an election in the not too distant future — maybe May, June, July, maybe 
even October. 
 
I recall last year. My comments then were that the 1981 budget was good enough to go into an election with. 
This 1982 budget, a people's budget, is one that I would love to fight an election on. It's a budget for the 
times. I want to congratulate the Hon. Minister of Finance for the sound, constructive, dynamic and, most of 
all, timely budget he brought down on Thursday last. The opposition cry out, "Oh, yes, timely — timely for 
an election." And I say, yes, even for an election, but that is the least important. 
 
I want to congratulate my fellow colleagues who have spoken in a concise and precise way to outline the 
benefits of this 1982 budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now going back to the question of it being timely, I say it's timely because of its content and purpose — 
assistance being given to people when assistance is needed. What better time is there than now to help 
people through rampant inflation and the high cost of living and to maintain the high standards of service the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve to have protected? And that's what this budget does and more. It makes 
possible economic progress and encourages growth and building, rather than bringing in massive cutbacks as 
the federal Liberal and many provincial Conservative governments are doing throughout Canada. It's a 
budget that boldly projects Saskatchewan into the future. And what's most noteworthy of all, Mr. Speaker, is 
that in times like these, when growth in all other provinces is almost zero, Saskatchewan is still vibrant and 
healthy and, of course, the most important thing — the budget is balanced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the vitriolic condemnation of this budget by the opposition is unbelievable. Words such as 
"inflationary, waste, not enough" were the litany of criticism levelled against this budget by the 
Conservatives. Then, in the same breath they say, "It's not enough; it's niggardly," and make suggestions for 
increases with no thought of a balanced budget. There is total inconsistency in their argument, Mr. Speaker. 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
988 

I want to make a comment on something that was said yesterday in the House. The member for Maple Creek 
takes the Oscar for her so-called contribution in the part of this budget debate that the Conservatives have 
taken. The member for Maple Creek said, in budget debate yesterday afternoon, that the budget and its 
contents insults "the intelligence and integrity of every man, woman, and child in this province." Mr. 
Speaker, once again, in the desperation and frenzy with which these Conservatives want to get their hands 
into government, into the treasury coffers, they will say anything, anywhere, anytime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to the comment made by the member for Maple Creek. If intelligence and 
integrity were ever insulted in Saskatchewan, it was by the member for Maple Creek. It is unacceptable and 
insulting. Let me tell the lady member of this legislature that by taking the intelligence and integrity of the 
Saskatchewan people so loosely, she has done the citizens of Saskatchewan an irreparable harm. The 
estimate made by the member for Maple Creek of the ability of the Saskatchewan people to gauge and judge 
what the budget is all about is unbelievably insulting. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, are not stupid. They know what the budget is all about. They 
know what is in it for them. They know where the money is coming from. I challenge the member for Maple 
Creek to issue her statement to all the people of her constituency. I wouldn't bet a plug nickel that she will be 
re-elected come the next election after that kind of thing. 
 
When the budget speech was given by the Minister of Finance, the opposition Conservatives kept up a steady 
barrage of catcalls, "our ideas, our platform," when the budget referred to some items which had been 
discussed in this House and outside the House, not just by Conservatives but by New Democrats in 
convention and in caucus. Mr. Speaker, when financial resources became available, this New Democratic 
government dealt with them. 
 
Let us take only one of these items which they are talking about — the interest subsidization on housing. The 
Conservative members point to the fact that we have expressed opposition in the past for assistance to 
home-owners in mortgage rates. Of course, we have, Mr. Speaker. I am opposed to the already exceedingly 
outrageous fat profits made by the banks which are getting fatter by the day, by the minute and by the 
second. I am just as opposed today as I was yesterday. But, Mr. Speaker, we in the NDP believe that 
sometimes there comes a time when there are overriding causes which must be considered, that concern for 
people comes first. Yes, Mr. Speaker, if it means that it will help to save a home, then you leave political 
considerations aside. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — It is pure and simple as that. I know the Conservatives are so hidebound in their 
dollar and cents philosophy they almost always never see the human side of the situation. But that is to be 
expected in this era of the Reaganomic thumb-screw approach. I say that the people of Saskatchewan will be 
watching; the people of Saskatchewan will judge all that bombast and rhetoric by the Conservative 
opposition to see if it is real concern for the Saskatchewan people or nothing but empty words, a political 
ploy and a sham. 



 
March 26, 1982 

 
989 

Mr. Speaker, I wouldn't mind wagering my last pay cheque on all the bluster about how much of the budget 
is Conservative platform. I would like to know if they will be voting for or against it. I think they will vote 
against it because the Conservatives would do anything, as I said before, anytime and anywhere to distort the 
truth, distort the right, and distort the positive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you really believe they would ever have instituted any one of those items which they talked 
about had they been in power? I say, never, Mr. Speaker. They, like the rest of the Conservative 
governments, including Clark and Crosbie and Sterling Lyon, would have religiously followed the Reagan 
line, and that is, what John Crosbie the Conservative budget whiz kid, indicated to the people of Canada 
when he presented his budget in Ottawa. This is what he said, roughly speaking, "Get your nose up to the 
grindstone, John Q. Public; you have to suffer first before some benefits will accrue to you." 
 
Do you really think, Mr. Speaker, that these divided Devine Conservatives would have provided the kind of 
humanitarian budget like this one? Again I say never; the complete reverse would be true. For one thing, Mr. 
Speaker, under their philosophy of more for the rich, there would be no resource revenues such as this 
government has put into place to finance such a budget. They, the Conservatives, are believers in 
Reaganomics. "All economic ills," they say, "unemployment, inflation and low interest rates will be cured if 
you give the industrialist, the financier, the rich and the powerful monopolies unimpeded profits and lower 
their taxes." "Recession will be beaten," they say. 
 
The possibility of the so-called monopoly benefits of the rich and the powerful being eventually filtered 
down to the middle class and the poor people is as likely, Mr. Speaker, as the proverbial camel going 
through the eye of the needle. I think another expression would be "like a snowball in hell." 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the evidence we are getting from the United States and Great Britain is that that theory is an 
illusion that will cost this world most dearly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you, Sir, and to all members of this legislature, that I am going to miss this 
place. After more than 14 years one develops a sense of closeness with the surroundings and the people that 
work here. I certainly will miss the comradeship of my New Democratic colleagues — as fine a group of 
stalwart Saskatchewan citizens as one can find anywhere. I will even miss some of the opposition members. 
But I can tell you one thing, I am not the only one that will be missed in this House, as I am quite certain that 
most of them will be missed in this House after the next election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — History moves on, Mr. Speaker. I am proud of the recorded 10 years of 
Saskatchewan history as written by the Allan Blakeney government. I know that the people of Saskatchewan 
are proud of that decade of accomplishments as well. But, Mr. Speaker, there are dark clouds on the horizon. 
 
I recall that last year in this legislature I reflected on one aspect of the case for separation based on the debate 
raging in Canada; the constitutional debate was almost entirely Anglo-Saxon versus the French, fighting for 
their own rights with almost total disregard in their heated clashes for other ethnic groups and Indian and 
Inuit people in this country. 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
990 

I said then, Mr. Speaker, that the ethnic groups weren't asking for special consideration. All they wanted in 
this country was recognition as good Canadians, having contributed most diligently to the overall good of the 
province and Canada. They wanted to be recognized as having added immensely to the overall wealth and 
culture of this country, as an integral part of the whole make-up of this nation and particularly the mosaic 
make-up of western Canada. 
 
We should not ever forget that these small and some not so small minority ethnic groups have been 
long-suffering and overearingly patient in their aspirations. But, Mr. Speaker, no one should take all that for 
granted. Mr. Speaker, the cracks of western separatism are not emanating from the ethnic groups — not yet, 
and I don't believe they ever will. You will find no one as strong in support of one Canada as these people. 
But, Mr. Speaker, if we are to remain as one country, then all people, and particularly politicians — federal 
and provincial right across Canada — had better address themselves to the realities as they affect all the 
people of Canada, including minorities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — They must do so because, if continued disillusionment in the West persists, then 
the job of keeping Canada together will be insurmountable. 
 
I would like to turn a little bit to my Melville constituency. Melville constituency is made up of that kind of a 
pattern, Mr. Speaker, of German, Ukrainian, Anglo-Saxon, Polish, Hungarian, Scandinavian, and many other 
back grounds including Indian people — a constituency I am exceedingly proud of for a lot of good reasons, 
but one in particular. It is another place in Saskatchewan where racial discrimination is rare and where 
people are recognized for what they are. Even though only 20 per cent of the population of Melville 
constituency is of Ukrainian origin, they have elected and re-elected me, an ethnic, for four consecutive 
terms. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — I say, Mr. Speaker, in light of this and many other such situations, it bodes well 
for Saskatchewan and for Canada when representation is chosen for this House from across the whole 
make-up of the population. Mr. Speaker, it bodes well for true participatory democracy. One has only to look 
at the government side of the House in this legislature to see that kind of true democratic representation. Mr. 
Speaker (I say this with sadness), how notably absent was such democratic representation in the Lyon 
Conservative government of Manitoba prior to the last election. Then, Mr. Speaker, some nitwit or some 
nincompoop in the newspaper business had the nerve to write just lately in a news column. "The ethnics 
gave strong support to the NDP in Manitoba" — with good reason, Mr. Speaker, with real good reason. 
 
Melville constituency was represented by a New Democrat for the last fourteen and one-half years and will 
continue to be represented by a New Democrat, Pat Krug, after the next election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOWALCHUK: — Melville constituency has benefited in the past decade more than they have 
benefited in the past 40 years of administration prior to the NDP government. Melville people are looking at 
this budget and saying, "It's one we can vote for." 



 
March 26, 1982 

 
991 

Before closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that Melville city is celebrating its 75th birthday in 1982. I want to 
express congratulations to Mayor Don Abel and council for the great celebration they are planning. Melville 
has a great history — a history of the pains of birth, of deep depression, of coming into its own in the past 
decade. Melville is a CNR town disillusioned with its bosses in their management of the railway. 
Nevertheless, it is a co-operative community — a community that works together, a community that is one 
of the finest in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to inform this House that every village and town from Melville west came on site as 
the Grand Trunk railroad progressed west. Fenwood, Goodeve, Hubbard and Ituna are all going to celebrate 
birthdays progressively as the years go on from this year. Goodeve celebrated is 70th birthday in Celebrate 
Saskatchewan year. To all of them, I want to extend congratulations and the best in the future. To the people 
of Melville, I express deep appreciation for the confidence they have had in me for all of these years. To 
serve them was an experience which was challenging and rewarding. I will miss some of this political 
atmosphere, but I will continue to fight for the concerns of the people. I will still be there. 
 
With these few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I want to say most emphatically that I support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HARDY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is the second time within a year that I have had the 
opportunity to speak on the budget speech in this Assembly on behalf of the people of Kelsey-Tisdale. 
 
To begin with, there are some very interesting suggestions brought forward in the budget that I think come 
from this side of the House. They are new ideas, Mr. Speaker, from a new party, a very aggressive party, and 
a very aggressive opposition. One thing, Mr. Speaker, I noticed that they brought forward (and I think 
everyone over here has been asking for it for the last couple of years) is purple gas for tandem trucks. That is 
a very essential thing in our farming communities with the long hauling of grain we have. Mr. Speaker, that 
is one thing we really need. 
 
One other thing is a rural gas distribution system. How many years now have we been asking from this side 
of the House for exactly that? And how many years has the government been saying, "Oh, no, Mr. Speaker, 
we can't afford it; it costs too much; it costs $1 billion"? Then all of a sudden they come out and say, "The 
Conservatives are right; it costs $175 million and should be done." I'd like to congratulate them on that, Mr. 
Speaker, because I think that they have finally seen the light. They realize that rural gas distribution in the 
province of Saskatchewan is a must. 
 
Another thing they brought forward which we have been suggesting is mortgage assistance for home-owners. 
But they haven't put anything really substantial there. They did it just partially. They forgot that the interest 
rates today are 16, 17 per cent, and went up today maybe to 18 percent. So they give 1 per cent below. Will 
that really start a new housing project in Saskatchewan? I don't think so, Mr. Speaker. I really think that it's 
lacking there. I don't think we are going to start any new housing. No new industries are going to start 
because of that. Plumbers, electricians — all of those are not going to have an opportunity to start working 
unless there are housing starts. 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
992 

In my area there are three mills. Two of them are down and one has laid off a considerable number of men. 
I'd just like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the lumber industry is an essential part of our part of the province. It 
also relates to the rest of the province. If it is not selling its lumber, no houses are going up, small 
construction companies are not working, and the laborers are not working. That means fewer dollars, Mr. 
Speaker, for the province and for the working people — fewer dollars for all of us. 
 
The government did bring forward a public utilities review commission, and also a public utility freeze, but 
only on power, and in the last two years they have almost doubled their power prices. Surely, they can freeze 
it for six months without really hurting anything. What about Sask Tel, what about SGI? SGI had a 200 per 
cent raise in the last two or three years. And Sask Tel, although maybe it hasn't the highest in the country, 
has been making a large profit. Is it not time, with the hard economic squeeze, to freeze this utility rate, too? 
But no, Mr. Speaker, these people don't want to do that. They want the money to buy more land, to buy more 
companies, to own and control it all. 
 
Another example from the budget — they said they had actually reduced taxes, and Mr. Speaker, what they 
have done is increased them. They expect to get $200 million more in personal income tax alone. Personal 
income tax increased, I think it's been mentioned here many times, from $409 million to $597 million. I 
noticed in the last two or three days the hospital workers in here asking for more money — asking so they 
can meet those costs of living. What have they done? They haven't even tried to bring them to the 
negotiating table. They have never made a really sincere try to do that. Mr. Speaker, it costs just as much for 
them for a loaf of bread or a pound of butter as it does for anybody else. These people have to have a living 
the same as the rest. And when you talk about increasing taxes, our own personal income tax alone, just 
think what these people must feel, how they must react to their costs. You are offering them 11 per cent, and 
then putting 20 per cent into health care. Are they not a part of our health care system? Do they not warrant a 
fair part of that budget? 
 
Talking about renters, you know they did bring in more mortgage assistance for renters — $2 a month or 7 
cents a day — and for the home-owners — $3 a month or 10 cents a day. Now what would that buy, Mr. 
Speaker? Not very much. And you know what they have also done? They put $2 billion into the Crown 
corporations — $2 billion. And I notice here that they are going to borrow from outside investments, $859 
million to make their budget balance, to put it in there for these Crown corporations. Is it not time now, Mr. 
Speaker, that we used a little bit of common sense and said, "Hey maybe for a year or two we have to curtail 
some of these major expansions"? Maybe we have, in fact to be a little more realistic and realize that the 
people of Saskatchewan only have so much money and that we can only afford to buy so much. Maybe that 
comes first, Mr. Speaker, maybe we should make people first, as the Minister of Finance said, and not just 
power. Instead of ownership, maybe we should make people first. 
 
Another point I think I'd like to make is that in the estimates they've allowed $42.3 million for the rural 
municipalities in this province. That's for bridges, administration, roads, the cost sharing of hospitals, 
recreation, ambulances, regional parks — the list could go on and on. That's $42.3 million for all of rural 
Saskatchewan. Just to compare, last year, Mr. Speaker, they estimated $91 million for DNS (Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan) and then I notice there was an overexpenditure of an additional $29 million. Do our 
rural people in Saskatchewan not need the same type of assistance? Do they not need the same type of 
consideration? 
 



 
March 26, 1982 

 
993 

Do you realize also, Mr. Speaker, that many rural municipalities are faced with over a 100 mills municipal 
tax and over 80 mills school tax? And this year's is not yet announced, as far as the school tax goes. Also, 
Mr. Speaker, the rural people of Saskatchewan have to pay hospital tax. In my municipality we pay 15 mills 
hospital tax; that's $200 tax that we pay to keep our hospital going in our town, above all the other taxes. 
And also if we want to expand our hospital or any hospitals, we have to pay 60 per cent of the structural 
costs of the renovations of those hospitals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite claims that they care about our health. Has it not really forgotten to 
carry its share of the cost of health care in this province and, in fact, put more and more of that cost back on 
the rural taxpayer? In the urban centres, they're not quite as bad, Mr. Speaker. They don't have that mill rate 
tacked on their taxes for hospital costs. It's only the rural areas — our small towns, our small communities. 
I'm not too sure, Mr. Speaker, if they really care about our rural areas. I'm not too sure, Mr. Speaker, if they 
really have a deep concern for the rural people of Saskatchewan, because it seems that ever and ever our 
roads are being left behind. 
 
Talking about roads, I looked in this project array of the highways. I looked all the way through it, and I 
noticed the minister, speaking here a day or so ago, said that it was fairly well distributed among all the 
constituencies. I look in here, Mr. Speaker, and I see nothing for the Kelsey-Tisdale constituency but a little 
bit of repair on one highway. I've heard the minister responsible for Sedco, the member for Melfort, say, 
"Melfort's in there." Yes, I see Melfort in there, and good for Melfort. But what about the rest of us? Don't 
you really care about the rest of us? Is it just the seats that you own? I heard one member here today say, 
"The rest are (inaudible) seats." Are we all not part of Saskatchewan? Do we not all deserve the same rights 
as each member of the government does? 
 
I have roads in my area and roads north of Hudson Bay; No 9 I can think of specifically. It's called "suicide 
trail" in my area. There have been many accidents there and quite a few deaths there. That highway has to be 
one of the most used highways and the worst highway in this country. Just last year they had an official 
opening of that highway, and I couldn't get there. It took me four hours trying to get down the road to get to 
that highway, and I was late for the official opening. Now I don't call that a highway in our province, and that 
will never promote tourism in this area. 
 
Just another thing, Mr. Speaker. The price of fuel here in Saskatchewan has to be a concern of everybody in 
this province, whether he drives a car, a tractor, a truck or a motorcycle. We have to pay on every gallon of 
gas that we buy here in the province of Saskatchewan about a 40-cent road tax. Also, Mr. Speaker, do you 
know that we pay 7 cents a gallon to SGI? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I heard somebody over there 
say just now, "At least we build roads." Roads, I would like to note, in the constituencies of members on the 
government side of the House, not in the foreign constituencies, as they are referred to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know that as a producing oil province, even if gas were free it would still cost us over 
$1 per gallon for taxes alone — $1 gallon per gallon for taxes alone, even if gas were free. I wonder if this 
government believes people should come first. I think they believe that people pay, government comes first, 
power and control comes next, and people come last. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Tell us about health premiums, Neil. 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
994 

MR. HARDY: — The member mentions health premiums. You know, our health premiums in 
Saskatchewan are free. They are free in the urban centres but not in the rural areas. I just mentioned that we, 
in the rural centres, pay a hospital tax which is a direct mill tax, plus we pick up all the additional costs. To 
the average farmer, those costs amount to about $200 per year. Hospitals are not free in this province — we 
have to pay; there is no alternative. But don't let anybody tell you they are completely free. In the rural areas, 
the taxpayer pays directly at least $200 a year for hospital tax. 
 
Let's talk about jobs. I haven't noticed any jobs; there are 400 or 4,000 work-year jobs or something. How, 
Mr. Speaker — by spending $2 billion? I think there are many other alternatives. We live a resource rich 
province and we haven't really done anything to develop these resources. We have oil, gas, coal and 
limestone — you name it; we have it. And yet, Mr. Speaker, we are not really using our resources; we're not 
bringing any kind of industry in. Unless it's government owned and controlled it doesn't come in. 
 
I would just like to mention the rape-crushing plant which was suggested for the Melfort area. I would like to 
know who lobbied against it. Who spoke out in the papers against it? Who said it wasn't needed? No other 
than the minister responsible for Sedco, the member for Melfort! I would like to know why he said that, Mr. 
Speaker. Doesn't he want our farmers to have another outlet for their product? Did he not want the 70 new 
jobs which would come to that area and the spinoff factor of 200 more new jobs? Why didn't he want that for 
our province? It might have employed 270 young people, all told. Those young people are our future; we 
need them and we can't afford to let them go. I think it's time we became an exporter of products and not an 
exporter of young people. People really should come first. 
 
There is one other area I would like to mention — highways. It is the road which runs from Archerwill 
across to Highway No. 38 via Greenwater Provincial Park — one of the most used roads for tourism in this 
province. It's a grid road. We have asked to have it taken into the highway system over and over again, and I 
notice that this time it still hasn't been taken into the highway system. It would connect a major part of 
Saskatchewan directly to Greenwater through the highway system. I would think that the minister 
responsible for highways should seriously look at this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that small business is suffering from the same problems which plagues us all — 
high interest rates. We in the Progressive Conservative Party would introduce a $45 million loan program for 
inventory, upgrading of premises, and for equipment for these small business people — loans which would 
be made available for up to $25,000 at an interest rate of nine and five-eighths per cent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HARDY: — If you wonder where we would get the $45 million and where we get the nine and 
five-eighths per cent interest rate — the sum of $45 million was given to the Cornwall Centre at nine and 
five-eighths per cent, locked in for 35 years. Do not our small business people deserve that same 
consideration? Are they not spending their money in Saskatchewan? Do they not deserve the same 
consideration that was given to some eastern developer for the Cornwall Centre? We need the small business 
people; they built this province and we will do everything we can to retain them. 
 
Another thing we would like to have considered is freezing rates, at whatever time, to  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
995 

ease the strain. The rate is 9.625 per cent, and if they need to freeze it for five years it can be done, or if it 
needs to be frozen for one year, it can be done. That is a very essential part of our small business 
development program. 
 
I would just like to say that I was at a meeting in Carragana a little while ago. It was a wheat pool meeting, 
and that meeting was being held for a reason. It was held because the wheat pool was going to withdraw its 
services to that community. When I was there I spoke about what is needed in a community. 
 
There are four essential things that make a community, Mr. Speaker; a school, a post office, an elevator and 
a small business section, and if we do not retain that small business section, we don't retain our small rural 
communities. Mr. Speaker, these retail businesses are a must for the survival of small communities. 
Anything we can do to assist these people, who have become the backbone of rural Saskatchewan, should be 
done. Let's put people first, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Although there are many good things in this budget that came from our side of the House, there are many 
things that have only been half-addressed. So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that I won't be supporting the 
budget. 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, let me begin by congratulating my colleagues on this side 
of the House for their participation in this debate and their contribution to this debate. I will even go so far as 
to extend a word of commendation to the members opposite in this Assembly for their valued efforts in 
trying to make some points in this debate. Even the member for Kelsey-Tisdale tried so hard that he ended 
up by re-announcing our program of assistance to small business people in the interest abatement program, 
and a new program that Sedco is going to provide because of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, never in my experience for all the years that I have been in this Assembly has an opposition 
wanted less to debate a budget than this one. This is a budget that has been well received by people across 
this province and by organizations such as SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), HUDAC (Housing and Urban Development 
Association of Canada) and others. But you know, having said that, I really have to say (and I regret to say it) 
that there are a few (about 17 of them) for whom this budget was a disappointment. I refer of course, to the 
members opposite, because they, alone, are unhappy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Why are they unhappy? They wanted a deficit budget like that of Alberta — a budget which they could 
condemn as irresponsible. Instead, Mr. Speaker, they got a balanced budget. They wanted an austerity budget 
with cutbacks in health, education and social services, because that is their policy; that is the Conservative 
approach. In spite of that, they wanted a budget that they could say was insensitive. Instead, they got a 
budget which responds to the needs of people today, a budget which provides $700 million for health care 
service in Saskatchewan — a 22 per cent increase. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives wanted a retrenchment budget, a budget that would choke off the 
growth of our economy. The member for Regina South actually outlined that in his response. That's a budget 
that lets the recession creep in from Tory Ontario and take away Saskatchewan jobs. Instead, we have a 
stimulative budget, a budget that provides 18,000 construction jobs. 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
996 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — We have a budget that directs $2 billion to productive investment in 
Saskatchewan, investment that benefits Saskatchewan people now and in the future as well. And do you 
know what the member for Regina South called that stimulative aspect of the budget? He said it is absolutely 
ridiculous. When he talked about the 18,000 jobs, he said that it is absolutely ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. So the 
opposition doesn't like this budget; they've done their best to criticize it and that really wasn't much of an 
effort. This debate showed something very important again. It showed the ineptness of that leaderless group 
of Tories over there when it came to trying to propose some alternatives. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — As a matter of fact they were so inept, Mr. Speaker, that they couldn't 
sustain the debate on their own amendment and had to vote on it on Tuesday evening. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — They show little respect for the facts and even less respect for the 
intelligence of Saskatchewan voters. For example, the member for Regina South says that per capita income 
in Saskatchewan is 10 per cent below the national average. Well he knows that is wrong. He knows that's 
wrong, Mr. Speaker. The real figure is 2 per cent, not 10 per cent. And more importantly, Saskatchewan's per 
capita income has grown faster since 1970 than any other province in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — And I know that that's an accomplishment that the members opposite 
would like to forget. The Tory finance critic goes on to say that Saskatchewan young people must leave this 
province in order to finds jobs. Well, wrong again Mr. Speaker. Jobs are more widely available in 
Saskatchewan than in just about any other province in Canada. The proof is that Saskatchewan's 
unemployment rate is the lowest in this country. 
 
The Tory finance critic said that this government will increase Saskatchewan's debt by $2 billion in 1982 — 
once more wrong, Mr. Speaker. I refer the member to page 54 of the budget speech, and he should read it 
before he delivers a speech that somebody else writes. But that document clearly shows that the province's 
debt will increase not by $2 billion but by $912 million — a $1 billion mistake on the part of the Tory 
opposition over there. Tory arithmetic, Mr. Speaker, fails again. And he fails to mention the crucial point 
that this money is being borrowed for productive investment in Saskatchewan, investments that demonstrate 
our confidence in Saskatchewan's future. The member opposite made it clear that if a Tory government was 
elected, it would not carry on the expansion of electrical generation at Nipawin or Coronach, because it 
wouldn't borrow any money. He made it clear that if they were the government there would not be an 
expansion of the potash mines because they wouldn't borrow the money. He made it clear they'd sell it off. 
He made it clear that they wouldn't build any housing because they wouldn't borrow the money, Mr. Speaker. 
We heard lots about Tory policies. Those are Tory policies and we will have no part of them 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1982 

 
997 

HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, this is not money borrowed to pay for a budget deficit as 
happens in other provinces. This is money borrowed for productive investment in Saskatchewan. I couldn't 
help but be amused by the opposition's feeble attempts to claim copyright ownership over parts of our 
budget. I really couldn't help but become amused. For example, they want to take credit for the removal of 
the sales tax on children's clothing and footwear. Well, I want to invite them to come to a convention of the 
New Democratic Party with me some day as a guest. That item has been an annual resolution of NDP 
conventions for the past seven years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — And now the Conservatives want to claim it for their own. The next time 
the House sits, I would not be surprised if the members opposite announced that they invented medicare and 
that they would have Dr. Barootes make the announcement. 
 
What about rural gasification? We have greatly expanded the natural gas network in this province since the 
early 1960s, Mr. Speaker, and the program that we have announced is a responsible program, not an 
irresponsible program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — And we are providing assistance through Warm Up Saskatchewan to 
parts of the province that will not have natural gas. That's something the members opposite would never 
have thought of, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is one more criticism that must not be left unchallenged. The Tories have accused this government of 
poor management. The member for Regina South made two very revealing claims in his speech. He was 
stating Tory policy when he made them. First, he ridiculed public investment in non-renewable resources 
such as potash. As a matter of fact, he said, "It is like buying stock in a company that has just declared 
bankruptcy." Well, Mr. Speaker, that bankrupt corporation — the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan — 
has made over $400 million in profits in the last five years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — If that's bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker, we need to have more of it. In 1981 
alone, the potash corporation estimated $141 million in profits. Some bankruptcy. But don't take my word 
for it and I tell the members they don't have to take my word for it because obviously I might be biased. Let's 
consult an objective, expert source as to whether this government is well-managed or whether the people are 
receiving good value for tax dollars. Let's look at what a prominent Canadian investment firm says about 
Saskatchewan as reported in the February 27 edition of the Globe and Mail, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan is in excellent health — even better than Alberta in terms of future financial 
footing. Their resource sectors look very strong and they have an extremely capable 
administration and they tend to be a lot more prudent than other provinces in the way they 
spend their money. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
998 

HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — That's hardly an assessment that agrees with the members opposite. That 
says something about the quality of this government's management. It says something about the value of this 
government's economic and financial policies and it says something about the lack of responsible criticism 
from the Conservative opposition in this House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the second revealing claim made by the member for Regina South states the Tory policy 
for resource management in the future. He said he fundamentally disagrees with government ownership of 
resources and that private corporate enterprise should solely operate these ventures. Let there be no doubt, 
Mr. Speaker, on anybody's mind in this House or in Saskatchewan that he has proposed a Tory government 
would sell off Saskatchewan's resource revenues and investments to private owners in the United States and 
overseas. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Now I find this point of view staggering, Mr. Speaker. Where has the 
Tory party been for the last 10 years? Doesn't he believe that Saskatchewan people have the ability to 
conduct their own affairs? Conservatives don't believe in Crown corporations. They don't believe that 
Saskatchewan people should build their own economy. They would sell of the Crowns for a quick buck and 
that means head offices in Toronto and in New York and in Atlanta and not in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
That means profits and dividends for their corporate friends outside Saskatchewan, the same vested interests 
who have helped support the Conservative Party. That means a province with little control over its future, 
the same boom-and-bust economy that the people of Saskatchewan have worked so hard to overcome, and 
once the Conservatives had done that they'd strip the heritage fund of its assets. They'd plunder it, Mr. 
Speaker. There's no doubt about that. Years of hard work down the drain. That is the Tory plan for the short 
term. That is their policy and we will not have any part of it. That's the way they would pay for their 
so-called plan of action but, as I have said in the budget, Mr. Speaker, there is more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tories have presented a shopping list of expensive new proposals that they have no idea 
how to implement or even less idea how to pay for. The cost of these proposals is hundreds of millions of 
dollars. In fact, almost $1 billion for the rural gasification scheme alone, and you know, the member for 
Regina South makes more promises than a used-car salesman. Mr. Speaker, promise now, but who will pay 
later? That may be the privilege of opposition. Unfortunately, the people of Saskatchewan would have to pay 
a high price indeed if they ever made the mistake of driving that clunker off the lot, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, "Money is no problem," says the critic of finance. All he would do is spend less here so that he could 
spend more there. Hundreds of millions of dollars are involved. You know, he is going to readjust spending 
priorities. He's going to cut programs, and he won't say which ones. Of course not. Well, the only place that 
he's going to get hundreds of millions of dollars is by cutting back on the major programs, Mr. Speaker. That 
means health care services; that means health premiums like in Ontario, which are now $550 a year for a 
family in that Conservative province. That means cuts to our senior citizens, and also in grants to schools 
and local governments, as is happening in other parts of this country and the continent. That's where the 
Devine axe would fall, Mr. Speaker, and every man, woman and child in this province would suffer for it. 
We can see it being done right now in the United States by the Tory's political idol who governs in that 
nation. Make no mistake — it would happen here. 



 
March 26, 1982 

 
999 

And after, Mr. Speaker, they had slashed the services for people, like health care and nursing homes, they'd 
bring in their version of private enterprise. And the first priority would be a free ride for big corporations like 
Noranda and Canadian Pacific — tax breaks at the expense of Saskatchewan residents. 
 
And then the Tories would set the provincial economy adrift. Let the winners win, and the losers fall by the 
wayside, controlled by a chosen few, Mr. Speaker. Conservative policies are very clear, and they are on the 
public record just as their Tory leader is on the record in his opposition to the crowrate. This government 
does not support that policy. We don't believe that people have to be punished by high interest rates and high 
unemployment. We believe that in these times of high inflation and national recession, governments must 
act, and this government is prepared to act, and this budget is one of action in that respect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tory policies are clear and they are well-known. They are policies of cutback and tax cuts for 
the rich. It was tried in Manitoba, and in four years the people of that province booted that government out. It 
would be devastating in Saskatchewan, and Saskatchewan people will not have any part of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they will ask where the evidence is about my explanation of their policy. Let me tell you the evidence. 
Let me give you a quote: "We are living in a time that needs strong action and determination, such as that 
exhibited by President Ronald Reagan." 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who said that? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Graham Taylor, PC MLA for Indian Head-Wolseley. 
 
Another quote, Mr. Speaker. "It is very clear that what is needed is to follow the lead set by U.S. President 
Reagan." Who said that? Colin Thatcher, PC finance critic. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — One more quote: "I would suggest to the finance minister that if wants 
guidance he should take a look at President Reagan's economic package." Who said that? James McGrath, 
PC federal finance critic, Mr. Speaker. What about their position on interest rates? Well, the finance critic of 
the Tory Party in Ottawa spoke in Montreal in February. Guess what he said? This is the headline, "PC's 
Financial Critic Opposed to Lowering Interest Rates Too." And he was agreeing with Allan MacEachen, Mr. 
Speaker. That's the Conservative policy. 
 
Now the members opposite have called this budget cynical. And the press has picked that up, and I don't 
blame them, because that's all the members have said in this debate. I'm sorry that the members opposite 
believe that a senior citizens' shelter allowance is cynical. I'm sorry for them. It's hard to believe that the 
Tories would even admit that they consider assistance to home-owners and the provision for adequate 
housing for everyone cynical, Mr. Speaker. That's their view of these kinds of policies. And they would not 
be possible had it not been that the resource policies of this government which each and every one of them 
fought with everything he had to prevent from happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the biggest losers if the Conservatives have their way would be  



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
1000 

Saskatchewan's grain farmers. I've heard those gentlemen over there talk about the crow. I've heard the 
deathbed repentance of Mr. Devine, the same man who once said, "Scrap the crow." The Leader of the 
Conservatives now realizes that this attitude won't win him any votes and so he says, "I've changed my mind; 
keep the crow." That is, Mr. Speaker, keep it for now. Mr. Devine won't have to worry much about changing 
his mind again. He's gone down twice and soon, in Estevan, he's going to go down for a third and last time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, in closing my remarks I just want to say that it is time to 
consider the motion before this House. It is time for the opposition to search its conscience and decide how it 
can vote against this budget. The initial comments made by the member for Regina South gave me 
optimism. He suggested he would support the budget but now I understand that, like his leader who flip 
flopped on the crow, he has changed his mind. 
 
I offer them a challenge, Mr. Speaker. I challenge the hon. member, as I challenged all the Conservative 
members in this House, to vote against this budget. I challenge them to vote against a budget that meets the 
needs of today and builds a secure and prosperous future. I look forward to placing this budget directly 
before the people of Saskatchewan. I look forward to the opportunity of comparing the record of this 
government with the irresponsible promises made by the Conservative Party. And I look forward to the 
outcome of that verdict, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have a government that believes in people. We have a New Democratic Party 
government and in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, because of that, people come first. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 42 
 
Blakeney Pepper Allen 
Kaeding Snyder Romanow 
Smishek Bowerman Tchorzewski 
Baker Feschuk McArthur 
Gross Rolfes MacMurchy 
Mostoway Banda Vickar 
Hammersmith Kowalchuk Dyck 
Thompson MacAuley Engel 
Byers Long Cowley 
Cody Koskie Matsalla 
Shillington Skoberg Poniatowski 
Pebble Johnson Lingenfelter 
White Nelson Lusney 
Solomon Chapman Miner 
 

NAYS — 13 
 
Berntson Garner Birkbeck 
Lane Taylor Andrew 



 
March 26, 1982 

 
1001 

Thatcher Rousseau Pickering 
Duncan McLeod Katzman 
Hardy   
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

AGRICULTURE 
 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. ANDREW: — We on this side are very concerned about the low budget allocated in this province to 
the Department of Agriculture. I would ask the Minister of Agriculture to rise and ask to report progress and 
ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

QUESTIONS (continued) 
 

Sask Power Rate Increases 
 
MR. LANE: — A question to the minister in charge of Sask Power. I know that there was some semblance 
of a temporary freeze announced in the budget, but I note the annual report, showing the SPC loss, tabled in 
the Assembly today. I quote from the president's letter on page 6: 
 

What does this mean to us? It means tighter controls on our own spending, still more 
borrowing at high interest rates, and continued rate increases. 
 

I ask the minister responsible for Sask Power whether continued rate increases are in fact what is going to 
happen with SPC, and if, as the president says, continued rate increases are necessary to get some 
profitability into SPC? 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, one would not have to be a genius to know that over the long 
term the costs of energy in this country are going to increase in general, and certainly if one simply looks at 
the Alberta-Canada agreement under the national energy program he will see that over the long term there 
are price and cost increases that are being provided for that will be applied against the consumers. It is 
obvious that over the long term there are going to be increases in costs of energy in this country and the Sask 
Power Corporation will not be separated from that general arrangement. Certainly, the rate review will take 
place under the commission that has been appointed, and during that time we have frozen rates for 
residential and farm customers so as to provide the opportunity for that review to take place in a full and 
complete atmosphere of confidence without the complication of any possible rate changes during that period 
of time. 



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
1002 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to provide for the establishment of any Adult Dental Project in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. minister, I move that a bill to provide for 
the establishment of any adult dental project in Saskatchewan, be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MOTION 
 

House Sittings 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders, I ask leave to move a motion, seconded by the 
Hon. Mr. Vickar, the member for Melfort: 
 

By leave of the Assembly, that on Friday, March 26, 1982, rule 3(3) be suspended, so that the 
sitting of the Assembly may be continued from 1 p.m. until 10 p.m. and there shall be a 
recess from 1 p.m. until 2 p.m. and from 5 p.m. until 7 p.m.; 

 
And that notwithstanding rule 3(4), on Saturday, March 27, 1982, this Assembly shall meet 
at 10 a.m. until 10 p.m., and there shall be a recess from 12:30 p.m. until 2 p.m. and from 5 
p.m. until 7 p.m., and that the order of business shall be same as on Friday. 

 
Motion agreed to. 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Call resumption of the debate, Bill No. 45. I note that it is 12:40. I leave it to 
the House whether you'd like to adjourn now and come back at 2 o'clock. In some ways that makes sense, I 
think, rather than going for 20 minutes, but if the House would like to continue, that's fine by me. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — There could be unanimous consent by leave of the House to consider at this time the 
private bills. There are three or four which will go into committee. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think we should deal with the suggestion of the Attorney General. Is that acceptable? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Just on that point, to try to manage the House — I am flexible. The hon. 
member for Moose Jaw North has suggested that the three or four private bills be done with. I don't think any 
of them are controversial. We could do them, and then adjourn for the break rather than penalize the private 
people, or we can do them on Tuesday. But it is entirely up to the House. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! We're in a position where a suggestion has been made. In the absence of the 
acceptance of that suggestion, which was to adjourn now and come  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
1003 

back at 2 o'clock, we can follow one of two courses. We can continue until 1 p.m. or we can adjourn the 
House until 2 p.m. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I take it that the feeling is that we should proceed with Bill No. 
45 now. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Romanow that Bill 
No. 45 — An Act respecting Temporary Provisions for Labor-Management Disputes be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You will recall last night at adjournment time that we 
pointed out to the Attorney General, the Minister of Labor, the Minister of Health and the Premier, that, in 
fact, all parties to this dispute who are affected by this particular bill were in this building. We suggested, at 
that time, that they should be afforded the opportunity, overnight, to try to get to the bargaining table and 
come up with a negotiated settlement to the dispute. 
 
Obviously, either through the lack of effort on the part of those ministers named or through lack of desire by 
the parties to the dispute, that didn't work. We have concerns, as does the Attorney General, I am sure (or he 
wouldn't have introduced the bill), that, in fact, public health and safety may well be jeopardized over the 
next few days. We think that it is important that at least section 1 of this bill does receive passage today. 
With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, we will be supporting the bill on second reading. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I shall try to be reasonably brief in my wrap-up 
remarks on second reading of this bill. I don't know if I will be able to conclude before 1 p.m., but we will be 
back at 2 p.m. and it will be shortly after 2 p.m. that I will be able to conclude. I feel I have to take this 
amount of time to rebut some of the comments with respect to this legislation, which were made over some 
three hours of debate yesterday, and to try to answer some of the other points which have been raised by the 
members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think everybody agrees that this has been a fairly wide-ranging debate. It has been a 
wide-ranging debate because it has ranged all the way from a minimal discussion (on the part of some of the 
MLAs) about the contents of the legislation itself to a broader discussion about funding of health services 
and the funding and spending priorities of the government generally. I think that it is important that we set 
the record straight on a couple of the issues which the opposition, in my judgment, has falsely and 
deliberately tried to misrepresent during the course of last night's debate. 
 
I want to try to answer, first of all, the question of whether there is underfunding with respect to the health 
system. This is the question which has been raised several times by some of the members opposite. In fact, 
almost all of them, in one way or another, got up to try and address that point. Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the 
members of this Legislative Assembly that the opposition, in my judgment, mounted absolutely (if you'll 
check the transcript of the records) no statistical or financial indicators to buttress that wide-sweeping and, as 
I have already said, false allegation. 
 
It is to be noted that hospital expenditures estimated for 1982-83 will be in a four  



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
1004 

year period about 154 per cent by way of actual increase or, if you will, roughly more than twice the rate of 
inflation which is existing in the country. 
 
Over 1,100 new positions have been funded in Saskatchewan hospitals in one year since 1979-80 and the 
cost implications of that are in the neighborhood of $25 million. Services for enriched programs (I won't get 
into them because I don't think they are strictly germane to the debate) go all the way from regeneration of 
hospital facilities in Regina, increasing staff complements for smaller hospitals, the cardiac services program 
in Regina, 72 new positions for rural hospitals and level 4 and so forth (all of these have been announced in 
the budget) to the neonatal intensive care program. One could go and I think indicate quite clearly that the 
expenditures of this government with respect to health are very significant indeed. 
 
The allegation that the health system is underfunded is spurious; it is false and is propagated by the members 
opposite, who would do so for purely partisan political reasons. I don't suspect that the hon. member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley, Mr. Taylor, would really stop to consider this, but I think he should think about the 
question of touring, for example, the new neonatal intensive care facilities in Saskatoon or Regina. Has he 
done this? Has he noticed the $120 million regeneration program, which is under way at Pasqua and Regina 
General hospitals, or come to my city to Saskatoon University Hospital and seen what's going on with 
respect to that as well? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on but I think the point is made that the per capita figure for funding hospital costs 
in this province, by any yardstick that you use, is surely, to be modest and fair about it, at least equal to and 
in reality above those that are being carried out in other areas. In Saskatchewan, for example, it's $310 per 
capita; in Ontario, $292; and the Canadian average is $308, so we're certainly keeping pace with respect to 
that aspect of it. I think that allegation, Mr. Speaker, is, as I described it, spurious and political and those 
who advocate that argument are doing so for purely political reasons and political objectives alone. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is another issue. The issue is: have negotiations been exhausted? We heard that 
argument, Mr. Speaker, given as what I would call the pretense of the Conservatives in stalling the passage 
of this legislation. That was the pretense last night. They said that they weren't satisfied that the negotiations 
were exhausted. Mr. Speaker, you can always find an excuse for stalling any piece of legislation. I suspect 
that when we reconvene at 2 o'clock this afternoon the next pretense in stalling this legislation will be 
aspects of part 2 of the bill. You can find a reason to hold back any piece of legislation, including this one. 
The one that they use is supposedly in the interests of public safety from their point of view; they find that 
concern this morning. But they stalled it last night, Mr. Speaker. We all saw that when they, after the 
adjournment was turned down, called it so very forcefully 10 o'clock and thereby forced the legislature and 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan to put this over for another 24 hours. 
 
The Tories say that the government has not exhausted all avenues of negotiations, that we haven't done 
everything to bring the parties back to the table. Yet, Mr. Speaker, no one can deny that there have been six 
months of negotiations carried on, I think in good faith, with no agreement. There have been five days of 
conciliation — intensive conciliation proceedings last weekend. Without casting blame on either side, there 
was no agreement. Mr. Cliff Hagen, an experience conciliator with the Department of Labor, who was 
around before this government was here and probably will be here long  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
1005 

after this government is around (unless my friends emasculate the Department of Labor should they win 
office), is an experienced conciliator. He has called on both parties. He knows both parties. He knows what 
the positions of both parties are. As of today, there is no basic change in the position of the parties despite 
these efforts by the Minister of Labor and the conciliator with respect to both of the positions. How long 
would the Tories have us wait? Why don't the Tories accept and acknowledge the fact that that situation 
existed last night? They knew that existed last night. Why would they have said, last night, that the 
negotiations need to be given yet another chance, after 15 or 16 days of a strike? Again, not casting any 
aspersions or making any judgment calls as to who's at fault, those are facts. 
 
You can shuffle the deck as much as you want, but after 16 days there is no settlement. There was no 
prospect of a settlement last night, and yet the Conservatives in this province, in my judgment, acted wildly 
irresponsibly by holding up this House and this legislation last night on the pretense that there were 
negotiations when they knew full well that there weren't. They knew that to be the case then, and they know 
that to be the case today. 
 
Even if there were some avenue of negotiation, what would the Conservatives have the government do? 
Somebody said, "Well, you have to bring them to the legislature." And then do what with them? Do what 
with the parties then? Mr. Speaker, I say that it is either naiveté or maliciousness which advocates that 
proposition. It is either naiveté or pure political purpose which causes them to say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, to the hospital workers, to the SHA, "Do something. We're not going to tell you what to do. 
We're not going to tell you that you should increase the offers. We're not going to tell you unions that you 
should down on the offers. Just do something." I say, Mr. Speaker, that that is a kind of position which lacks 
credibility. More importantly, on a matter of this serious nature and this gravity, dealing as it is with hospital 
care and the quality of hospital services, not only is it naiveté, but also it is irresponsible and not befitting the 
conduct of any political party that would seek political office and government in this province. 
 
Then, of course, a third issue arose. I think I will talk about their attitude toward labor relations and toward 
the unions sometime this morning or perhaps early this afternoon, but let me just touch very briefly on their 
attitude toward the other side of the dispute, the Saskatchewan Health-Care Association (the SHA). In the 
course of this debate last night, Mr. Speaker, as we heard outside of the House, these members opposite have 
made what I think are absolutely insulting (that's not too harsh a word to use) descriptions of the SHA. 
 
What does the member for Thunder Creek, who unfortunately just had to leave, call the SHA? "Your front 
men." That's what he calls them to the government. What does the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley 
call the SHA? He says, "You can overrule them. Bring them in and tell them what to do." 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that you can take a look at who the SHA is or isn't. I don't happen to know too 
many of the people involved. But I know this: if you look down the board of directors of the SHA, you see 
people like Walter Pappenfus, Harvey Fox, Dave Hart, John Margerison, Sister Therese Roddy, and on it 
goes. These are people, for good or for bad, who are community people who have been chosen to run 
independent local hospitals, to do the best job they can in providing health services for the people of their 
community, to do the best job that they can in getting along with the workers in their hospitals, even in the 
strained times we have here. They're making their best efforts.  



 
March 26, 1982 
 

 
1006 

They owe their independence or dependence to no one. They do it as a public service. They negotiate in the 
way they see fit. The hon. member for Thunder Creek has the audacity to call them "your front men." He has 
the audacity to say, "You call them and overrule them." 
 
I want to tell the hon. Conservatives opposite and the people of the province of Saskatchewan that, for their 
information, the SHA is a body composed of representatives from all over the province. Again, whether they 
did the right thing in putting this amount on the table whether they did the right thing in their negotiation, is 
not for the moment an issue. I'll talk about that later on. But the issue that is raised is the arrogance of the 
Conservative caucus in saying that any government should simply roll over these independent, locally 
autonomous people and impose upon them the wishes of the government. Now that may sound good to some 
trade unionist, if rolling over the SHA is imposing a good settlement in the minds of the unionists, but if that 
principle is established, it cuts two ways — and someday there is going to be a Conservative or a Liberal 
government here which will roll over the SHA the other way and cut back any offers that the SHA would put 
on the table — the moment you establish that principle. 
 
But these people opposite don't care, and they have no respect for the people who volunteered their services. 
They have no respect for the hours of work that have been put in by decent men and women on both sides to 
get an agreement. They want this government to roll over. Translated another way: if they were the 
government and if that settlement were too high or if the offer were too high, they would roll over the other 
way. Mr. Speaker, that's a principle that I don't subscribe to and I cannot subscribe to it as a member of this 
administration. 
 
I know how people feel about strikes and industrial disputes. Some in this House may not believe it, but I 
acted, when I practiced law, exclusively for trade unions, including CUPE. Yes, exclusively for CUPE. I 
have never acted for any employer organization, but I know one thing about labor disputes — 
notwithstanding the emotion that exists in them at the time, there are always other days and other 
relationships and other arguments and fundamental principles that are at stake. And the fundamental 
principle that is at stake here is the principle of a government imposing upon the SHA or if you will, by 
corollary, on a union, its view of the settlement. The moment anybody falls into that trap, even if it should be 
momentarily acceptable in any one given dispute, I tell you that in the future, down the road, the concept of 
free collective bargaining and independence (because it cuts both ways) is seriously impaired and damaged. 
And I can only express my concern at the Conservatives for suggesting that kind of authoritarian approach. 
That was the third matter which I wanted to speak about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I'll 
come to that in a minute — about 1966 and 1971. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to raise a fourth matter which needs some rebuttal. One of the most incredible 
statements that I think I've heard during the course of the dispute, and there have been many from the 
opposite side, is the statement made by the hon. member for Regina South who said that 1 per cent separates 
the parties in this dispute, that 1 per cent can solve the strike. That's what the member for Regina South said 
last night. He said, "if the government" — not the SHA, because we'd blow out the SHA, roll right over 
them, according to their view — "would simply blow out the SHA and go 1 per cent, this strike would be 
solved." That's what he said. Well, Mr. Speaker, I'm interested in knowing the source of that member's 
information. I can speculate, of course, but I simply invite the members of the House to consider how 
credible that position is. Mr. Speaker, I invite you to do this: take the last advertisement of the SHA on 
wages, and the  



 
March 26, 1982 

 
1007 

proposal they laid out on the table, add 1 per cent to it, and ask if CUPE will buy that as a settlement. That's 
what the member for Regina South said they would do. That's what he said the 1 per cent would be. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Regina South either knows that is an absolutely false position to take 
— he knows that to be the case and he's using it accordingly to try to make mischief in this area — or in the 
alternative, he is doing it again deliberately, as we saw last night, to thwart the public will and the public 
need with respect to this legislation. Surely, Mr. Speaker, if it were 1 per cent on the positions — at least the 
one position which is published . . . I've not seen any position published from CUPE yet on this matter. 
There may be some published; I don't know. But take the one that is published — 1 per cent — from that 
point of view, to solve the strike. Mr. Speaker, is that a credible posture for any government, any SHA, any 
union, any member of this House to take as a basis for destroying the possibility of a free collective 
bargaining agreement? Of course, it wouldn't be; of course there is a wider gulf than that. However one 
computes the various factors that are in there, whether it is the 5-5-4 or the vacation or the dental plans or the 
salary rates, whatever it is, ultimately the two parties are apart by an amount which is more than 1 per cent. 
 
You don't have to take my word for it — that clearly is the situation because of this kind of dispute. That 
member gets up and makes mischief and says that 1 per cent is the basis for holding it back. Mr. Speaker, I 
say that kind of toying, that kind of playing with emotions, with a factual situation, is again of the highest 
order or irresponsibility and is not deserving of any member of this Legislative Assembly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I notice it is 1 o'clock. I will have another 15 or 20 minutes to 
go, and I can continue if the members want me to continue . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . So, we will 
continue straight through then? 
 
The Assembly recessed until 2 p.m. 
 
 


