






















































Hansard: June 22, 1982


153 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 22, 1982 

 
EVENING SESSION 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Address in Reply (continued) 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, like the rest of my colleagues who have already spoken, I 
would like to congratulate you on your appointment as the Speaker of this Assembly. Having known you 
for several years and knowing of the high esteem in which you are held in this Assembly and around the 
province, I know that you will exercise your responsibilities and duties with distinction and honor. 
 
I deem it a distinct pleasure and an honor this evening to rise before this Assembly as the MLA for the 
Treasure Chest City of the West. My constituency of Yorkton, Saskatchewan is a city of some 16,000 
people nestled in the beautiful agricultural parkland of east-central Saskatchewan. I consider myself 
fortunate when I hear of the boundaries that my other colleagues have, when they’re telling me of the 
boundaries of their constituencies. I have an excellent constituency that works, as practically the city of 
Yorkton. I have a few miles on the north and the west and the south of farm area and that adds just 
enough flavour of the agricultural aspect to make my constituency very interesting. Having grown up 
and having been born and raised on a farm, I am very aware of the impact which agriculture has on our 
community. 
 
Our city has two of the largest manufacturing firms in western Canada, at least west of Winnipeg. We 
have an educational system there with two high schools, two junior high schools, and a number of public 
schools. We can also offer the first year of university classes in Yorkton. We have one of the largest 
television stations, as far as area covered, in western Canada. We have two weekly newspapers. We have 
a radio station. We have motels that can accommodate 1,500 people, and we have a convention centre. 
We have good, broad streets and a clean city, and I’m proud of it. 
 
On the other hand, Mr. Speaker, I feel very humble when I consider the vote of confidence the people of 
Yorkton gave me on April 26, 1982. I wish to thank them publicly for their support and to assure all of 
my constituents that I will work to the maximum of my ability to build a dynamic and flourishing 
community. My colleagues, I am sure, have the same vision for their own constituencies. With this 
enthusiasm, we will make this province number one within the Dominion of Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — I would like to congratulate my buddy, my Scotch friend from across the 
aisle here. I have been blessed with him as my assistant, I am Scotch also, but there is something 
different. I am going to have to go to night school to learn how to roll my r’s. 
 
Another milestone we are celebrating this year is the 100th birthday of the city of Yorkton. Many 
activities are being planned throughout the year and I extend to each and every one of you an invitation 
to drop in anytime during the week or weekends and take part in the activities and the festivities which 
are going to be going on. There are lakes, beaches, golfing and camping within a 15 minute drive of 
Yorkton and many that  



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
154 

are no more than one hour. 
 
Congratulations must be extended to the founders and the administrators of out city who have worked 
throughout the years and up to the present time. They must be congratulated for the foresight, hard work 
and dedication that they have exemplified to make Yorkton one of the finest little cities in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have no idea how good I feel when I look around this Assembly and see that at least 86 
per cent of the space is taken up by Progressive Conservatives. I would suggest to the hon. opposition 
members that you settle into your chairs and get comfy because you are going to be there for a long time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — You will probably need many years to find something to crow about, Mr. 
Speaker, since the opening of this Assembly, we have been hearing from hon. members opposite that all 
our government has been doing in the first six weeks of office is reviewing, studying and putting projects 
on hold. I wish to remind you same hon. members that before you can build on a muskeg, you must find 
the solid base before you can sink your foundation piles into it, and that is what we are doing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — But in spite of the muskeg, we have removed the sales tax on gasoline, 
which we had promised, on the first day we were the government. I don’t know how much faster you can 
react that that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the removal of that tax did much to ease the anxiety of our people about their future and 
their financial security. A young man who had recently started a trucking operation in Yorkton advised 
me the day after the election that the removal of that tax made the difference between his either breaking 
even on going in the hole, and his making some profit this year. The benefits cover all walks of life 
including teenagers, the working class, senior citizens, and they even benefit people who don’t have the 
same political allegiance. 
 
During the fifth week in office, right here in this Assembly, we announced the increased assistance to 
renters and senior citizens. The renter’s rebate is being increased to $150 a year from $115 and the senior 
citizen’s rebate is being increased from $460 to $510, which will reduce the impact of the increased cost 
of living. We heard today about the inflation rate in Saskatchewan being held almost steady in the month 
of May. 
 
During the sixth week, which is today, the act to put into place our home mortgage interest reduction 
program has been presented to this House for enactment. Mr. Speaker, this program alone will put back 
into the pocketbooks of home-owners anywhere from $210 to $225 a month, or the equivalent of $2,100 
to $2,700 a year. It will also mean that people will now be able to purchase a home or to build one of 
their own. The construction of new homes will substantially increase. This will guarantee jobs for 
plumbers, for electricians, and for carpenters. Lumberyards will start selling lumber, and the furniture 
stores will start selling furniture and appliances. The list goes on and on, and the multiplier effect is 
incomprehensible. With more people working, additional salaries will be earned and of course additional 
funds will flow into our treasury because of the income tax, personal and corporate. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
155 

You talk about this government not helping. I’d like to relate an incident which occurred a number of 
years ago when the previous government instituted the estate tax, which to a private owner would have 
meant disaster on the exemption that was allowed. It almost meant that you had to go out of business. 
One of the members opposite was the chairman of the inquiry that came around to listen to our concerns. 
I’ll never forget his answer. He told us to sell out to John Deere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have always been amused at the boasting of the previous administration and their claim to 
the low unemployment in this province. I’d like to remind them that there is low unemployment up in 
the Arctic Circle as well, because there’s nobody there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — The same is here in this province with the flood of our youth to other parts 
of North American, and we heard today about our concern for the students. We have concerns about jobs 
for students. We have concerns about jobs for everybody. The difference is that we are going to be 
concerned about those students when they enter the work force, so that they can be in Saskatchewan to 
work. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Just last night, I spoke to a girl from Saskatchewan who had been living in 
Los Angeles for the last four and one-half years. She has come back home to Saskatchewan. She hasn’t 
found a job yet, but she’s looking and she wants to stay here. Several nights ago, a small construction 
firm that used to build in Yorkton and moved to northern Alberta phone us to say that they are coming 
back to Saskatchewan and to Yorkton to start up business again. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, this tells me one thing. The people of this province became 
completely fed p with the size of government in this province and the big daddy-o image that was being 
created here. They sucked out the very ambition and aggressiveness of people and businesses to grow 
and to develop a future for themselves in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — The attitude was “Don’t worry, sonny; if you go broke, we’ll buy you out 
and we’ll make your operation into a nice little crown corporation.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are going to experience a complete turnaround. This 
Progressive Conservative Party is going to be a servant and not a master. 
 
In closing, I wish to congratulate the hon. member for Melfort and the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale for their excellent moving and seconding speeches of the throne speech, and I would like to 
also express my congratulations to all my colleagues; it’s going to be an enjoyable four years working 
with you. My thanks to the Hon. Premier, Grant Devine, whose leadership and dedication had a large 
part to play in our being here this evening. The invisible man, whom we heard so much about during the 
campaign, has suddenly become very, very visible. I support whole-heartedly, Mr.  



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
156 

Speaker, the motion on the floor. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. JOHNSON: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an Honor for me to be able to participate in this debate on the 
Speech from the Throne. I am proud to be able to be here tonight as the member for the Saltcoats 
constituency. At the outset, Mr. Speaker, allow me to congratulate you on being elected the Speaker of 
the legislature. I know you will bring integrity and dignity to your office. I should also like to 
congratulate the Deputy Speaker on his appointment. 
 
I should like to point out to you that Saltcoats constituency was one represented by a Speaker of this 
legislature. Of course, I’m speaking of Jim Snedker. I’ve had the privilege of knowing Jim as I’m sure 
many of you have had. He was a man I dearly loved and respected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night there was a statement made in this Assembly (or yesterday afternoon) on the 
status of the lack of hair on some of the hon. members’ heads. I wish the hon. member for Thunder 
Creek were here this evening. I would beg to inform him that actually the good Lord only made a few 
perfect heads and the rest of them he covered with hair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I decided to enter into politics in 1978, but I was delayed for a few years – until April 26, 
1982 to be exact. Mr. Speaker, the reason I decided to enter the political arena was that many of the good 
people of Saltcoats came and asked me to stand on their behalf and run for the Progressive Conservative 
Party. Personally, I had had enough of the indifference and arrogance of the NDP government. I felt that 
a Conservative Party offered ideas that were good for Saskatchewan, and the voters of the province 
obviously agreed in 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in keeping with the tradition of a maiden speech, I would like to talk a few minutes about 
the Saltcoats constituency. Now, sir, I would like to tell you where the Saltcoats constituency is located. 
To the river on the south side of me is the beautiful Qu’Appelle Valley with the Qu’Appelle River. In 
Moosomin constituency, to the south, would be the hon. member for Moosomin who was elected in 
1975. I might mention he served his constituency well. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. JOHNSON: — The west boundary of the constituency is approximately Highway No. 9, and to the 
west side of that is the hon. member for Melville. To the north, of course, is my good friend the Minister 
of Labour, who has just spoken in this House, representing Yorkton. Then to the east, of course, is the 
hon. member to the right of me, the member for Pelly constituency. Of course, the eastern boundary of 
my constituency is the Manitoba border. 
 
Saltcoats constituency has a strong agricultural base. It’s a mixed farming area and we have both very 
large acreages and small acreages. The livestock industry in that part of the country is strong not only 
with commercial cattle but also many, many purebred breeders. 
 
The economic pulse of Saskatchewan continues to centre around the agricultural  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
157 

industry. Still, in the hear of this province, we have an important industry, and that is potash mining. I 
would like to dwell a little bit on potash this evening, because I have a potash mine in my area and also 
because there is a PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan) mine across the valley in the Moosomin 
constituency. In my constituency, there are about a thousand people directly employed (and probably that 
many again indirectly employed) by the potash industry. Our family farm is just three miles south of 
International Minerals and Chemical Corporation (IMCC). Their K2 plant makes us neighbours to the 
largest potash mine and refinery in the world. IMCC is also the largest private producer of potash and 
other fertilizer materials. 
 
I’ll dwell on potash for those who don’t know about it. Potash takes its name from the early American 
settlers who observed native Indians burning wood in large pots to collect ashes. The ashes were than 
added to the soil to enhance plant growth. This form of potash was an early means of fertilizer to the 
soil, but potash here today in Saskatchewan is known as potassium chloride, and chemically written as 
KCI. Potash in this form, with nitrogen phosphates, is essential to the elements of fertilizer, and for those 
who fertilize their lawns and fields, I’ll tell you that on the bag of fertilizer it says 26-13-0. The first 
number represents content of nitrogen; the second, phosphate; and the third, of course, potash. 
 
In most parts of Saskatchewan there is little use of potash, because we continue to get a sufficient natural 
supply. Potash operations have a tremendous impact on communities, and to demonstrate that impact. I 
would like to use Esterhazy as an example. Esterhazy is a Hungarian settlement named after Paul D. 
Esterhazy, who came from Hungary in 1887. From that first settlement, Esterhazy grew to a typical 
sleepy prairie town of 500 in the mid-1950s. Esterhazy remained in that quiet image until 1957, when 
IMCC started sinking the present location of K1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after five long treacherous years, and conquering engineering problems beyond your 
wildest imaginations, in August 1962, the K1 plant became the first successful potash operation to 
remain in continuous service. The Potash Company of America, commonly known as PCA, started 
producing potash back in 1958 in Saskatoon. However, after going into production for a short period of 
time, it was forced to close down because of water problems in its shaft, and then didn’t return into 
production until 1965. 
 
K1 broke the ice, and today we have 10 potash mine operations in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to further demonstrate the impact of potash, I would like to give you some statistics. To 
repeat again, IMCC employs more than 1,000 people directly, its annual pay roll is $32 million a year or 
more. The annual tax bill is about $154 million, of which $100 million is paid to the provincial 
government, $45 million in royalties and $1.6 million to the local municipal governments. It buys about 
$25 million worth of supplies from Saskatchewan distributors. Fifteen million dollars is paid to Sask 
Power for natural gas and electricity. The two mines use up about 20 million to 25 million kwh. Of 
power each year, which is the power required to light a city of 100,000 people. Economically IMCC 
plays a tremendous roll in the community, and socially IMCC has always been a good community citizen 
when called upon to help with such developments as construction of schools, public utilities and 
recreational facilities. 
 
Ninety-five per cent of the potash that is produced in the world is used in fertilizer. The other 5 per cent 
is used for chemical purposes, manufacturing such things as pharmaceuticals, synthetic rubber, 
insecticides, specialty soaps. Dyes from process- 



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
158 

ing, etc. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 65 per cent of all potash produced in Saskatchewan is exported to the United States directly 
by rail or by a combination of trucks and trains. Thirty per cent is moved by rail to Vancouver, then 
shipped to other countries such as Japan, Indian, Brazil, China, Korea and Australia. The remaining 5 
per cent is delivered to eastern Canada by rail. Potash has become a very important resource in our 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now go into agriculture because in my view agriculture remains the number one 
industry of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I wish to commend the Premier for establishing a caucus committee on agriculture. This 
government, I’m confident, will give agriculture a key priority. We have a Premier who is strong in his 
agricultural background and thinking. And, indeed, we are fortunate to have an excellent agricultural 
minister in the member for Souris-Cannington. And this government will make agriculture number one. 
 
I should like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the cattle business in our province is in need of long-term 
programs that will revitalize it. Agriculture must be renewed and we will make it number one. Of that, I 
have all the confidence in the world. It suffered too much neglect under the former government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a few moments I would like to discuss the special-care units that were brought up in the 
House this afternoon and yesterday. We are in dire need of special-care units in this province. We have a 
waiting list of some 80 people in my constituency. Our hospitals are full of level 4 patients and we have 
to address that problem because it’s not going to go away. 
 
The town of Langenburg is in need of a sheltered workshop for the mentally handicapped, or the 
handicapped at any rate. The previous government had promised this for the past two or three years and 
it did not produce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn a little bit to policy. I know that during this administration, rural gas 
distribution will take place. My constituents in Saltcoats are looking forward to this. It will be a great 
achievement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to commend our Premier on his decisive leadership in the quick removal of the tax 
on gasoline. This is the real way to fight inflation and the figures from CPI (consumer price index) made 
it obvious. It was a very popular move with the voters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also much more. All the people out in the country are watching this government 
with renewed optimism and faith that we will bring new and bold leadership in the ’80s. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne, we have pledged a public review commission to protect consumers from 
unwarranted rate increases. This morning the bill was tabled in regard to the 13.25 per cent mortgage 
plan. We are working on the farm purchase plan. And that, Mr. Speaker, is only the beginning. 
 
These are great times for Saskatchewan. I want to tell this Assembly that I pledged to the people of 
Saltcoats constituency that I will always stand ready and willing to serve them. I thank them from the 
floor of this House for their confidence. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
159 

Mr. Speaker, it has been an honor for me to speak this evening. Accordingly, I support the motion of this 
great throne speech and I urge all other members of the Assembly to do so. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I am not an accomplished speaker as some of my fellow colleagues are. 
I will not speak to such lengths as some of the hon. members to the right of me have spoken, but I will 
speak for the betterment of my constituency. I am here today not only because of the policies of Premier 
Devine, but also, as I was quoted on the night of April 26, 1982; parties don’t win government lose. This 
election, unlike other elections, showed the former government that it had misplaced the priorities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MYERS: — . . . of the people of Saskatchewan. The Leader of the Opposition likes to use phrases 
when he speaks. Well, I have only for his party: regret out of neglect. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MYERS: — Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege and an honor for me to rise in this, the first session of the 
20th legislature. I would first like to say thank you to all of the constituents of Saskatoon South who 
worked so hard for me during the election, I would also like to thank all of the people of the Saskatoon 
South constituency who voted for me and put their faith in me – a faith I will work hard to maintain over 
the next four years and for which I will work hard to represent them in this legislature. 
 
I would like to offer my services to all of the people in my constituency, regardless of any political views 
that they may have. There are many areas in government today where people may need assistance to cut 
through the extensive bureaucracy which has choked government for the past 11 years. I will not let 
partisan politics interfere with my service to my constituency and its constituents. I will endeavour to 
encourage them to contact me at any time, in any area in which they may need help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say thank you to Premier Devine for his most capable leadership and 
guidance during the past two and one-half years and during the past election campaign. It is his 
leadership and moral strengths that will assure this province its future and rights within confederation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to join my colleagues in congratulating you on the position to which you 
were elected. I am sure that you will serve the position with great distinction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency that I represent is not large by provincial or civic standards but rather is a 
primary residential area within the city of Saskatoon. We apprise quality of life and amenities associated 
with it. The people come from every walk of life and are free and proud of the heritage that they have 
built for themselves over the past years. I was born in Saskatoon and raised in the constituency. I would 
like to say that I felt it a most enjoyable time of my life. The schools were excellent and the people most 
friendly. I will always carry those memories with me. It is my intention, as their representative, to ensure 
that they, the constituents of Saskatoon South, are able to maintain this quality of life. 



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
160 

Over the next four years, Saskatchewan will no doubt experience a very difficult time which has been, in 
part, due to world and Canadian economic conditions. But I say, Mr. Speaker, only in part. It has also 
been due to this province’s past governments, which were unable to control bureaucratic growth and 
provide an economically sound leadership in dealing with resource growth and management. We, as the 
government, hope to stimulate the economy and provide an incentive to the residents of Saskatoon and 
Saskatchewan. We hope to provide incentives, for this province to attain its destiny, which has so long 
been stifled by the former government. As Premier Devine has stated, “This province is open for 
business.” And we mean it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MYERS: — The mortgage assistance program is only one such way the government intends to aid 
this economy. Although its primary aim is to assist those people with the burden of high interest rates, 
the spin-offs of this plan should create twice as many new home starts as were proposed by the former 
government. In turn, the construction industry in my city and in this province, which has been suffering a 
high rate of lay offs and unemployment in the past, will now be able to proceed. It is our hope to be able 
to stabilize employment in this particular industry. 
 
It is my belief that we, as a government, can provide a strong, desirable leadership within the resource 
sector. It is said (and it is true) that agriculture is the backbone or the bread of the Saskatchewan 
economy, but it is the resource sector that is the butter that provides the industrial growth. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MYERS: — Without providing proper stimulus, this industry cannot grow. It has shown that in the 
past it hasn’t grown. In the future, I envision a heavy oil upgrader plant being established in an area 
which is close to the source of oil and which can draw its water needs from the North Saskatchewan 
River, therefore assuring a better supply of water to the South Saskatchewan on which more 
Saskatchewan farmers and residents rely on. The heavy oil upgrader must be encouraged immediately if 
we, the Saskatchewan people, are to capitalize on our own heavy oil industry and also on Alberta’s 
heavy oil supply. We cannot allow our oil to go to Alberta for processing. 
 
Our potash industry needs leadership and direction, something that it has not seen in the past. We hope 
to provide such direction to enable a steady employment and planned growth. That’s something we 
haven’t seen in 11 years. Is it? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MYERS: — The cycles in production can be levelled out by assuring a reliable and stable market 
in North American, and by offshore sales. That, I may comment, is by pulling back into Canpotex and 
not trying to go our own separate way within the world. We’ve certainly lost those markets, haven’t we? 
 
It has been unfortunate that the previous government chose to invest in the potash market and not to 
invest in the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon we need an extension to the Saskatoon City Hospital; it is an extension which 
is long overdue. We as a government have stated that we intend to put  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
161 

people’s needs first, and I will be intensively reviewing this urgent matter. The city also requires some 
immediate financial assistance for the completion of the 42nd Street Bridge and freeway project. I will 
be lobbying my fellow colleagues (very hard, I assure you) so that this $4 million shortfall in financing 
arrangements with the previous government is overcome. 
 
In concluding, I will be supporting the motion which was moved by my colleague for Melfort and 
seconded by my colleague and friend for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I want to congratulate you, sir, on your 
appointment as Speaker of this Assembly. I know you will discharge your duties in the same manner that 
you discharged your duties as a member of this Assembly, a manner which gained you the respect of 
both sides of the House. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Speaker, in rising to speak tonight, I did not want to respond to any of the 
new members in the legislature in this new session. I didn’t really think it appropriate to do that. You are 
a new government; you have lots of power. You are out there feeling your oats and throwing your digs 
across the House. We accept that personal attack on each one of us. These are parliamentary rules that 
we accept. I think today that was exceeded, Mr. Speaker. I want to comment on some of the remarks that 
the member for Turtleford mad in this House today. It’s gone beyond personal attacks. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . on the record Freddy. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — It’s on the record. The statement which the member for Turtleford made in this 
House today that DNS was a blot on the people of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I think that goes beyond the parliamentary rules in this country of Canada. We have a lot of 
great people in northern Saskatchewan, and I think that was a slur on the residents of northern 
Saskatchewan. I sincerely hope that the sensible members on the other side of this House will not follow 
the same course and make the type of statements which were made by the member for Turtleford today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — I am sure this member made the statements due to his inexperience – a lack of 
knowledge as to what DNS has done for the residents of northern Saskatchewan. Had he visited 
communities in the North prior to 1971 and seen the poverty which existed at that time, I am sure he 
would not have made that statement. If he had gone into northern Saskatchewan in 1971 hen the New 
Democratic Party took over the government, he would have seen the conditions in which the people in 
northern Saskatchewan were living – the type of poverty, the lack of housing, the lack of sewer and 
water. There were absolutely no facilities in northern Saskatchewan for the people. We as a government 
decided we had to solve this problem, and the only approach which we could take at that time was to 
create the Department of Northern Saskatchewan so we could zero in on these problems . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I know we made mistakes. We were reminded of it throughout the throne speech debate. 
But the type of attack that came today from the  



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
162 

member for Turtleford is, I think, the type of attack that we cannot put up with in this province. I am sure 
there are sensible members who sit on the government side. I know there are sensible members over 
there, and I’m sure there are a lot of members over there who do not feel that it was a blot on Northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The new Minister of Northern Saskatchewan has made some statements that I will come to in a few 
minutes. I just think that with the type of statement that we have heard in this House today, maybe we 
should set up a committee and travel around the North and take the member for Turtleford with us and 
show him what it is like in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
If this new government wants to set up a committee to go into northern Saskatchewan and find out just 
what the situation is today, it can make the hon. member for Turtleford the chairman. I would appreciate 
showing him the sewer and water systems that they never had before, showing him the new houses that 
they never had before, showing him the recreation facilities that they never had before, the new roads 
and the new airfields. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What did you guys do up there for 11 years? 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — If the hon. member would just listen to what I am saying, maybe he could also 
get on that committee and come into northern Saskatchewan. Let me tell you, the people of northern 
Saskatchewan don’t think it’s a blot on the people of Saskatchewan. They don’t think it’s a social 
experiment. They don’t think that they’re guinea pigs. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who’s giving us this information? 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — These are the find of statements that I have heard in the last few weeks. Let me 
tell you, the people in northern Saskatchewan appreciate what was done for them by the New 
Democratic government. I went into those communities in 1971 – 72, and I was travelling around in 
those communities, and I saw the poverty, Mr. Speaker. I saw 27 individuals living in a 900 square foot 
house – 27 individuals in one small house. That consisted of three families, Mr. Speaker. As soon as the 
weather broke and spring came, they would come out of that house and two of the families would live in 
tents in the warm summer months, while the other family would live in the house. This is the situation 
that existed in northern Saskatchewan in 1971. The New Democratic Party formed the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan to solve those problems. 
 
Here we have a new member, Mr. Speaker, a totally new member who comes and says that the (and 
most of these people that I am talking about are the first citizens of this country) native people of 
northern Saskatchewan – natives, born and raised in northern Saskatchewan . . . And you say that the 
money that we spent to build these schools up there, to build the hospitals, to put the public health nurses 
in there, and all the facilities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Maybe you could just hold on for a second; 
and when you want o speak, you stand up. 
 
It’s degrading to northern citizens. It’s really degrading to hear that type of statement because most of 
the people that are sitting in this house have not really seen the conditions before, compared to what they 
are now. I am not standing up in this House saying that everything is good in northern Saskatchewan. 
There are many problems in the North, as there are many problems in this province and in the rest of the 
nation. We,  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
163 

the legislators, have to tack these problems, not run them down, not try to sink them lower. Northern 
people are starting to come up in this world. They have an opportunity now, an opportunity that they’ve 
never had before, Mr. Speaker. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Never had it as easy as that. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — That’s right. They appreciate that. Any reduction in the cost of living in northern 
Saskatchewan that they can get – let me tell you they really appreciate it. They live a long way from the 
cities and the services; yet they continue to go back and forth up and down those highways in my 
constituency and they spend money, buy new machinery, buy new furniture and they buy the services 
from the town of Meadow Lake. 
 
The hon. member for Meadow Lake also made the statement that it was a socialist experiment and that 
they were guinea pigs. Let me tell you I don’t think the people of northern Saskatchewan appreciate that. 
I don’t think that the business community in Meadow Lake appreciates the statement that the 
government is going to do away with this department. That’s right. They’re going to do away with it and 
so were we going to (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. There is a lot of difference between north 
and south. There was a lot more difference between north and south in 1971, Mr. Speaker, than there is 
today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — All of a sudden they are coming closer and closer together. They all of a sudden 
feel that they are a part of Saskatchewan. We have to continue to make them feel a part of Saskatchewan 
and given them that opportunity. We can’ take it away from them now. We have to continue to put more 
money into building a school in northern Saskatchewan than we would put into building a school in 
Estevan. It costs so much more money to build a school in La Loche or Camsell Portage up on the north 
shore of Lake Athabasca than it does to build one in Weyburn. We have to accept all these facts because 
northern Saskatchewan is a unique place. 
 
In 1971, northern Saskatchewan had about 50 per cent of the population totally isolated – no roads, Mr. 
Speaker, no lighted airfields, no telephones. Just put yourself in that position. The child mortality rate 
was high because we didn’t have these facilities. A mother would commence labour in an isolated 
community and complications would set in. there was no lighted airstrip at all, no road in, no telephones. 
Two-way radios were used and most of them were through at supper time. Or if a storm came, it could 
be 40 below zero in the winter. That’s what took place in northern Saskatchewan in 1971 and prior to, 
and for a few years after until, Mr. Speaker, we put public health nurses into these communities. 
 
We built hospitals in places like La Loche and improved the ones in Uranium City and in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse. We built health centres in Stoney Rapids and Stoney Rapids is just about up in the 
Northwest Territories. We built health facilities in those places. We built health facilities in Pinehouse. 
The hon. member for Nipawin was just in Pinehouse with me about a month ago to officially open a new 
school and a new hall and he was pretty impressed. So are the people of Pinehouse pretty impressed with 
it and I am sure the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan would have been impressed had he gone in (and 
he’ll get the opportunity to do that), because they are nice facilities. They are  



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
164 

facilities that the people in northern Saskatchewan needed and wanted and they got them. 
 
I’m not here to blow my own whistle but I was elected in ’75, ’78, and again in ’82, and I think that says 
something. I think that says the people of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, appreciate what was 
done for them. I really and truly think that the hon. member for Turtleford spoke without really thinking 
about what he was saying. I am sure that if there were a parliamentary committee set up to go into 
northern Saskatchewan and he were part of it, he would come back to this House and he would have a 
different attitude. I am sure he would if he got across the lake at Michel village, 40 miles across a huge 
lake, where we have put a small health centre, where we have put a new school and where we have put 
telephones. We have made those people now feel that they are part of Saskatchewan. We have made 
them feel that they are a part of Saskatchewan and they appreciate that. They don’t want to lose these 
services. They appreciate the new houses that they have. 
 
When you take a look at a community like Patuanak, three-quarters of Patuanak is an English River 
Band Reserve; the other quarter is a Metis park, a Metis settlement. They have one school. They have a 
brand new skating rink. They have brand new houses. But most of all, Mr. Speaker, they are not isolated. 
They are de-isolated now. They have an all-weather road into Patuanak. They have an airfield into 
Patuanak for serious emergencies. They have these facilities and they appreciate them. 
 
I have had a lot of respect for the hon. member for Meadow Lake, and I know that he has that respect in 
Meadow Lake, but he made a statement that it was a socialist experiment, that the northern people were 
guinea pigs. I don’t think that he really meant that statement because it was a socialist experiment, and it 
cost a lot of money to implement, but we took the bull by the horns and solved some of the problems. 
There is still a lot of work to be done . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, and I appreciate what 
the Hon. Deputy Premier has said. I appreciate that and I sincerely hope that you will continue to put 
money into northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I would hope by Monday morning the STC bus that was offered to northern Saskatchewan, which 
you’ve got on hold, will be operating. Because let me tell you, the hon. member for Meadow Lake and 
the business community of Meadow Lake are the ones that would benefit from the STC bus. And I can 
tell you there are a lot of senior citizens and students going to school to Kelsey and to community 
colleges who were really looking forward to that bus service. I ask the minister, and I asked the Deputy 
Premier, to get that STC bus ready. We could have an inaugural run u there, and that would give you 
people a chance to see just what is taking place in our centre. 
 
I see that the Minister of Highways wants to get the highways going; he wants to finish paving that road 
between Buffalo Narrows and La Loche and I appreciate what he is saying, if that’s what he is saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I sincerely hope that this government will continue to spend money in northern 
Saskatchewan. It’s money well spent. We need a new hospital in Buffalo Narrows too, Grant. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the citizens of northern Saskatchewan are just starting to get on their 
feet. I wish you cold see all the young people who are starting to graduate from school now, and the 
families that have some hope to raise their young boys and girls in northern Saskatchewan in the future. I 
say in all good conscience, Mr.  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
165 

Speaker, that this government should continue to develop northern Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Fine, you can phase out the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, but make sure that when you phase 
out one agency within that department there is no disruption in services. There would be no problem in 
taking social services and health and education out of DNS, no problem at all. You have those people in 
place. But there is still a big job to do in municipal affairs. We have a big job ahead of us yet in 
construction, training and training facilities. 
 
I sincerely ask, Mr. Speaker, that the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan take that position sincerely and 
continue to develop northern Saskatchewan and give the residents of northern Saskatchewan the 
continued opportunities that they’ve enjoyed in the last six or seven years. I would appreciate that. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing the motion. Thank you very much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SAUDER: — Good evening fellow members. I would just like to reply to the last speaker’s 
statements as to what this government has said about the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. I was 
up there approximately a month ago. I saw some of it first-hand. I don’t think there’s a person here who 
disagrees that there is a lot to be done yet in northern Saskatchewan. I don’t think what this government 
has been criticizing is the people of northern Saskatchewan; it has been criticizing the administration of 
DNS, the way it was handled. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SAUDER: — I think this government realizes that the key to the integration of northern 
Saskatchewan into the mainstream (as the hon. member for Athabasca was mentioning) is through 
education. But education shouldn’t relate only to Northerners. It should relate to the total education 
system in Saskatchewan. It cannot come about by having everything wrapped up in one department 
where people related only to themselves, and don’t mix and relate to the people of southern 
Saskatchewan. With that comment I would like to get into what I had prepared for this evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I consider it a great privilege and honor to rise in this Assembly to speak on behalf of the 
people of Nipawin constituency. I’d like to take this opportunity to  



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
166 

congratulate you on your election to the most important job of Speaker, and to wish you wisdom and 
good judgment as you face the decisions ahead. At this time, I would also like to congratulate all the 
hon. members on their success in the April 26 election. I would also like to take the opportunity to thank 
all those who voted for me and also those from the public school level through to many of the senior 
citizens, who worked so hard on my behalf in the election campaign. 
 
It is my sincere desire that I will be able to discharge my duties and serve my constituents in a manner 
befitting the trust that has been placed in me. 
 
Now I would like to say a few things about the Nipawin constituency. It’s made up of the town of 
Nipawin and a number of smaller communities, which are about one-half of the population. The 
remainder are mainly farm people – the people who are the backbone of our economy in Saskatchewan, 
as we’ve heard many of our members mention in the last couple of days. The constituency is located in 
what I believe to be one of the most productive agricultural regions of the province, the Carrot River 
Valley. It has a diversified agricultural base, producing not only our regular cereal crops but also many 
forage and grass seed crops, which are exported all over North America and western Europe. 
 
Peas and other pulse crops are also grown there, and I was certainly pleased to hear the announcement by 
our Minister of Industry. Trade and Commerce recently that the pea starch plant in Saskatoon is to be 
reopened. This should provide another market for some of our pulse crop production. Canola is another 
crop which is produced abundantly in our area, and the canola crushing place, CSP Foods in Nipawin, 
contributes greatly to the employment and economic stability of the Nipawin area. 
 
Another agricultural-based industry that is a major contributor to the cash flow of the area is the alfalfa 
dehydration industry. There are four such plants operating in the Nipawin constituency – plants, I might 
add, which are totally dependent on natural gas for their heat source, and thus have been adversely 
affected by the high gas prices. 
 
Getting away from agriculture, there are two other industries which are very important to the economy of 
the Carrot River area; one of these is a peat moss processing plant, and the other is a Sask Forest 
Products sawmill. The waste and mismanagement that has been allowed to go on in that sawmill and the 
surrounding forest operations, coupled with federal economic policies which have certainly hurt the 
forest industry as a whole, have left that plant with a very unsure future. There is also a major 
construction project underway in the Nipawin constituency; that is the Nipawin Hydroelectric project 
being built on the Saskatchewan River. The hon. Leader of the Opposition yesterday made reference to 
the project; in his comments he pointed out that because this government was reviewing the project there 
are now 900 people out of work. According to the facts published in the media at election time by my 
opposition, the NDP candidate, there are approximately 150 people employed on that project. Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Nipawin constituency are responsible, hard working people. They helped to elect 
a government on April 26 that was going to be responsible. I think part of being responsible is prudent 
management and any time someone is spending something over a half a billion dollars of my money, I as 
a taxpayer would appreciate a review of that expenditure from time to time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SAUDER: — That’s particularly so when that budget is brought forth by somebody  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
167 

who can exaggerate the figures from 150 people to 900 people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SAUDER: — From my previous remarks, some of you may think that all the people in that area do 
is work very hard. Although the fine farms, businesses and communities built up are a tribute to the 
initiative and industriousness of the people of the Northeast, there is also another side to this story. 
 
The Nipawin constituency is also the home of Tobin Lake, otherwise known as the Northern Pike 
Capital of the World. This is the home of the annual pike festival which provides a $5,000 prize for the 
person who catches a tag fish from the lake. Contrary to the idea that this may be compared to looking 
for the proverbial needle in the haystack, such is not the case, as in 1975 the tag fish was caught and the 
$5,000 reward won. 
 
There are also several fine regional parks in the constituency and some great gold courses. Big game and 
waterfowl hunting are also excellent. I would invite anyone to come and enjoy some of the scenery and 
recreational facilities available in the great parkland area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I previously mentioned the hard working and industrious people in my constituency. I 
would like to go back to that point if I may. We have people of almost every racial origin in my 
constituency. We have a mix of people whose ancestors came to this great country for basically two 
reasons; religious and economic freedom. With that economic freedom comes the right to have 
something for themselves – the right to own property and to control their own destinies as far as it is 
humanly possible. The religious part (I believe) has been quite well served, a fact attested to by the 18 
different churches practising their own particular religions in the town of Nipawin alone. 
 
Economic freedom is an area of people’s lives where they are feeling oppressed. One of the central 
things to that economic freedom has been the right to own property. Under our new Canadian 
constitution, people feel that they no longer have that right, and they have placed the blame for that 
squarely in the lap of the NDP. When our former government in Saskatchewan sided with the federal 
government to keep that right out of the constitution, people felt that their wishes and desires were no 
longer being represented by their government here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Coupled with that was another policy of the former government which helped more than any other to 
ensure my election to the legislature, and that was the land bank program. People realized that in practice 
it just did not work the way that they had been led to believe it was going to. Time after time I was told 
by the young land bank tenants, “I’ll never own my own land under this system. We have to have 
something different.” Yes, Mr. Speaker, it may sound good to a socialist to have the government own all 
the land, but pride of ownership and the freedom that goes with it still outweigh the hollow promises of 
long-term leases with no ownership. People realize that their concerns were not the guiding hand to 
government policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had here in Saskatchewan a government which had been elected mainly on its resource 
policy. After they were elected, some of their resources policies were turned around a little bit. They 
turned to a resource policy for the potash industry, take control; to a resource policy for the forest 
industry, take control; a resource policy for the uranium industry, take control. Lo, another resource 
policy for the oil industry, take control of that, too. 



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
168 

There was also a resource policy for the agricultural industry, for it too was a resource – take control and 
buy the land away from the farmers with their own money, and then we’ll be able to control them. 
Fortunately, the farmers and people of Saskatchewan realized what was happening before it was too late 
and said “No” before that business was driven to ruination by government ownership and control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to you that throughout all of these resource policies the government forgot the one 
major resource – the human resource. They forgot the people whose parents and grandparents had come 
to this country to be able to make a new life for themselves and their children – a life where they could 
be free from government intervention and oppression. But, then again maybe they didn’t forget the 
people, because by taking control of all the other resources they would ultimately gain control over the 
human resource also. But on April 26 we found that the people are not that easily taken in. Ten million 
dollars worth of advertising was not enough to convince the people that the family of crown corporations 
was, indeed, improving the lives of the people. 
 
In the field of advertising there is no better commercial than a satisfied customer and all the high-priced 
advertising in the world is not going to take the place of a bad product, i.e., a bad government with bad 
policies. 
 
By way of comparison, there seems to be a striking similarity here between government and the auto 
industry. Both are selling – one a product and the other a service. The North American automobile 
industry manufactured a product to its satisfaction and then went out and tried to sell it. Then the 
Japanese auto industry went out and asked the consumers what they would like in their cars and then 
built those cars to suit the market. We all know the shape the two industries are in. Just as the consumers 
have let the North American car sit in favour of the imports which suit their needs, so too have the voters 
withdrawn their support of a government no longer responsive to their wishes in favour of one which has 
shown itself to be responsive to their needs and desires, one which shows that it is concerned and that it 
cares. 
 
This leads me to some of my final remarks. Care and concern for these people have been demonstrated 
to them by a very fine and capable Premier, the hon. member for Estevan. Since his taking over the 
leadership of the Progressive Conservative Party, he has worked tirelessly and travelled continuously 
from Estevan in the south to Uranium City in the north. On these travels, he has listened to the people 
and heard their concerns and ideas. These concerns and ideas have been brought back and formulated 
into policies which address the issues of today. 
 
The people who have been listened to and whose ideas have been developed have shown that they want 
to be a part of the governing process and once again take control over their own destinies. They have 
sown that they are tired of government interference in their lives and are not about to be controlled by a 
government which forgot where it came from. These people realize that it was not governments which 
have created people but people who have created governments, and they are not about to let the tail wag 
the dog. These are everyday, responsible people, be they farmers, labourers, businessmen, professional 
people or senior citizens. These people have remembered and realized that the true wealth of this 
province and country has been created by hard work and individual initiative, and not by a government 
which believes in taking everything over and then telling people how wonderful they have it. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
169 

I should like to congratulate our new Premier for the care and concern he has shown. If he continues to 
be as responsible to the people in the future as he has in the past, he should be here for a good, long 
while. 
 
Any contribution which I, as a representative of Nipawin, can make to the betterment of life in this 
province, I shall be happy to make. I am looking forward to the years ahead of working with the fine 
people elected to this legislature to bring about the changes which are necessary if we are to see this 
province take its rightful place in Canada and, indeed, the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe you can see from my remarks that I am pleased to be able to support the motion, 
but I cannot support the amendment that was brought forth. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YOUNG: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great honor and humility that I address this House as the newly 
elected member for Saskatoon Eastview. I would like, first of all, to take the opportunity to congratulate 
my fellow colleagues on their elections and some of them on their re-elections. Certainly, it was a job 
well done and, as I’ll point out later on in my remarks, I think to a great extent the creditability of 
candidates on the PC ticket ensured another’s victories. It certainly ensured the worthy position of the 
nine members opposite. 
 
I’d like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for taking on the responsibility of your position. The respect that you 
have garnered in this House and in the community prior to your election as Speaker, in my judgment, 
will certainly make your decisions easier to swallow for some of the members who may not find 
immediate fairness in them. I am sure that we will find the fairness in your decisions and certainly your 
respect in that regard is going to make your position a lot easier. 
 
I would like to congratulate, as well, the cabinet ministers on their appointments. I especially 
congratulate the cabinet ministers from my city of Saskatoon, the Hon. Mr. Schoenhals and Hon. Mr. 
Sandberg. 
 
Like the Premier, Mr. Speaker, I was born and raised in Saskatchewan, unlike the Leader of the 
Opposition. I was born in Vanguard, Saskatchewan. I was raised there and I attained my education in 
Saskatchewan. I ran for the Conservatives in the 1978 general election and came fairly close to getting 
elected. I want to take this opportunity to thank my constituents and my supports and workers, both in 
the 1978 campaign and in this last successful 1982 campaign. 
 
I’m not foolish enough, Mr. Speaker, to believe that I was elected for good looks, or brains, or for any 
reason such as those. It was certainly a combination of a number of factors, I believe, other than those, 
that made my campaign successful. Saskatoon Eastview, as some of you may or may not be aware, is the 
constituency in Saskatoon which is closest to Regina. It’s on the southeast corner of the city. It’s the 
second largest constituency, population wise, in the province, second only to Saskatoon Mayfair. It had 
13,669 eligible voters in this last election. The seat is generally white-collar in make-up. There is a small 
spattering of farmers and a heavy concentration of professional workers. 
 
Certainly I believe that one of the reasons for my obtaining over 60 per cent of the  



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
170 

popular vote and nearly taking the deposit of the NDP candidate was not only the leadership of Grant 
Devine, but also our whole array of policies, such as our mortgage interest reduction program, which is 
going to benefit a large number of people in Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
I was fortunate enough as well, Mr. Speaker, to have a very well-organized and active constituency 
association which turned into workers in the election. I’d like to thank those people, particularly, for all 
the work that they have done for the Progressive Conservative Party and for me toward this 1982 
election victory. 
 
I would think that the icing on the cake in this election – the election that brought so many of the 
Progressive Conservative members to this House and that brought me such a large percentage of the 
popular vote – was the leadership of my Premier, Grant Devine, who is an active and dynamic leader, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see my duty as the member for Saskatoon Eastview to make myself available to my constituents, to 
make them familiar with the views of this very positive government, with its policies and its approach to 
governing the province. I feel that the former NDP member was very remiss in that regard. He did not 
live in the seat and had very little contact with the constituents. That is an area where I intend to do a 
very good job. 
 
Through the campaign, I promised my constituents that I would come back and visit each of them in 
their homes prior to the next election, and that is a promise that I intend to act upon. I intend to keep in 
very close contact, Mr. Speaker, with the people who saw fit to elect me to this House. I can feel that by 
obtaining the percentage of the vote and obtaining the number of members, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatoon Eastview and indeed, the province were fed up with the Blakeney bureaucracy. They were fed 
up with the red tape, as it has been called by a number of my constituents. 
 
The member for Athabasca, I note, has left the House, but in response to some of the comments he was 
making toward the member for Turtleford, I would point out to him and to the members opposite that 
Judge Noble of the Saskatchewan court of Queen’s Bench termed DNS a bureaucracy run amuck. Think 
on that, members opposite. That’s what it was. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YOUNG: — I think it’s worthy to note, members opposite, that for a number of years you have 
found your election success in splitting the free enterprise vote. Unfortunately for you, in 1978, the 
Liberals died. You had to face us one on one this time and you can see what happened. As a matter of 
fact, you were very fortunate, especially the member for Gravelbourg and the member for Shaunavon, to 
have the numbers that you have. You two found in your good fortune and in the circumstances another 
way to split the vote: the member for Gravelbourg with the Liberal leader; the members for Shaunavon 
with the WCC. But for that split, you would have seven members. I don’t believe you are going to be 
fortunate enough to have that split next time. You, the member for Gravelbourg and the member for 
Shaunavon, are going to be facing a one on one situation next time. I don’t anticipate you’ll be as lucky. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YOUNG: — As well, the next time the election comes, the NDP lie pertaining to Medicare the 
little quote, “Don’t let them take it away,” is going to be shown up. You  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
171 

won’t have the old grey mare of medicare to drag out. It will still be here in three and one-half years, and 
in better shape. What in the world are you going to run the next election on? The people on whom you 
perpetrated this deceit are going to be very reluctant to believe any other allegations made by the 
members opposite with respect to what may or may not happen in the future when your lie pertaining to 
Medicare is shown up, as it will be, in three and one-half years. You are going to be bankrupt of 
campaign proposals. 
 
The cruelty, Mr. Speaker, of the deceit of the NDP in its last-ditch efforts to cling onto power came 
home to me on the morning after the election, on April 27. I received a phone call from an elderly lady 
who indicated she was from one of the senior citizen homes in my constituency. She said to me, “Mr. 
Young, you seemed like a real nice guy when you came around and visited our home during the election. 
I’d like you (and there was pleading in her voice) please, if you will, to try to get the Conservative Party 
to reconsider taking away Medicare.” The lady had been lied to so much that she actually believed we 
were going to take away Medicare. That was the type of perpetration of deceits that took place all over 
the province and certainly took place in Eastview. And I say shame on the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, for such deceit. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YOUNG: — I was amazed, Mr. Speaker, when I heard the Leader of the Opposition the other day 
in his reply to the Speech from the Throne suggest that he couldn’t see anything in the speech to assist 
the unemployed or relieve the people of this province from the hard times. I would suggest that he is still 
back in the campaign, alleging that we won’t keep our campaign promises. If he would have been 
listening and watching, the day we came into power we took off his sliding 20 per cent gas tax. 
 
Before the House today is the bill for our 13.25 mortgage interest reduction program. How much faster 
do those members opposite think that a government can go to implement its promises? Our big monetary 
expenditures are taking place now. I would suggest to the members opposite that if they are patient they 
will see all of our promises implemented – contrary to their campaign rhetoric. The multiplier effect of 
our interest reduction program is going to have effects on the other industries through spin-off that just 
cannot be calculated, Mr. Speaker. We’ll have to wait and see, but there’s certainly going to be a lot of 
business brought about by the multiplier effect, as pointed out by the Minister of Labour in his address. I 
think that’s something that the members opposite have not properly considered. 
 
I was also very amazed that the Leader of the Opposition would have the gall to suggest that the PC 
Party was in any way wrong with respect to some of its appointments. I cannot help thinking back on my 
seven years of practice of law in Saskatoon . . . watching day after day, month after month, the patronage 
the NDP government offered to its party supporters and friends. I think of the former attorney general’s 
appointing his campaign manager, Dennis Wendel, to be the chairman of the . . . board. I think of the 
former minister of tourism, Reg Gross, appointing . . . friends to work in the Cypress Hills Provincial 
Park. I think of Highway No. 43 . . . the Morse constituency becoming a toy of the politics of Reg Gross. 
He wanted the road to go by his farm. While everyone else is suffering, he moves, or attempts to move, 
the highway so that it will take him from his farm to Lake Pelletier where he has his cottage. How can 
the Leader of the Opposition stand up and accuse us of what he does, in light of that record of the NDP? 
Shame on the members opposite for having the gall. 



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
172 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I’m honored to sit as a member on the government side in this House with my 
colleagues and I look forward to many terms in office with my colleagues on the government side. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Mr. Speaker, Hon. Premier Grant Devine in absentia, Godspeed in Edmonton, 
members of the cabinet wisely chosen, members of the government side deservedly sitting, members of 
Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition recently self-destructed. 
 
When I look over there tonight, out of the nine members that you fellows apparently have (at least I have 
read this in press reports), there are only three sitting here this evening. I’m not sure the province has, or 
Her Majesty could recognize them as, her loyal opposition. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — One of the reasons I became extremely interested in politics as a very young man 
was that I took a trip to Regina, sat in the Speaker’s gallery under the administration of Ross Thatcher. A 
member opposite was reading the newspaper. He didn’t have the common courtesy to give the House an 
ear. I can’t remember his name but I know another member, who is no longer sitting with us, whose 
daily exercise in the House was to read (I think) the financial page. I’m not sure; it may have been the 
comics. 
 
It is with mixed feelings that I stand here tonight and address this House – mixed feelings of pleasure 
and mixed feelings of humility. Humility not because I am a member of this government or because I am 
addressing this Assembly but humility because of the efforts that were put in by so many people in my 
campaign to assure this government a seat in northwest Regina. 
 
My humility goes beyond personal expression. Great effort was contributed from every walk of life, 
every colour and creed, every age group from small children to the old age pensioner. My sincere 
gratitude goes out to the people work worked for me to assure my being elected in northwest Regina. 
These campaigners selflessly contributed hours and hours of their time for several reasons. 
 
The first reason was, in the minds of most including many former card-carrying members of the 
oppositions, that government was being too powerful. It was controlling too many people. This growth 
of government was threatening the very fabric of freedom in this province. 
 
The second reasons, which is almost as important as the first, was spiralling inflation and high interest 
rates on home mortgages and consumer loans, which were leaving the families of Saskatchewan on the 
brink of bankruptcy in many cases. Meanwhile the government of this province aggressively and proudly 
advertised, spending millions of dollars. They advertised the wealth of their family of crown 
corporations. 
 
People were asking, “If the government has so much, why are we all so poor?” I think they answered that 
question on April 26. 
 
The election platform of the Progressive Conservative Party answered these questions  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
173 

with campaign policies designed with compassion and designed for people, not with power-grabbing, 
selfish government. 
 
The throne speech outlined two programs which immediately deal with the needs of Saskatchewan 
people – removal of the road tax on gasoline, which is the largest single tax reform in the history of 
Saskatchewan, and may in fact, be the largest single tax reform in the history of this country . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — . . . and the mortgage interest reduction plan, the first and only program of its kind 
in Canada which addresses one of the most serious economic woes of our times, crippling interest rates. 
Now, I apologize because I realize that the NDP had a program that in itself was crippled. I can’t recall 
the name of it but it was tabled in the budget prior to the election, it covered very few people who were 
facing problems with their home mortgages. 
 
I did a survey in my own constituency a few days after we introduced the mortgage interest reduction 
plan. The results of my survey, which was done to compare our program with the program tabled prior to 
the election in the NDP budget, were fairly astounding. 
 
I talked to 40 home-owners. One did not have a mortgage, 39 did have mortgages. Out of those 39 
people, one was assisted by the NDP program proposed in its budget. To the people of Saskatchewan, I 
would like to say that all 39 were assisted by the program we introduced in our election platform. This 
probably reduced your numbers by upward of 20 in the two cities and other urban areas in the province, 
as well as in communities where farmers and home-owners require mortgages. 
 
Removing the gas tax occurred within minutes of swearing in the new cabinet, allaying any fear the 
people of Saskatchewan may have had that the new Government of Saskatchewan would not act quickly 
on its promises. The gas tax reduction alone will add approximately $125 million in additional cash flow 
to the people of Saskatchewan in the coming year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Using simple arithmetic, that will put approximately $2 million (and if you 
wonder how I arrived at he figure, talk to me after the session) in the pockets of my constituents in 
northwest Regina. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Using the same arithmetic, I’ve assumed it puts $2 million in the pockets of Russ 
Sutor’s constituents in northeast Regina. I think I could go through the whole province and arrive at 
almost the same figures. It helps the people of Saskatchewan, in all walks of life and in every corner of 
this province. 
 
The moneys these people save as a result of the removal of the road tax on gasoline will be circulated in 
Saskatchewan for generations fuelling our economy not through decisions made by bureaucrats, but 
through decisions made by families – maybe to buy a quart of milk, maybe a prescription. Once again, 
we are supporting people, not the selfish interests of the NDP. 



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
174 

The second program tabled in this legislature which will soon become legislation, the mortgage interest 
reduction plan, will stabilize the uncertainty of many Saskatchewan home-owners. I’m sure even 
members on the opposition side of the House have talked to home-owners who are in financial trouble 
because of the mortgages on their homes. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I’ll bet you they apply for it. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — I know that a couple of tem need it. I don’t think there’s any qualification that 
doesn’t cross political boundaries, so you’re qualified, boys. 
 
Many Saskatchewan home-owners are now in a position where they can have dessert in the evening. 
Losing their homes is a fear, and was a very real fear under the past administration. Foreclosure can be a 
very demeaning experience when you’re feeding four kids and you’re faced with a 20 per cent mortgage, 
which, incidentally, is the current rate. 
 
Our homes, not the SGI tower, not the T.C. Douglas Building, not the Cornwall Centre, are our castles, 
and nobody is going to take them away from us. Our government, through this program, will once again 
communicate to the people and the families in Saskatchewan that we are a compassionate government, 
and that the security of our homes ranks very high on the list of priorities of this government. 
 
Now I realize you people had solutions. One of your solutions was that as young families lost their 
houses, you would build row housing in Regina and Saskatoon, and everywhere else across the province, 
so that they could move into and comfortably live under the wing of the government for the rest of their 
lives. This philosophy, I believe, has come to an end. God bless us. 
 
The right to own our homes, our land, our businesses, has made Canada and Saskatchewan leaders in 
individual freedom in the world. Our government believes this ownership to be a right, a God-given 
right. I know you’ll say that’s hogwash, but it is a God-given right and the protection of this right is the 
responsibility of our government. 
 
The learned members to the left (fortunately we didn’t sit you over here, boys), the past administration 
whose philosophy supported government ownership of our land (their policies bear this out), of our 
homes (well documented), of our businesses (I think they own a few), acted against the common sense of 
every resident in this province. 
 
We’re a common-sense government. We were elected on the basis of common sense rather than socialist 
political rhetoric. The people of Saskatchewan are a tough-minded, individualist society which believes 
that initiative should be duly rewarded. They believe that power should be in the hands of the families of 
the ladies and gentlemen of this province, not in the hands of government. 
 
We are not socialist . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I say we are not socialists and I’m speaking for the 
people in Saskatchewan. I’ve lived here all my life and it is a fact that prior to elections you could never 
find one. However, I would like to define the word for those on the other side of the House who are 
possibly confused about its definition. I don’t want to see you wandering across here after you realize 
what you are, because there’s no room over here. You’re sitting where you’ll have to be. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
175 

I want to quote one of the greatest statesmen this world has ever known . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
Well, we had one right answer. This quote comes from Winston Churchill, and maybe the fellows 
opposite have studied socialist rhetoric. I would hope they have. In the House of Lords, the Hon. 
Winston Churchill reminded people that socialism is the philosophy of failure, the creed of ignorance, 
the gospel of envy, and its only inherent virtue is the equal sharing of misery. Now take that home 
tonight, boys, and study it. 
 
At this time in the House, I would like to as for something that’s possibly an unusual request. My 
ancestors (as did those of many in this House, on this side and that side) came out of a system based on 
the most demeaning system this world has every known, a system based on socialist philosophy. 
Looking at their writings (I think if you go far enough back, the original philosopher was Immanuel Kant 
– K-a-n-t), it is apparent that they came to this country to get away from what we’re trying to introduce. I 
would like to request a moment’s silence, sometime during this session, for the millions of people who 
still today are under the thumb of socialism in this world; the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. 
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, the trade unionists in Gdansk . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, even Manitoba. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Sharing the wealth created by initiative is one thing; sharing the misery created by 
governments is an altogether different matter. Mr. Speaker, on April 26, 1982, the new Government of 
Saskatchewan was given the strongest mandate for change in the history of this province. We were given 
the strongest mandate for change in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Over 60 per cent of the people in Saskatchewan repudiated your repugnant social 
policies and elected me and 55 others (I believe it is 55) and, believe me, I will never let you forget 
where we came from. Power in this province and in this country must be delivered back to the people. 
failure to do so would be our demise. Success will result in a very strong province through people, who 
through hard work and initiative will carve their own destiny, and a heritage that will survive the ravages 
of time and the ravages of selfish politics that were the order of the day under the NDP. 
 
There are many examples of selfish politics. Time limits me to a few, but over the next four years we 
may have more time. One of the most glaring was the potash takeover in 1975. I ran in that campaign 
and there was not a breath by a single member of the government of the day that they were going to take 
over one of Saskatchewan’s largest industries. They did not request any feedback from the people in 
Saskatchewan. The people were not consulted; they were insulted. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — That insult showed up very evidently at the polls on April 26 and at 7 p.m. here 
again tonight. This is the most obvious insult that we can perpetrate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Are 
you having difficulty hearing me? 
 
The NDP is supposed to be, I think I’ve heard Mr. Blakeney say, “The champion of the little guy, the 
champion of the elderly.” Well, listen to this. The big lie, and I put that in perspective and in italics and 
whatever else is required, regarding medicare in the 



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
176 

1978 election created a fear in the minds of our pensioners and our pioneers in this country that is 
inexcusable in a few democracy. And I’ll tell you that runs pretty deep. When tactics like that have to be 
used, the desperation quotient is fairly high; it’s certainly well above the intelligence quotient. The big 
lie was that the Progressive Conservative Party if elected would take Medicare away from the elderly 
and other citizens in this province. The fact about Medicare is that in the last 11 its very base has been 
sadly eroded by the policies of the last government. 
 
A drug plan introduced in 1974 offers the elderly again a prescription fee, which requires payment to 
pick yup their prescription. Most of the people in this province over 65 years of age are on drug therapy 
of one kind or another. I have documented evidence supporting the fact that some elderly people in this 
province are paying drug bills worth hundreds of dollars a year – hundreds of dollars a year because of a 
government that suggested it had compassion for these people. Where was the compassion? One elderly 
woman born in 1906, bless her heart (that makes her almost as old as this province), paid in excess of 
$200 over a two-month period for one prescription not covered by our members opposite while they 
were in government. That is only one example: 75 years old, fixed income, compassionate government. I 
think the scenario is fairly clear. Is that a program initiated by a government showing compassionate 
leadership? I think not. 
 
Our government promises to make Medicare in Saskatchewan the best in Canada. Under the 
administration of the NDP we slipped to number eight . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If Tilden were 
number eight, it would be out of business. The direction of our program will place interests of the patient 
first, stuffing the selfish interests of the government in an Erlenmeyer flask (it’s not very big, I should 
have brought one to show you what it looks like) to be corked and hidden in the halls of our hallowed 
hospitals forever. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Pardon. 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — You want me to repeat that for you? Let me be very loud and clear to the elderly 
or to anyone else receiving health care in Saskatchewan. It will be provided in the best interests of the 
patient without deterrent fees. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — This is a promise. The third area (and this is the last area I’m going to cover) 
where selfish government has introduced taxation tantamount to fraud is an additional tax charge. Our 
pensioners, our pioneers and the people of this province must suffer this on their power and telephone 
bills. A French controller general (we had to go a long ways to find him) of finance around 1700 
declared, “The art of taxation consists of so plucking the goose as to obtain the largest amount of 
feathers with the least amount of hiss.” 
 
In the case of the additional taxation of telephones and power bills in this province, the NDP caught a 
nerve while plucking the old goose. With the cost of goods and services rising so rapidly, this tax adds 
insult to injury. Examination of this taxation deserves out immediate attention. The financial benefits 
secured by the people of Saskatchewan through the legislation tabled in this House have never been 
equalled by any government in the history of this province. The golden goose as referred to by the 
former controller general of finance will fly again. These programs have a very positive effect on our 
provincial economy. The positive effects will be shared by all, including  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
177 

members sitting opposite. The combined returns to the constituency of Regina North West from the 
removal of the gas tax, plus the mortgage interest reduction plan will be approximately $5 million per 
year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — The average family in Regina North West has already saving $700 by throwing 
the members opposite out. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — This is a lot of milk and honey for the electorate in Regina North West. It is a 
bonanza that I feel we will benefit from for generations, and will result in our re-election for many many 
elections to come. With these programs, along with many others to be legislated by our government 
(keeping in mind that the people of this province come first), Saskatchewan will finally take its proper 
place in this great Canadian confederation. Under the leadership of Grant Devine, we will become 
known throughout the world as the land of milk and honey, where opportunity will once again be based 
on merit, individual initiative and hard work. One’s ability to espouse socialist change in attitude since 
April 26 has rippled across this province like a tidal wave. Legislation presently before this House will 
only fuel this optimism. Program which will be offered through legislation during future sittings of this 
legislature will be exciting. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — If you think that the learned opposition, to quote our distinguished newly elected 
member for Turtleford who has just been . . . (inaudible) . . . by Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, is a 
pathetic, rat-tag collection today, just wait until after the next election. This is some of the most exciting 
stuff ever enunciated in this House. 
 
In conclusion, I would like to once again thank the people in Regina North West who elected me as their 
member to this legislature. I am at your service throughout my tenure regardless of your political 
persuasion. I promise I will give you 110 per cent. 
 
At this time, I would also like to congratulate the selection of Mr. Speaker – a good man. I’ve travelled 
the road between Beechy and Kyle often enough to know that if you can make it out of there to Regina, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a task in itself. I can say that safely because I’m from Kyle . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . We will. It’s not a promise but I think it is under consideration. 
 
I support the motion before this house; I do not support the amendment. Thank you very much. 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — Mr. Speaker, first of all congratulations on your position. Of course, I am 
especially pleased with your position because I had the honor of vacating the Chair for you. Thank you, 
hon. member for Regina North West. It’s not every time I get to speak behind some who makes me look 
positively staid, understated, restrained and moderate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If he promises to be 
my manager, I might take him up on that. 
 
Although it appears that my decision to enter politics was spur of the moment, this  



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
178 

decision dates back 10 years. I could not trust a world created by people who arbitrarily decide what is 
right and wrong. I could see that when a world has no moral absolutes the state becomes absolute. Its 
power and jurisdiction has no limits other than its own inefficiencies. 
 
People have learned the nature of state power through different milieu. A businessman sees how the state 
takes away a person’s initiative. Through heavy taxes, a person cannot enjoy the fruits of his labour. He 
is encumbered in what he builds, how he builds, who he hires, how he fires, what prices he sets, how he 
advertises and how he sells. An artist sees that who gets a grant depends on political persuasion and the 
message, “Usefulness to the state.” A teacher sees that the state will attempt to rearrange history and 
replace academia with collectivist, manipulative exercises. A farmer sees that while the socialists attack 
entrepreneurs, they play the market with the family farm until all land is in the process of being owned 
by the state. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — For years former Premier Douglas talked of that land of milk and honey. Sweden 
– some day, if we are good and continue to vote CCF or NDP, Saskatchewan could be just like Sweden. 
Apparently the hon. member for Quill Lakes is still infatuated with Sweden. Roland Huntford is an 
Englishman who has lived in Sweden for 20 years. His book, The New Totalitarians, is a chilling expose 
of Sweden. It was especially frightening because it so clearly shows us how far we have moved toward 
Sweden and in which ways we have already arrived. 
 
Some call what has happened to Saskatchewan, state capitalism. Others call it socialism. Others call it 
sheet mismanagement. Whatever you call the nature of the beast, I want to leave Sweden and get back to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I learned the nature of the beast by seeing its continual attacks on the institution of the family. I 
remember a Trotskyist saying, and I quote: 
 

The reason we should fight for abortion on demand is that the capitalists cannot give us our demand 
without destroying capitalism. 

 
At that time I thought that was a very silly statement, but it became clear that capitalism, or free 
enterprise, depends on the family as a mainstay or basis of civilization. Socialism is dependent on 
making all members of the family not interdependent on each other, but dependent on the state. 
Wherever people have attempted, or are attempting, to bring in any form of state totalitarianism, whether 
that totalitarianism is of the right or the left, they know they must weaken or destroy the family. They 
know the importance of abortion in weakening the family. 
 
As one leader in the French pro-abortion movement said at an international conference, and I quote: 
 

We are here to destroy all aspects of Judaeo-Christian civilization. To do that, we must destroy the 
family. To destroy the family, we must attack it at its weakest link – the unborn child. Hence, we 
are for abortion. 

 
It is no accident that our lax abortion laws were instigated by Pierre Elliott Trudeau, with the backing of 
the NDP. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
179 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — Day care has become seemingly a very safe issue. It appeals to our natural 
helping instincts. We want to help mothers who must work and who may be on shift work, but the 
hidden agenda of NDP philosophy on day care is that the raising and nurturing of children should be left 
to the state. 
 
The farmers have discovered that the land bank had a hidden agenda. The real plan was to have state 
control of land. They claimed the plan was to help maintain the family farm. 
 
Parents have seen that the NDP has a hidden agenda in many of its so-called family support programs. 
That hidden agenda appears to be making children the responsibility of the state. The thing about a 
hidden agenda is that eventually it becomes apparent. Eventually people say, “Enough!” on April 26, 
1982. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — The only question I have left is: how did the NDP manage to re-elect as many as 
nine members? However, I am sure being in opposition will be a great learning experience. 
 
Saskatoon Westmount has been considered one of the safest NDP seats in the province. You may have 
heard that on both sides of the House. I knew it was no longer a safer NDP seat long before April 26, 
1982, and long before the election writ. As much as I would like to believe the seat was won solely by 
my hard-working husband, my team and me, I must give credit where credit is due. 
 
I wish to extend my thanks for the election and for my win in Saskatoon Westmount to the past minister 
of health, Mr. Rolfes, the part minister of education, Mr. McArthur (who is no longer with us but I see 
him wafting about the halls in the shadows), and the past minister of social services, the hon. member 
for Shaunavon. I am delighted he is still in the House because there is so much he can learn. The seat 
was won because of their arrogant, blatant attempt to extend NDP control, not just to potash mines, not 
just to oil fields, not just to farmlands, but to the minds, hearts and lives of individuals and families. 
 
There are two popular books by a Mr. Tim LaHaye. They are called Battle for the Mind and Battle for 
the Family. He describes how state power is forcing a state-endorsed philosophy on people. There 
probably is no better example of what Mr. LaHaye describes than the NDP’s actions in health, education 
and welfare. 
 
Yes, Saskatoon Westmount was won because the PC Party and its leadership provided a positive 
alternative. But never forget, hon. members in the corner, you no longer have your former speaker in the 
House because of your actions and attitudes, because of your utter contempt for the individual, for the 
importance of the family and for traditional values. 
 
I think you guys should be clapping! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
180 

MRS. CASWELL: — Maybe that’s one of the things we could employ the opposition to do since they 
don’t have much to do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — This speech-making is fun, isn’t it, Bill? Because Saskatoon Westmount has 
many low income and single parent families, many families have felt the brunt of state intervention in 
their homes and families. Low income people do not want so-called free programs. They do not want a 
bevy of professionals running their lives. 
 
Saskatoon Westmount people want what the rest of Saskatchewan people want – including, I am sure, 
the northern people – the opportunity for a potion of economic freedom that is won by their own efforts. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — They want to be treated as individuals capable of shaping their own lives. They 
are the experts on inequities, inadequacies, the humiliation and soul destroying aspects of the welfare 
system – the welfare system created, maintained and expanded by the NDP. 
 
As the MLA representing Saskatoon Westmount, I am committed to protecting the individual concerns 
and aspirations of the families there. I refuse to let the socialists tell me what is good for the so-called 
poor. 
 
Saskatoon Westmount has 15 churches Caswell Hill alone has six. Many of the pastors want to take a 
hard, cold look at the 129-page Non-profit Corporations Act passed in 1979 – 129 pages to regulate 
churches. They sense this is an invasion of privacy and encroachment on religious freedom. 
 
Many of the voters in Saskatoon Westmount are elderly. There are six senior residences and nursing 
homes immediately around our constituency office. The elderly tell me how hospital line-ups affect them 
in life-and-death situations. They see that the dedicated staff at St. Paul’s Hospital cannot give them the 
time and care they want to give. They know our hospitals are under funded and understaffed. They 
remember that the past minister of health attempted to take over St. Paul’s Hospital and have it directly 
controlled from Regina. He was concerned that the three Saskatoon hospitals had different philosophies. 
An NDP government can never tolerate different philosophies. Everything must be run by its 
philosophy. 
 
I know many of my constituents expect me to work to restore the sanctity of life in this province because 
that is precisely why they voted for me, among other reasons, and they know that I knew it. However, 
there is another reason the abortion issue is forced on me as priority. If medical costs continue to rise as 
they have, if the aged continue to be a large percentage of our population as they will, if the sanctity of 
life continues to be eroded as it was in the past NDP reign, there would have been a cry for active 
euthanasia. The arguments would have been made on an economic utilitarian basis. They would have 
been sold as compassion for the elderly, getting rid of the inconvenient unborn; they would have been 
the precedent for getting rid of the inconvenient elderly. Fortunately, we got rid of the NDP. Fortunately, 
this is a province with a very strong pro-life movement and sanctity of life will be restored. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
181 

We can have enough money to give proper medical care to those who need it. Hopefully, more elderly 
will live their last years with families near by. They know that the economic situation under the socialist 
regime has forced their children to go elsewhere for jobs and opportunities. The highly educated, the 
independent, aggressive person, has been fleeing from this province. If the NDP had not been trounced 
on April 26, many more would have left. Many people came to me during the last election and said, “I’ll 
fight one more time, but if the NDP wins we’ll have to move out of this province.” Fortunately, in 
Saskatoon Westmount, many of us were too stubborn to move. When the choice was to move or to fight, 
we chose to fight. Apparently, the Westside guys know how to fight. 
 
According to Evelyn Eager in Saskatchewan Government, the father of the past House speaker chastised 
his CCF Party for not having more women run, and for having them run only in seats unlikely to win. 
 
The NDP has always claimed to support women’s’ role in government. One trusts that if someone had to 
beat their attorney general, their speaker, and three other NDP candidates, they were happy to have them 
beaten by women. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — Both the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone and the hon. member for Regina 
Centre seem very concerned about women, or wish to make it appear as if they are concerned about 
women. The NDP has always been concerned about women, but it has never been interested in listening 
to women unless, of course, those women were saying what it wanted them to say. 
 
The Grey Nuns were giving health care to this province before there was a province. Did the NDP 
consult them before it attempted to take over their St. Paul’s Hospital? Has the NDP listened to pro-life 
women? The Victoria Order of Nurses has been delivering home health care since 1912. Did the NDP 
listen to those women when steps were made to stop their contract? Did the NDP listen to mothers who 
are concerned about bureaucracy? Did the NDP listen to hospital workers, most of whom are women? 
Did the NDP listen to nurses, most of whom are women, who are saying they cannot give proper care 
and concern to the sick because hospitals are under funded and understaffed? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Are any of the members of the NDP married? 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — We don’t discuss their private lives. We have enough to say. Did the NDP listen 
to mothers who were saying they wanted to have the right to stay home with their children without being 
forced to work because of high taxes? 
 
No, the NDP did not listen to the majority of women, and that is why their members are reduced to a 
huddle. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — However, once again, to give credit where credit is due, the NDP does treat 
women equally to men. It only listens to men who say what it wants to hear. The NDP is quite happy to 
equally control men, women and children. 



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
182 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — Saskatoon Westmount has two public high schools (both full) and one Catholic 
high school, four public elementary schools and three Catholic elementary schools. All schools have a 
stable or growing population. Saskatoon Westmount includes Kelsey Institute. This institute was not 
treated well by the last regime. I hope to work with the Minister of Education and the administration 
staff and students at Kelsey to attain proper funding and more autonomy. 
 
Saskatoon Westmount has a diverse population. There are union and non-union workers who are proud 
of their homes and families and of what hard work has done for them. There are potash miners. We had 
supporters from both the government-owned mines and the privately-owned mines. They could see that 
layoffs from the government mines were coming and they suspected that the only reason layoffs had not 
already resulted was that it was an election year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — The nationalization of the potash mines lost the NDP the votes of many people 
who had supported them for 20 years. 
 
There are some professionals and very hard working small businessmen. It is a friendly democratic area. 
Ethnic and religious diversity, economic and educational diversity, family and age diversity is 
everywhere. Saskatoon Westmount people are hard-nosed individualists. We are proud of our 
Conservative views and are looking toward Conservative views and policies to help the poor. It is like 
small-town Saskatchewan in the midst of the city. Saskatoon Westmount is my home. I love my home. I 
am proud to represent Saskatoon Westmount, my home, in the legislature. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BAKER: — Thank you. First of all, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your 
election. I do feel that we certainly made an extremely good choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with a great deal of pride that I have been given this opportunity to rise in the 20th 
Legislative Assembly, I would like to now thank my wife and family for the sacrifice that they are 
making to allow me to service the people in the constituency of Biggar. I am proud to serve as the MLA 
for the constituency known as Biggar. Firstly, I would like to thank the voters in my riding for placing 
their trust in me as their member. 
 
I will at this time tell this Assembly a little bit about my riding (I won’t be shaking in four years.) it 
covers a great deal of territory, taking in towns such as Vanscoy, Delisle, Harris, Asquith, Perdue, 
Sonningdale, Arelee, Biggar, Handel, Kinley, Swanson, Donavon, Springwater, Ruthilda and Cando. It 
also borders Saskatoon and Battleford. There is primarily mixed farming throughout the constituency 
with a large number of . . . (inaudible) . . . and beef producers. I have quite a few sheep farmers and hog 
producers, who make it a very diversified type of farming area. I also have two Indian reserves, the 
Mosquito and the Red Pheasant, with a combined population of roughly 1,000 people. I also have five 
Hutterite colonies in my seat along with a large group of Metis, so that makes my seat have very special 
needs. I have two provincial parks, one being Pike Lake and the other Eagle Creek. Mr. Speaker, I have 
some grave concerns about the largest town in my constituency, which is Biggar. The population under 
the  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
183 

last seven years of NDP rule in this province has dropped some 300 people – from nearly 2,900 to nearly 
2,600 persons. If towns this size are losing population, no wonder Saskatchewan is being left behind in 
the growth potential that has occurred in western Canada. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be part of a 
government that is determined to do something about this province – to create new opportunities for the 
province and the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to serve under a government that acts on its promises, like the removal of the 
gas tax, the freeze on the utilities, the opening of the books of the crown corporations to public scrutiny, 
the mortgage reduction to home-owners, the lower interest rates to young farmers. Mr. Speaker, anyone 
would be proud to serve and be a part of the government with the capable leadership of our Premier, 
Grant Devine. 
 
I’m going to make up a little time here that the member for Regina North West took, and I will be 
supporting the throne speech and I thank you very much. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, first of all let me congratulate you on the honor this House has 
placed upon you. Having served as a member with you in the House, I know the respect that all of us on 
both sides had, and I know that you will dispatch your duties as Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I must first thank the people of my constituency who sent me to this 
Legislative Assembly for the third time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I hear the hon. member say it was 
a squeaker. Wouldn’t you love to have a squeaker like that? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — And let me give you a suggestion, Mr. Hon. Member: some more of you are going 
to go after the next election. I don’t know if you’ll have a seconder for motions. But we’ll see what we 
can do about it. On that point, as I said, I’d like to thank my constituents. They sent me the first time 
with 38 per cent of the vote, the next time with 53 per cent of the vote and this time with over 73 per 
cent of the vote. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — It’s going to be difficult over the next 20 years to get my percentages higher and 
higher, but I shall work at it. First of all, being one of the three senior members on this side of the House, 
I was pleased when the Premier came to me and said, “Ralph, there are a lot of rookies. Will you help 
them learn the ropes?” it must mean that I learned something around this building over my past seven 
years and I took on the challenge. I took on the challenge. You’ve seen the speakers we heard all day 
yesterday and today and I’m proud of our new members. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Don’t you wish you had some of them, Al? Mr. Speaker, my speech tonight . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You know, that’s true, but you know the pride of a teacher is to always have 
his pupils do better than himself. 



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
184 

I was going to talk about the transfer of power. Being the first member from the Conservatives to enter 
each of the cabinet ministers’ offices of the former government as they vacated, it was appalling to 
discover the amount of material left behind. If you were lucky, you found a pencil or a paper clip and 
maybe even a piece of paper in the filing cabinets. That’s if you got lucky. Now how many hundreds of 
thousands of dollars did it cost the citizens of Saskatchewan for you guys to play with shredders? I 
understand you even shredded Regina telephone books. I mean that’s going quite a ways, boys! 
 
You know, the last speech of the former minister of labour, when he raved in this House about my 
ability to know what went on everywhere in that government, was rather enjoyable because I knew and I 
predicted, long before the election, that the Conservatives would be the government. In fact, I publicly 
stated we would have 44 seats plus. I was a little generous to you people; you didn’t even do that well. 
You know, I hear good old modesty from the front bench over on that side. It’s a good thing there are 
only nine of them, because otherwise you would have never got a front bench. 
 
Mr. Former Premier, Leader of the Opposition now, your ministers did not have the decency to even 
leave the duplicate copies of information that wee in the departments and in their filing cabinets when 
they vacated their offices. Even they had to be shredded. Isn’t it strange that documents which were all 
through the departments had to be shredded? Will we ever know the added burden of expense put upon 
the citizens of Saskatchewan? You stand by your seats and complain about lack of action, but you 
destroyed all the documents. That means we had to start and recopy every document that is important 
enough to be used to make decisions. If you had left documents behind, we might have been able to 
work. 
 
In 1976 or 1977, in this House, Mr. Davey Steuart, then leader of the opposition and a former member of 
the treasury board under the Liberal government, made a little blunder and said that the Liberals – I 
repeat – the Liberals had considered selling SGIO (Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office). Well, 
the former attorney general, Mr. Romanow, who is not here any more, jumped to his feet with glee and 
said, “I’m glad that hon. member brought that up, because I wasn’t allowed to bring it up because it was 
in the files, and I discovered it as a cabinet minister.” Those were his comments. And then he went on 
the repeat that, and we had a debate going on that issue. It’s unfortunate that our cabinet ministers could 
not reveal all the things they have found, because the people of Saskatchewan would never, ever dream 
of returning an NDP government. 
 
But, once again, let me warn the opposition. My ear is still out; I’m still listening. I’m not part of 
cabinet, and I can release everything I find. And just watch, it’ll all come. There are little things I’d like 
to know about, and when you guys play out, which you just about did today in question period, I’ll get 
my opportunity to ask my questions about $50,000 walls and things like that which have never been 
reported. One day in question period I shall have my time. 
 
You know, if you would like to know where that wall is, I would suggest that you go down to that nice 
expensive bathtub and look around at the rest of the room. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency came to this country for rights and freedoms, as 
the member for Regina said earlier this evening. One of the major rights was the right to own land. 
During the election campaign, people once again spoke to me about that right. They were wondering and 
they said, “Why did Mr.  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
185 

Blakeney and Mr. Romanow work so hard to make sure that the right to own land was not part of our 
Canadian constitution? Why would they have done that?” 
 
I quote Mr. Jake Epp, a member of the constitutional committee who, when speaking in my 
constituency, indicated that there was an agreement in the House between the Liberals and the 
Conservatives that they would allow that particular motion to be put and approved. But the NDP 
member for Yorkton got up and stalled and stalled until the clock was talked out. And then the former 
premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. Blakeney, and Mr. Romanow hustled down to tell their buddies, the Libs, 
“If you put that in, you’ve got no agreement.” So the Libs said, “Oh, we won’t put the right to own land 
in the constitution.” That’s what happened. 
 
Why was he scared that the people should have the right? The only reason he felt that way had to be that 
that way he couldn’t control every daily part of their lives. But they don’t have to worry about that 
anymore, because they don’t have that government anymore. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — During the last sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker, just before we went to the 
election . . . And, boy, was I glad to get out on the boondock trails again. That’s great sport, Al, because 
it was easy to kick the tar out of a government like yours which was arrogant and only concerned with its 
own hip pocket, not the purses of the people of Saskatchewan, unless it was to take money out of them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I’m talking about funds. I’m going to miss the former attorney general because he 
was always good for a shot or two to get me going, but I know the member for Moosomin will always 
help out when I have a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1975 seven Conservative MLAs came to this House with a task. The task was to change 
the direction of this province, to allow people with individual initiative to have the right to go forth and 
be rewarded for their work – for the right to know that those who need help will receive it from those 
who can assist them. That magnificent seven, as it used to be called, had everybody in this place scared. 
The former Liberals were busy shooting at us. The NDP over there were busy shooting at us. In fact, they 
arranged some deals so there wouldn’t be by-elections in certain ridings because they were scared we’d 
win those too. But we ended up in Prince Albert-Duck Lake in due course. You know, the member 
suggests that we’ve had some problem with that. In a couple of days there will be something happening. 
I think we will have the opportunity to have it back again. I always relish a good campaign, especially 
close to home. 
 
As I was saying, those 7 started something; they grew to 11, to 15 and now to 55. You know, I can even 
go home, pack up my bags from politics and say, “I’ve accomplished what I came here to do.” There are 
only three of us left, but we accomplished what we came to do. 
 
We have brought in a government that’s concerned for people. we have a government that wants to listen 
to people. None of us are here for fund. Most of us can make a lot more money outside this House than 
we’ll ever make here. But some of us enjoy it, as the member for Moosomin says, and some of us feel 
that because the land has been good to us and because people have been good to us, this is the way that 
we will assist  



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
186 

and give back. Those seven I referred to were chastised, stomped on by both sides, the Liberals and the 
NDP. You played your little games to try to get at us. Seven years I’ve been a member. Seven different 
offices I have had, because the walls had to come down or there was something changed in the building. 
But we’ve lived through that. We used to hear the whine. “You’re a lousy opposition.” But we’re 
government today, so we must have been a good opposition . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) got you guys. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — When they took you on. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — That “O” cost a lot of money to come off, too. That’s right, Mr. Member for 
Moosomin. Just to take off an “O” you decided to have a study. At least when we study something it’s 
for worth-while purposes – to reorganize the departments, or something for the betterment of the people 
– rather than just to change a symbol. 
 
But we were a good opposition, because every time you said it we knew you were hurt. That was your 
way of deflecting, and the former attorney general was just super at it. He used to give that press corps 
supreme you-know-what because he was getting in trouble and your government was in trouble. The 
only way out was to take it out on them because we were right and you were wrong. So, you had to pick 
on those fellows upstairs. Well, I know they can look after themselves, so they didn’t need much 
defending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I started commenting in my speech about the transfer of power, about the dollars that were 
wasted, about the comments of Mr. Steuart and Mr. Romanow, and about the comment I made that 
fortunately I’m not in cabinet and my ears are still in tune. Now I can release the information that I find 
out. 
 
It’s unfortunate the former minister of social services is not here right now, because I’d love to whack 
the tar out of him. It’s very simple. In my constituency, during the election there was a phone call by 
than hon. member and his support staff, informing the constituency that it was getting some money for a 
special project. When we took over the books, I found out through my own sources that that had never 
been approved by that government. What’s he doing – playing games with politics? If he can’t tell the 
truth then he shouldn’t say anything. 
 
I don’t know how many other places there were where that went on in the government because I only 
listen for certain areas, for my constituents, who are good hard-working constituents, and I’m proud to 
be here representing them. 
 
There are a couple of other things I can talk about. It’s unfortunate the person whom I am to speak about 
cannot be here to defend himself. Just prior to the election, your little group of shells tried to play a game 
with me. I’m pleased and glad to learn today that you guys were cuffed on your ears. When you play 
games you’d better get your facts right, because all those little charges Terry Stevens and his gang tried 
to prove were thrown out of labour relations and were totally proved false. In fact, I understand that this 
chief witness was considered for perjury charges. 
 
You know, if you are going to get down into the gutter, you’d better know the game, and you guys are 
pros at it. In seven years I’ve learned how to defend myself from snakes and those kinds of animals. For 
seven years I have watched you attack individuals and  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
187 

persons who put their names forward to stand up for public office, and I have watched you ridicule them. 
I just hope some of our guys have the gall to give it right back to you because you deserve it. 
 
After the campaign your people said you should have thrown mud at Premier Devine. That man is so 
clean, you couldn’t find any. If I wanted to find mud, I could find lots of it on you. But, when you throw 
mud, you soon lose the farm, and I like my farm. That’s what you fellows have done from 1975 until 
now. You even tried it in this election and it didn’t work, fellows. Speak the truth and people will listen. 
Throw mud and falsehoods and you’re going to get smaller and smaller until you go to oblivion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of my leader, and I repeat what I said in 1979 or 1980 when he was elected 
leader in Saskatoon. The Conservative Party has been famous for shooting inwards. Let me repeat what I 
said then, “Before anyone gets to my leader, you have me to go over.” There is a guy in this House with 
a cracked rib or two because he got smart, so just watch it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I should pretty soon get into my prepared text but I’ve been having too much fun ad 
libbing. The member from Moosomin suggests I go without it – well, why not? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Throw it away now. Throw it away. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I haven’t had this much fun since I went out stomping on ants. But then, 
considering what’s there, that’s just like stomping on ants. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had members from the other side suggest we are arrogant. Doggone right 
we’re arrogant, because we beat the wax and tar out of you and we’re proud of it. But we’ve also got 
enough humility to listen to the people, and that’s something you didn’t have. Nobody is in this House if 
he doesn’t have a bit of arrogance. That’s part of the make-up of a politician. You have to believe that 
you can do it; otherwise you’re not here. There are 55 members on this side who believe that they can do 
something, and they put their names on ballots and they proved that they can do it. 
 
Mind you, it’s the only job in the world that you fight like heck to get – you’ve got to get two, three, four 
or five hundred people to help you. You’ve got to get them to donate money so that they can afford to 
pay the bill, and then you’ve got to pray that the citizens in your riding have belief in your policies and 
therefore will elect you. Then you spend the next four years getting you know what and then you go back 
out and do it all over again. But the inner satisfaction for that which the three out of the seven of us 
achieved will go with us a long way. 
 
In 20 years or 25 years when the Conservatives are re-elected and re-elected and re-elected, we will feel 
good inside because we knew we were the start of something better for the people of Saskatchewan. On 
that note, I say thank you to my former colleagues who didn’t last until today, but I say we appreciated 
their hard work which increased our caucus from 7 to 11, to 15, to 55. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me change the tone of my comments a bit and refer to something that personally bothers 
me. I ask the members of the House to take it as it is laid out. In Canada, we do not treat our defeated 
premiers or prime ministers with what I believe to be the proper respect when they retire. It is 
unfortunate that we do not make provisions in our system to allow them to retire with dignity and with 
the financial assistance  



June 22, 1982 
 

 

 
188 

necessary to do the things they must for history to remember the years they dedicated to this privileged 
institution. I may chastise the former leader of the former government, but the position he held deserves 
respect, the same as the position you hold deserves respect. I would hope in some way that we will 
modify our system to show all our appreciation for the years of dedication anybody who sits in that high 
office deserves. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I talk out of turn, Mr. Speaker, when I say that I broke some rules. When it came 
time to change offices in this building, I sealed the building as we switched offices for the former 
premier and the new Premier. And I don’t apologize to the press for that at all, because that’s the way it 
should be done. 
 
I do not apologize for breaking another rule. I may have to pay the bill myself, but that’s fine because I 
believe in it. That’s an expensive bill, Mr. Blakeney. The former premier has been left with his vehicle, 
and I think that is only proper because he is the former premier. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I know it is unfortunate that nobody can predict how an election will finish eight 
or 12 weeks ahead of time, but the labour legislation of this province was totally ignored as people were 
removed from the office of the caucus because of the grant system. And I hope we take that into 
consideration, in due course, as they do in all other province in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, being the last speaker of the evening, I don’t want to finish on that kind of note. I’d rather 
finish on a high, so I will go back to my former style of speaking now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the privilege of sitting in this House, as I said, for seven years. I’ve had the 
privilege of watching a government grow more arrogant and arrogant and arrogant. I’ve had the privilege 
of learning the ropes by the good old method called street smarts. That’s when, if you did it wrong, you 
got kicked in the teeth, and you never did it that way again. And now I have the privilege of assisting our 
new members so they don’t have to take as many shots as I did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you sit, and in an impartial chair I feel sorry for you at times because I know that at times I 
cannot hold my own emotions in check when I wish to join debate, and for two days I have seen you do 
an excellent job of staying impartial, and I compliment you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — To my former colleagues, who are now all in the cabinet, I feel sorry for the 
amount of work you must do and the long hours that you must put in. I do not envy you at all, because 
your jobs and the mess that was left behind by the former government will keep you busy for many long 
hours into the night. 
 
It’s interesting to watch the midnight oil burn in this building, as cabinet minister after cabinet minister 
must remain here hour after hour unscrambling the mess left behind by the former government. And, as I 
said, my ears are open, and I continue to hear things. And one of the things I hear is not only our 
department’s mess, but that some departments have spent so much of their budget that we’re not going 
to know where  



 
June 22, 1982 

 

 
189 

the money is going to come from at the end of the year. 
 
On that note, let me go back to government services, a department I used to be the critic for. In 
approximately January of this year, I wanted to order one three-draw filing cabinet. I phoned up the 
department, which I always have to do when that happens, and requested one. They said, “Sorry, Mr. 
Katzman, we’ve spent our whole budget for the year. There’s no more money until the new budget.” I 
said, “There are three months left. No money?” They said, “Oh, that’s normal. We’ve ordered the 
equipment, but we can’t pay for it till we get the new money. Therefore we can’t have it.” I wonder if 
some of the cabinet ministers are find things like that – that the money ran out months and months ahead 
of time. 
 
I notice the former premier is writing. I suggest that the former premier check with the former 
department officials of that date and they will tell him that story. It happened. In how many other 
departments did it happen? We will never know for a while. 
 
Mr. Speaker, noting the time of the evening and noting that tomorrow will be here shortly I wish to 
adjourn debate. I ask permission to adjourn debate, please. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:55 p.m. 
 


