




















































Hansard: June 24, 1982


273 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 24, 1982 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
Address in Reply (continued) 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I may say it had not initially been my intention to get into this debate for a second 
time. I was into the debate once. I had hoped that members opposite . . . I will sit down in due course. I at 
least speak from my feet, as distinct from the member opposite, who speaks from his seat. I had initially 
hoped that if I spoke about it once, members opposite might listen. But I may say that what has been said 
and, more important, what has not been done by the government opposite, indicates that the government 
simply isn't listening. The government isn't listening to the opposition, and the government is not listening to 
the people. I know members opposite in their over-blown arrogance, with 55 seats, believe that there's no 
point in listening to the opposition; it has nothing to contribute. I say to members opposite that a good 
government listens to the opposition . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the members opposite say they 
are. They certainly aren't behaving in that fashion. Northing we have said and certainly not our amendment 
to the motion, seems to have made any imprint on the government and on the members of the treasury 
benches. 
 
I want to say, as well, something that I said in the debate on the main motion. I want to repeat it because it's 
relevant here. That is, I've never seen a government start out in this fashion. A government normally starts 
out full of vim and vigour. You want to attack the economic problems, the unemployment. You people are 
starting out as if you've been in office for 10 years. I was amazed at the Minister of Education today. He was 
actually able to say yes or no, the first person who's been able to say yes or no to anything. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — We've been proposing a number of things. You people aren't even decisive 
enough to say no. You just want to study it. You want to review it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I am 
speaking on the amendment. Do you want me to read your speech? I think mine's better. The Minister of 
Labour made an announcement today, the singular announcement that has come from government opposite 
with respect to jobs, unemployment . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right. Doesn't it impress the 
member for Regina North that that was our idea? Sorry, I may have your riding wrong. Doesn't it impress 
you that that was our project? We got it going. All you people did was flip the switch. That's all you people 
have done so far. You just flipped the switch on a project that we worked on and we got going and cut 800 
jobs out at the same time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I may say, Mr. Speaker, there's a surprising amount of enthusiasm for getting into this debate, an enthusiasm 
which was noticeably lacking before supper. Something you people have eaten must have given you some 
inspiration. 
 
I am going to deal with the amendment proposed by the opposition in reverse order. I want to deal with 
number 3 first: 
 

That the following words be added to the motion: 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
274 

but regrets that Your Honour's advisers, while recognizing this is a time of severe economic strain 
for Saskatchewan, have failed to propose any adequate measures to help those with the lowest 
incomes to deal with the severe hardships of rising prices. 

 
I think many people suspect that the Conservatives represent the upper echelon of society. The way that you 
have behaved in government thus far shows that you are certainly not disappointing those who hold that 
view. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Have you ever considered the amount of land that Reg Gross has? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don't know how one would add the amount of Reg Gross' land to mine. Mine 
would not make a significant dent in anyone's. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I'll bet that you have more money than I have. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don't know. We'll compare wallets when this is all done, I say to the member 
for Moosomin. But I think many people believe that you are the Conservative Party of the rich. You're 
certainly giving everyone reason to believe that they were right. For once you're proving everyone right. I 
predict that when it comes to people's worst expectations, you'll prove them right. With respect to the hopes 
which you kindled to such a bright flame during the election, you'll prove to be a monstrous disappointment. 
 
One of those with the lowest . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I can't see your speech. If you want me to read 
your speech, I can't see it. 
 
Among those with the lowest incomes, among those who are hardest hit, are the natives. Native people and 
the plight of native people have been something of an interest of mine. This interest comes about, in part, 
because of the nature of my riding. I don't think anyone could ever define exactly what a native is, nor could 
anyone do a head count, because I don't think a native could be defined exactly enough in the sense that they 
could then be counted by a census taker. Certainly, however, a larger percentage (I would think it may be as 
high as one-third) of my riding is native, and they get hit, and hit hard, with rising prices. 
 
In recent times, it hasn't been the price of gold, or the price of expensive scotch whiskey, or the price of other 
luxuries which has been rising, it's been the price of basic commodities. It's been that of food and shelter, and 
that hits the native people the hardest. 
 
Yet, we saw nothing in the throne speech which mentioned in any way the plight of Canada's and 
Saskatchewan's first citizens. I think native people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You want to hear that? I'm 
not sure the speaker will . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It may not take me 11 years to tell you, but it would 
take me some time to tell you what we did for native people. 
 
Native people are one group that didn't desert the NDP in this election. There were many who did, I'd be the 
first to admit that. Natives (at least in the cities) were one group that did not. Native people were among 
those who were most realistic about what they might expect from the government opposite. 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
275 

In my riding, I estimate that native people increased my majority from around 500 to 1,200. It made that kind 
of difference having them there. 
 
My learned friend here tells me they remembered everything that you people had promised to do for them, 
which wasn't very much . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They may have remembered the Pelly by-election in 
which you people made an issue out of some assistance that was allegedly given to a band which in fact was 
never given. You alleged that we had promised something to an Indian band which in fact was not promised. 
But in sort of a northern version of the southern tactic of nigger-baiting, you people tried to make an issue 
out of a grant that was never given. And it deeply offended native people. They came at that point in time to 
realize how little they could expect from a Conservative government . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm 
genuinely sorry, Mr. Speaker, that this disappointed the member for Moosomin. That hurts. I want you to 
know that. That really offends me that the member for Moosomin, my old stomping ground, would . . . 
 
You further indicated to native people how much help they were going to be in the by-election of Regina 
North West. When you made an issue out of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You want to hear it again? Mr. 
Speaker, I hadn't initially intended to rise on this debate. I had hoped that what I had said . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Members opposite suggest that I'm going too fast for them. If you'd like me to slow down, I 
will genuinely attempt to put it slow enough so that members opposite can understand what it is that I'm 
trying to say. Is that slow enough for the member for Regina . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that's a 
sharp contrast to the member yesterday. I had no difficulty hearing the member yesterday. You and I should 
get together. Half way between your volume and mine might do very nicely. You and I should meet 
somewhere in the middle and you may be able to make a sensible volume out of it. 
 
In the Regina North West by-election you further told natives what they might expect in terms of help with 
living conditions. Do you remember what you did there? I can well understand that the member for Rosthern 
doesn't want to hear about this. Probably the Pelly by-election and the North West by-election were two of 
the sorriest chapters in the history of the Conservative Party. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I'm having just a little bit of trouble relating what is being said to the amendment that's 
before the House. Would the member return to the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. I was being interrupted so constantly by members 
opposite that I forgot myself and actually began to answer some of the tripe that was being stated. 
 
Among those with low incomes who need help are natives. We saw nothing in the throne speech for them 
and as I intended to point out, they are probably the one group that isn't disappointed because they expected 
nothing from this government. 
 
It might have been some additional assistance to people of low income if you had kept your promise with 
respect to gas tax. I know it produced great hoots of derision, but you people didn't promise 29 cents. You 
promised 40 cents. That is a significant difference. It will make a significant difference on a tank of gas. If 
you people would keep your  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
276 

promises (and I want to get to some of them later), you could genuinely do something to assist low income 
people meet the rising cost of living. The gas tax would be one if you would just keep your promise. You 
didn't promise 29 cents. The bald truth is that you people can't multiply. That is how you came to get 40 
cents in tax instead of 29 cents. 
 
Another group of extremely low income people who are hurt by rising prices are immigrants. I met with 
some of them this afternoon — the people from Regina Plains Community College. They need help. It isn't 
part of this province's jurisdiction to determine whether or not immigrants come or don't come. I don't intend 
to get into that, it is a somewhat involved subject. But it is our responsibility to assist them once they get 
here. It is our responsibility to assist those people in meeting an ever-increasing cost of living. There are 
ways we could do that and you people have them at your disposal. I refer to the Minister of Education who 
impressed me so deeply in the question period today. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He is an excellent minister; he is a good man. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — He may be. You have a report on English as a second language instruction 
authored by Mr. Bizzarri. You did not receive it? Your predecessor did. But you have a report. He outlines 
for your benefit, Mr. Minister, if you have an opportunity to study it in the midst of studying everything else 
. . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That is the only one he hasn't read. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You know, I can believe that. That is maybe why he is such a sterling 
improvement over the other members of the treasury bench opposite. He may have to be doing some reading. 
If you get to the report, you will find a number of recommendations in that report to assist immigrants when 
they come to this country — the lowest of low income people. I say to the minister opposite to leave aside 
the humanitarianism of helping those people cope with the increasing cost of living and just look upon it as a 
good investment. What they ask for is additional assistance in the English language and additional technical 
training — the kinds of things that those low income people need to meet the rising cost of living. 
 
There is a serious oversight, perhaps, in helping those with the lowest income to deal with the severe 
hardship of rising prices. It is the failure to deal with the minimum wage. I may say I am still waiting with 
bated breath to see what is going here. I am still waiting with bated breath to see what happens with the 
minimum wage. I heard the Premier announced in unequivocal terms that the minimum wage wouldn't go 
up. I didn't hear him announce it. That is what was reported. A few days later, I hear the Minister of Labour 
come out with an approach that was a good deal more sensible. What I am waiting to find out is whether 
your Premier went off half-cocked again and announced something without having done any homework as 
he did with the 40 cent gas tax. Is the Minister of Labour playing games with those on the minimum wage 
who need help? Like I said, I can't read your speech. 
 
The minimum wage, if I may say, deals as directly with the third part of the amendment as anything that has 
happened in this House. I think this House has a right to know what you are doing with the minimum wage. 
Are we to believe the Premier, who says it isn't going up? Are we to believe the Minister of Labour? He's 
listening to everyone. Are you playing games with the trade unionists and others who lobby you for a higher 
rate? I think the House has a right to know which of you we should be listening to. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
277 

Among those with the lowest incomes who need help to deal with the severe hardship of rising prices are 
superannuates, a number of whom live in my riding. The Leader of the Opposition (and I keep wanting to 
call him the premier, out of force of habit and partially because of the inevitable recognition that he will be 
four years hence) said on behalf of the caucus that that is one thing you could deal with. The bill is there. I 
have it behind me, in fact. I can find it in less time than it will take to tell you about it. It was introduced in 
March. It provides a subsidy to the pensions of superannuates, most of whom need it very badly. All we get 
from the members opposite is a yawn. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What kind of subsidy was that? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What was the rate? Well, I can find it for the member if you like. I am not sure 
that I can find it very quickly. I don't remember the number. I am not sure the Speaker would let me, if I did 
start thumbing through it. Yes, indeed, a short two-page bill. You aren't doing much about it. I admit 
individual members opposite may care about superannuates. I believe the Minister of Social Services does. I 
think she has a genuine compassion for low income people. I think she exhibited that in the last House. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You should talk to your House Leader; he has the list of the legislation that is 
being introduced. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, no announcement to that effect has been made —whether you people are 
going to reintroduce it at this session. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You talk to your House Leader, he has the list. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are you saying you are going to introduce this legislation again? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . I'm not on my feet. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You seem to be doing a find job of it so far. I really don't know what suddenly 
inhibited the member for Souris-Cannington, because he has been doing a fine job of speaking from his seat. 
 
If you are making a commitment that you are going to reintroduce this in the House, that may well be the 
first positive thing you have done to assist people. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Are you going to vote against the gas tax and the royalty tax? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Opposition policy will be announced in due course. It's under study. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He's got the habit. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — It's a hard habit to break. Don't get into the habit of saying, "Government policy 
will be announced in due course." You'll never get rid of the habit. 
 
The act is the act to amend the supplementary provisions act. If I got a commitment out of the Deputy 
Premier that you will reintroduce that, then I think I would sit down. I really would. I think I would have 
accomplished something. I have been in the legislature long enough to know that you don't accomplish all 
you set out to do. You measure your accomplishments by a fairly fine ruler. If the Deputy Premier will give 
me the  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
278 

commitment that that is going ahead, that would make all the difference. I will wait in question period 
tomorrow morning, in ministerial statements, for the Deputy Premier to make that announcement. 
 
Senior citizens, another low income group who buy perhaps as much as anyone else, need help to deal with 
the severe hardship of rising prices. Of all the people in society, it may be senior citizens who are hurt the 
worst by rising prices. 
 
There are a number of things you could be doing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We'll get to that in a 
moment. Let's deal with the senior citizens. There's a number of things you could be doing. The shelter 
allowance which we introduced in March — not all the things we introduced in March were, I may say, 
positively received. I would admit with humility that comes with the day after, were very positively received 
by senior citizens. It was something that would directly assist those with the lowest incomes to deal with 
rising prices. 
 
I might say that I had a stack of little notes from out canvassing. I carry my diary with me with a notepad in it 
and I might say that I had a big stack of notes from senior citizens wanting more information on the shelter 
allowance. I'll bet you one out of three senior citizens I called on in apartments asked about the program and 
whether it or not was available for them. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We have stopped the rising cost of living in the province. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Oh, have you? It's unfortunate the former member for Regina North East can't get 
in and speak on this. He was a person with a genuine empathy for low income people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — His loss will be mourned by his constituents. The rent subsidy is something you 
could do. It would be positive and the expense is not that horrendous. Most of the programs we introduced to 
assist . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Maybe the Deputy Premier will give you a commitment on that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Maybe he'll give me a commitment he's going to introduce rent subsidy for senior 
citizens? That would be very positively received and I'll tell you I wouldn't criticize you for it publicly or 
privately. I would genuinely applaud it. 
 
I can't seem to find my edition of Pocket Politics but you people promised considerable assistance addressed 
in the broadest terms. You people promised to assist senior citizens in dealing with the rising cost of living. 
That's a direct quote. I hadn't noticed that. No, I thought I noticed the CPI (consumer price index) was still 
rising . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, for one month and then it will begin again in July its inevitable 
march upward. 
 
I may say that the gas tax is of extremely little use to senior citizens, at least in my riding. The vast majority 
of senior citizens in my riding don't drive cars. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — But the groceries still have to get to the front door. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, and they haven't noticed the groceries having gone down  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
279 

appreciably since you introduced that gas tax. They haven't. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It has an effect on freight rates, transportation, railroads, and you get the groceries 
a little cheaper then. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That, in fact, is not the case, I say to the member. I say that is not the case. I have 
a report on my desk in the legislature indicating that is not what is happening with the trucking industry. The 
report is that what they are paying drivers has not increased materially, yet they have not lowered their rates. 
So, in fact, the trucking firms are picking up the difference. It isn't going to the drivers; it isn't going to the 
public . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's what Dave Barrett, the future premier of B.C., used to call the 
trickle-down theory. Give it all to the people at the top and some will trickle down. That's how you help 
those with the lowest incomes to help meet the rising cost of living. 
 
I'm trying to impress upon you people that there is a serious problem out there with the economy, with jobs, 
and you just don't seem to be successful . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Sorry, but if you people would 
speak one at a time I would be happy to answer your questions. 
 
Do you want to ask a question? If you want to ask a question, you can direct that through the Speaker, and I 
will yield to a question from the member, because then I get the floor. I'm not going to sit down and let you 
speak, but I will let you ask a question. If the member wants to ask a question, I invite him to do so. 
 
I gather that the member has a good deal more courage from his seat than he does standing up. He doesn't 
seem to want to ask his question. Any of you people who are so anxious to get into this can do so by means 
of a question. All you have to do is ask if the Speaker will permit a question. I'll probably permit a question 
from the members opposite, if they really want to . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I don't believe that this session was meant to educate the members on the 
other side about the rules. Perhaps we could get back to the amendment. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker. The need is so awesome; the temptation is so great. I 
apologize that I succumbed to the temptation to start on that horrendous job of educating those people on the 
rules. 
 
The other group of low income people who need assistance in dealing with the rising cost of living is those 
receiving social assistance. Nothing was said about what you're going to do about social service recipients. 
 
To show you what you might have done if you had some imagination, how you might have assisted those . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The trouble is that if I go any faster I seem to leave you people confused. I'm 
trying to keep it slow enough so that you will understand it. 
 
I'm reading from a document by Midland-Doherty Ltd. I think most members opposite will know what 
Midland-Doherty is. If you picked the five most respected brokerage firms in the investment industry, 
Midland-Doherty would probably be in that number. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
280 

Listen to the opening paragraph from their report called "Saskatchewan Budget Report '82-83": 
 

This budget employs resource revenues to protect Saskatchewan people exposed to record inflation 
and record interest rates, and to invest in Saskatchewan's economic future. 

 
That's the kind of thing that our amendment is asking from you people opposite. 
 
It goes on, on page two of the report from Midland Doherty, to say that Saskatchewan's tradition of strong 
social spending is maintained in the '82-83 budget expenditure plan with allowances for senior citizens, 
assistance and positive programs to help native people, additional grants (here I'm speaking from memory of 
the budget — I'm not quoting from the document) and significant increased to what we used to call NGOs or 
non-government organizations. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The crowd is coming in. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The word is getting out that it's a great speech. 
 
Those were the kinds of things that that budget did. None of you people made any mention of doing it; you're 
not even going to bring in a budget which might tell us what you're going to do to assist people in the low 
income bracket. 
 
Midland-Doherty goes on: 
 

Promising to protect provincial residents from high interest rates, the high cost of living and 
unemployment. Mr. Tchorzewski plans to increase government spending by 21 per cent to $2.759 
billion. Relief from high interest rates will come in the form of a $20 million mortgage subsidy 
program and inexpensive loans to farmers and small businessmen. Measures to counter inflation 
consist of $6 million to senior citizens in the form of shelter allowances . . . 

 
That's all it would cost you to introduce a shelter allowance for senior citizens. All it would cost you is $6 
million. I wish the Minister of Finance were here. I'm sure he would admit that he can't estimate his highway 
budget or his education budget or his health budget within $6 million. It may sound like a lot of money, but 
in the terms of the budgets of provincial governments these days, $6 million is an infinitesimally small 
amount of money. Yet it would have meant so much to those senior citizens who are having a genuinely 
difficult time in meeting their rent payments. 
 

Measures to counter inflation would consist of a freeze on utility rate increases . . . 
 
We see the government opposite taking our idea of freezing utility rates and announcing it afterward as their 
own. You people are getting used to that. You are getting good at that. 
 

. . . 21 per cent higher family income supplements . . . 
 
That brings me to a program that genuinely assists people on low incomes — the family income plan. The 
family income plan was designed to deal with the problem of what we  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
281 

call the working poor, to deal with people such as those who exist in large numbers in my riding, in the 
riding of the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, and in the riding of the member for Saskatoon Centre. Those 
working poor would, in fact, make more if they quit their jobs and went on welfare. That's who the program 
was designed to deal with. It was designed to supplement the income of the working poor so that it could 
never be said that they would make more and be better off if they quit and went on welfare. It's a good 
program, and it's one that needs to be constantly updated and revised. I say this to the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, who may represent many of those people. If there's one group of people whom we should have 
no qualms about assisting (even you people can't argue) surely it's the working poor. You want to know how 
to do it? It's simple. Just enrich the family income program. 
 
This program was introduced some seven years ago. When the act was passed (if my memory serves me 
correctly. I wasn't in the House then, I was working as a personal aide to the then attorney general), that act 
was passed unanimously by the then opposition, the Liberals. So I recommend to you people the family 
income plan, in terms of assisting those who need it most, those with lowest incomes. I say this because I 
know that as soon as I sit down, someone is going to say, "Well, we need time to study it. We've got to get 
enough time to develop new ideas and programs." 
 
Part of the difficulty with members opposite is they take an election to be a revolution. You've got to change 
everything; everything has got to be thrown out; the family income plan has got to be thrown out; you've got 
to start all over again; you've got to reinvent the wheel. Parliamentary government is not a revolution; you 
don't have to re-examine every jot and tittle, in a budget of $2.79 billion. It is an evolutionary process . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I am; I am talking about assistance for those with low income. I know the 
members opposite are having great difficulty understanding the needs of low income people, but it is vitally 
important, and I want to spend just a moment longer on it. 
 
One area where you could assist those in low income (I know you are going to get up and say that you need 
to study it; you study virtually everything, except some of the reports that perhaps you should have studied) 
is housing. The rising cost of housing has hit those in low incomes harder than, I think, any other kind of 
inflation, because it has been so dramatic. There was a period of time in society when everybody, no matter 
what his income or station in life, expected to own a house, and that was possible. Nowadays, there's a big 
segment of people, a slice on the bottom, who have no hope of ever owning a house. Those are the kind of 
low income people whom we need to be assisting with the rising cost of living, and there are ways to do it. 
 
I point again to the budget introduced in March. We had a program to build 4,000 houses. All you have to do 
is flip the switch, the same as you have to do with the Nipawin plant. I urge members opposite to seriously 
consider that, because the poor are going to get hit much harder, and the group of people who are too poor to 
buy houses is going to expand, very rapidly, I predict. I say that because we have been building not nearly 
enough houses over the last few years and there is a shortage and a backlog. Once the economy rights itself, 
as it will, this madness will pass someday. It will probably be in four years time with a more sensible 
administration. And when it passes, there is going to be an explosion in the price of houses and there will be 
a lot more people who will not be able to afford houses. Regina housing prices could well go the way of 
Vancouver or Toronto. That will expand that group of people you are going to have to help to meet the rising 
cost of living. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
282 

The way to do that is to build more houses. I urge the members opposite to consider (if you won't listen to 
people of a so-called socialist stripe) trying your counterparts in Alberta. During the period of time when 
housing prices in Vancouver and Toronto were skyrocketing, they didn't in Calgary and Edmonton — the 
two cities with the highest rate of economic growth. Doesn't it make you curious as to why the housing 
prices didn't skyrocket in Calgary and Edmonton? They didn't because the Government of Alberta had a very 
active house building program and it kept the supply and demand in balance. Housing prices didn't go out of 
sight in Calgary and Edmonton. 
 
What I am suggesting to you people is that you need to be considering the same thing. It would assist in 
creating jobs. There are probably few industries that employ as many people as house building . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Sorry that the member for Rosthern is bored by those who have problems with housing 
prices and decent housing. Sorry that bores him. It may not be a problem in Rosthern. It is a problem in 
Regina and Saskatoon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it isn't. It is a serious commentary that I really wish 
you people would take seriously. 
 
You know, as I go out there on coffee row (and I do), I have an advantage over many of you. Perhaps I don't 
over the member who is speaking, but I have an advantage. It is every morning when I go out into the 
business world and spend the morning there. On coffee row I will tell you what they are talking about: the 
(inaudible) opposition amendment, the economy. That is what they are talking about out there. They are not 
talking about our amendment; they are talking about the economy, the kinds of things that our amendment 
zeroed in on. If you people really believed you were sensitive to public opinion and if you had anything like 
the enthusiasm . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Would you let a member introduce a guest? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, so long as my right to speak isn't . . . 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to this House nine ladies who belong to the Moose 
Jaw Toastmistress' Club. They are seated in the galleries this evening. They are under the direction of Mary 
Drackett. I hope you have a pleasant visit here this evening. I ask the House to welcome you at this time. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — While I am on my feet, I want to extend my welcome to the ladies in the 
Toastmistress' Club. One of the things I have always wanted to do, and never had time to do because of the 
pressures of public life, was to get into Toastmasters and spend some time with them to see their program. 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — There is one last program which I think was effective in assisting low income 
people — the so-called ESP. It doesn't stand for extrasensory perception. It stands for employment support 
program. Inevitably, in the course of government, we've spun off some programs which I think were less 
than effective. I can think of some that may have been downright counterproductive, but I will not name 
them. But the employment support program may well have been the most effective program that we  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
283 

set up. And it's the kind of thing that can be expanded and contracted with great ease. All you need to do is 
add another digit to the cheque and you've expanded the program. It automatically expands by itself. It aims 
at working with those with the lowest income and assisting them in dealing with rising prices and getting 
jobs that help them to deal with inflation. And, it's a self-help kind of a project. There's no paternalism about 
it. It's an excellent investment and I would recommend to the members opposite that you seriously consider 
expanding ESP. 
 
I want to deal for a moment, if I might, with students. I think that young people are the most tragic victims of 
an economic slowdown. I think how I might have felt if I had been 18, well-trained, well-educated, and not 
able to find a job. Nobody wants you; you're useless. I think that has a very deleterious effect on young 
people, on their attitude to their work, and on their attitude to society. I think that 10 years later when an 
employer hires someone who is 18 and has spent the first two years on the dole because he couldn't find a 
job, that employer is going to know it. Because I don't think that person is going to be as good a worker; I 
don't think he'll have as good an attitude. If there is one area in which we cannot afford unemployment, it is 
for the young and the students. I think a prolonged period of unemployment is debilitating to middle-aged 
men, much less students. I think we permanently warp their attitudes. 
 
And, so far, we've seen very little from this government opposite, except that its prepared to study and 
review. It will consider. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Consult. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, consult. Consult. Certainly, a certain amount of that is necessary, but 
anyone can play that game of consulting a problem to death. That doesn't help the students. That doesn't help 
the students one bit. If you come up with a good program in September, it's been a make-work project for the 
public service but not for anyone else, because it isn't any good to students come September. Something is 
needed now. There are all kinds of things we might do. 
 
I refer to the Minister of Finance who, in speaking to the report of the public accounts committee last year 
from opposition benches, referred to an idea which I think this House should consider. It would assist 
student employment. As well, I think, it would educate students genuinely in the way of parliamentary 
government. The idea was that serious students of political science would be assigned for a period of time to 
government and opposition caucuses — not one per member, but one for every four or five members. They 
would be assigned to the caucus; they would work for the caucus. They would do research and write 
speeches. I'd hope they would also have their turn at dealing with constituency problems. The members 
opposite will begin to realize that what we're going through here is but a tiny fraction of your work. The vast 
majority of your work doesn't take place in this red carpeted Chamber. I hope the students will have time to 
go out into the constituency. That is the student employment program which not only employs students but 
would make a positive contribution in assisting the public to understand our parliamentary government 
 
It seems that the members opposite were somewhat more decisive during the election campaign than they are 
now. They didn't have all these hesitations. I want you to contrast the present indecision and procrastination 
with what you said. You had good words. You surely can't implement them, but they were good words. I say 
to the member for Turtleford, people will judge you. The members in this House are so new, I simply cannot 
set this thing down and be sure I am going to identify members correctly. Just  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
284 

contrast the difference between what you said during the election and what you have done since. I say to the 
member for Turtleford that you will be judged not on what you said in the last election, but on what you do. 
Here is what you said, as distinguished from what you actually did: 
 

A new PC government will be committed to providing immediate opportunities for our workforce — 
jobs will be created, a rural community development program, and a rural gasification program. 

 
It seems they are having some trouble with that one. We'll get to the rural gasification program. They are 
having some trouble with that one. 
 

An industrial strategy will emphasize the development of renewable resource potential. 
 
I want to get to that in a minute, too, because that is one of the things you people really lack; any kind of 
overall strategy. 
 

Education and training programs will be upgraded so that young people can take advantage of the 
opportunities and workers can improve their skills. 

 
I urge upon the Minister of Education, as I did previously, to look at the Bizzarri report on immigrants. It 
probably wouldn't cost you any more than it cost you to print these for the province, and it would genuinely 
assist immigrants to become adjusted. 
 
There are all kinds of models that you people could use to assist students. The problem was certainly high 
profile when I first became interested in Saskatchewan politics in the 1960s. I remember Ross Thatcher 
bringing in a program, I think the name of it was STEP (student temporary employment program). Another 
program was YES (youth employment services). There were endless numbers of programs. All of these 
provided a very real measure of relief, and none of them were very expensive. I don't have the estimates with 
me, but my guess is that you could introduce a meaningful program along the lines of STEP or YES, and it 
wouldn't cost you $5 million. The way you guys are going through money, that's not even a blink of an 
eyelid. 
 
Many students look to construction jobs for work. It doesn't help female students as much, because not many 
want to work in construction. The industry genuinely helps a lot of students. What has happened to the 
construction industry in this province seems an almost intentional bit of destruction. I am not blaming the 
construction strike on you. I am not suggesting that it is something you designed, fermented or inspired. But 
it is a serious problem, and one which I think you simply have to concern yourself with. 
 
I want to read an editorial on that very subject from the Monday, June 21 Leader-Post. It shows you how far 
the construction strike is going. The headline is "Labour Dispute has Domino Effect." 
 

The strike that has kept building construction trade unionists off the job since May 1 has created a 
dangerous limit around the time needed to complete Sears Cornwall Centre store and the Victoria 
Square Mall. 

 
It goes on to say, and I won't read it all, how many people are going to be employed. There are 50 businesses 
in Victoria Square. 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
285 

Unions have been without a contract since April 30. The blame must be shared with the contractors, 
but both sides must determine quickly the need for a reasonable settlement, unless they contribute to 
the community-damaging syndrome that has hurt so many cities in these rough times. 

 
It goes on to say that if the construction strike isn't settled soon these projects will simply be delayed for one 
year. There are only 186 days left before Christmas. It means that for Regina the clock is running out even 
faster for waiting jobs. It means better fiscal help. 
 
I know the Minister of Labour cannot directly involve himself in the strike. That isn't the system. Neither 
side particularly wants that. But there are subtle, behind-the-scene things that can and should be done by the 
Minister of Labour. You can put subtle pressure on both sides to get them moving. A degree of obstinacy 
may exist in both camps. Yours is a very prestigious office, Mr. Minister. Your influence may just be what is 
needed to break the deadlock. I urge you to involve yourself, but not in a highly public way, like bringing 
them together and banging their heads. That won't work. That's what the member for Rosthern was 
continually insisting the former minister of labour do. He never did that; he had more sense. I suspect the 
present Minister of Labour has more sense than to do that as well. But the former minister of labour, in 
subtle, quiet ways, did bring pressure to bear on both sides to settle the strike, and I urge the Minister of 
Labour to do the same. 
 
The first portion of our amendment is the all-encompassing one. It says, "Help people who have jobs to keep 
them." That's really what is needed. It isn't enough when you are in government to point the blame 
somewhere else by saying, "Oh those people in Ottawa should be doing something. Oh, it's Reagan." 
 
I suspect you wouldn't blame a lot on Reagan, because you seem to be adopting some of his policies. I want 
to get to that in a moment. You people have the responsibility now to deal with unemployment and people 
becoming unemployed. I know the traditional capitalist philosophy that you people espouse and believe in 
with almost a religious fervour says that in a capitalist society what we need is less government. "Get the 
government off the backs of the people. Stay out of it and let the cycles run their own course." The problems, 
as people have know for a long period of time . . . No thanks, I don't need a bucket. With Regina water, 
probably the less I drink, the better it is for me. Too bad the city council is not more co-operative, then we 
might have a proposal for dealing with it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I've heard you can get new jobs. Go and clean up the water. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I say to the members opposite that that simply doesn't work any more. The reason 
it doesn't work is that a recession feeds on itself. My father used to repeat something that Herbert Hoover 
apparently said during the Depression, and it was the subject of great derision at the time and since. My 
father repeated it to me as an indication of how insensitive politicians can be. What Herbert Hoover said at 
the height of the Depression was, "What this country needs is a good laugh." In a strange way, there was a bit 
of truth to that, because the mentality of recession feeds on itself. 
 
When I go downtown and sit in the coffee shop and listen to those businessmen and their employees talk 
about how tough times are, I know it's a vicious circle, because the more they talk about it the less 
confidence people have. The less confidence they have, the less they invest in new plants and farm 
machinery. The less consumers spend, the  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
286 

fewer expensive items they'll buy. That's why the economy has needed governments to pull them out of the 
economic slumps. It's government that gets the system going and gets the mentality turned around. If only 
there were a cheap way of turning around the mentality. I think it would be all that's needed, but there isn't. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Turn then both around. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That's good advice. I don't know who asked him to shush, but that's good advice. 
I hope the member heard that, if he hasn't heard anything else. 
 
There is so much that you people could be doing. I refer again to the report from Midland-Doherty Ltd. on 
the Saskatchewan budget. Instead of picking the crown corporations to pieces, instead of setting up the 
Wolfgang committee to devour the crown corporations, you might have recognized them as a very positive 
instrument to be used to expand and assist the ailing economy. I'm going to read to you what they said about 
the former Saskatchewan budget: 
 

The important role played by crown corporations in the provincial economy will enable the treasury 
to insulate Saskatchewan's manufacturing and construction from the global malaise to some extent, 
through large infusions of resource revenue cash into public companies. Mr. Speaker, 1982 will see a 
major residential construction initiative as well as the expansion of the Interprovincial Steel and Pipe 
Corporation's Regina plant and a Saskatchewan Telecommunication Corporation contract for 
Northern Telecom to build a fibre optic plant in Saskatoon. Another positive factor is the momentum 
established by major ongoing projects that develop the province's resources, such as the Key Lake 
uranium mines, the Nipawin hydro-electric generating station . . . 

 
You finally got that one going today; it should have been going eight weeks ago. 
 

. . . and a $1 billion heavy oil processing plant on the Alberta border. 
 
The Minister of Mineral Resources confesses to be up to his ears in trouble with that one. It's amazing how 
the mentality of this province has changed since March 29. Well now let's go back to March 29, the day the 
election started. 
 
If you listened to businessmen and employees, they felt they were living in a province which was the island 
in a sea of storm. They felt this province had a different future from that of the other provinces, which were 
in dire economic straits. They were optimistic about their province. 
 
I think that a lot of that had to do with the kind of things that Midland-Doherty referred to with approval: 
"1982 will see a major residential construction initiative (4,000 houses compared to a paltry 1,000 from 
members opposite) as well as the expansion of the Interprovincial Steel and Pipe Corporation's Regina 
plant." If you people could ever get your act in gear on the farm gasification, they might get going again. 
 
But those kinds of projects were fuelling Saskatchewan's optimism. You know what happened April 26? 
You guys came in and you put the zipper right around the whole province. You wrap 'er up. Nothing goes 
ahead — construction strikes, public construction gone. Major projects which are needed and ready to go are 
put on hold.  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
287 

You put everything on the burner, and all of a sudden Saskatchewan optimism which has been a part of this 
province since 1971 has gone whistling down just like a spent rocket — splat! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How do they put that in Hansard? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That may be challenging I must admit; that may be challenging. But that 
optimism is gone and I honestly think that you people were a major factor in destroying that optimism 
because everything came to a halt. All the reasons why they thought that this province would be different, 
you people brought to a halt. 
 
Father had a saying that "Tory times are hard times." You guys have proven that true. I used to think that 
coincidental. I'm now coming to believe that it's not coincidental. It's part and parcel of the philosophy — the 
"do nothing" philosophy — every 60 years. God, I can hardly wait until 2040 when you guys are back for 
your third term of office. 
 
There are some other things that are just inexplicable. You put a halt to highway construction; had to look at 
everything; had to review everything. You people again see an election as a revolution. It's supposed to be us 
who believe in the revolution, not you but you saw it as a revolution. You had to rethink everything; review 
everything; and redo everything. It's an evolutionary process. You come into office; you change some things. 
A good deal doesn't come from a Liberal administration to a CCF administration to a Conservative 
administration to a NDP administration. Many of these programs never change. You guys are so inept, so 
inexperienced . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you're proving that there are some constants in this 
world. I say you are proving that there are some constants in this world. 
 
Why halt in a time of economic distress; why put the zipper on construction? Why put a zipper around the 
province's construction? Why lock it up? What on earth was the sense in that? Again you people have 
contributed to the lack of optimism. You've destroyed it in three short months. Part of it may be as well your 
whole approach to economics and I'd be interested in hearing from the Premier, who has a degree in 
economics, and the Minister of Finance, who is proving himself to be somewhat adept in the area. I'd be 
interested in hearing you people outline your economic philosophy. I get the impression it's Reagan 
economics. I get the impression that's what it is. I get the impression you people are simply reimplementing 
the philosophy that Reagan tried and failed with and failed very badly. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Margaret Thatcher. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Margaret Thatcher. In England they talk about deindustrialization — the reversal 
of the Industrial Revolution. 
 
It would be bad enough if it were a brand new idea that you people cooked up in opposition but it is Reagan 
economics; cutting the taxes and running up deficits. (A little loud am I?) That's exactly what Ronald Reagan 
has done in the U.S. It hasn't done anything to ease inflation. Inflation is at record heights. It's done 
obviously nothing to spur on the U.S. economy. The U.S. economy is at a lower level than it has been since 
the Depression and you people visit upon the province of Saskatchewan that tired, worn-out philosophy after 
it has been discredited elsewhere. 
 
It would be unforgivable enough if you were the pioneers but surely if you can't look to the U.S. and you 
can't look to Britain, surely you can look across the Manitoba border. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
288 

During a time when the Canadian economy was, generally, fairly buoyant, Manitoba stagnated. It didn't share 
in the growth and prosperity of the late '70s that the other provinces experienced. It was because they had a 
government that was trying to turn the clock back to the 1930s and 1940s. 
 
You people are reimplementing that tired, worn-out philosophy, and that's why we make a special point of 
urging you to assist those who have jobs to keep them. That means a direct reversal of your whole 
philosophy. Cutting taxes doesn't spur the economy. Surely Reagan has learned that. 
 
As I said before, you have to be some kind of a genius to be a Republican president, to be in office for 18 
months, and have Wall Street furious at you and think you incompetent. That's not easy. That's what he has 
managed to do. My guess is that by the time you boys have been in office for 18 months . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Not only Wall Street will be mad at them. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — It will be everybody . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm not even sure Boyd 
Robertson will be their friend. I'm not even sure of that. I'm not even sure Boyd Robertson will have 
anything good to say about these guys after 18 months, when he sees what devastation you are visiting on 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I say to you people, rethink what you're doing. You are going to exacerbate the unemployment in this 
province and exacerbate a weakening economy. And I say to you, rethink what you're doing. It hasn't worked 
elsewhere. I don't know why you think it will work here. I would be delighted if you would tell us why, when 
it didn't work in the U.S., and it didn't work in Britain or Manitoba, it will work in Saskatchewan. I would 
just be delighted if anyone would get to his feet and tell me why it's going to work here when it hasn't 
worked elsewhere. I assume that the Deputy Premier is going to get back in the debate, and I'm glad to hear 
that. 
 
I think you people know that you cannot depend upon much from the federal government. I note in today's 
paper . . . Why on earth Allan MacEachen is calling this thing a budget, I will never know because he doesn't 
seem to have a lot to say. But he's saying it's a difficult situation, that people should not expect too much. 
He's going to introduce non-inflationary growth. What he is saying, as I read it, is that he really has nothing 
to offer. Either that, or what he is going to introduce is going to be very, very destructive. 
 
One thing that I think would be as serious and devastating as anything Allan MacEachen would do, would be 
to put on foreign exchange controls and artificially lower Canada's interest rate. The interest rates need to be 
lowered; there are ways of doing that, but exchange controls are not the answer. I'm disappointed that 
members opposite haven't taken the last few days to make representations to Ottawa as to what is needed in 
that budget, because no matter how good a job you do, and you haven't done anything so far . . . But let's 
suppose that you were on the road to Damascus and you saw a blinding light, and changed your ways 
entirely. You became brand new people, and decided to do something about the problems. Supposing that 
miracle happened to you, the amount you could do would be limited because you would import the recession 
from the rest of the country. 
 
You could have a fairly expansive job-creating program here, but, inevitably, once it takes effect and the 
word gets around to the rest of the country, all of the unemployed  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
289 

come here. So you can't deal with the problem in isolation. You have to deal with it in the Canadian context. 
I'm disappointed, as I think many Saskatchewan people are, that you have chosen to do nothing in terms of 
that federal budget. You have made no representations at all. 
 
I think it would be different if there were some Liberal members west of Winnipeg sitting in the caucus, but 
they're not. We all know that. In as far as there is a spokesman for the Canadian public, it's you people, and 
the Canadian public and the Saskatchewan public look to you for leadership. So far, you have been woefully 
short of it. 
 
I want to mention just for a moment the promise that they would bring gas to all Saskatchewan farms. At 
noon hour today, I was reading a report from the Saskatoon Star Phoenix: 
 

Canada Manpower Centre has 25,000 people now applying for unemployment insurance, versus 
15,000 a year ago. 

 
That's a 60 per cent increase. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We inherited a real mess. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, you didn't inherit a mess. You inherited a difficult situation and you rapidly 
made it much worse. The optimism that was a hallmark of Saskatchewan people just disappeared like smoke 
on a windy day . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Coffee shops are filled with doom and gloom . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . Well, I'll tell you, it's not down at the Tommy Douglas House, it's downtown Regina. 
 
Frankly, I do not fathom the reasons why you are procrastinating on bringing natural gas to farms. The 
program was started. You may feel we were proceeding too fast. Well, that would a strange turn of attitude. 
You may feel we were proceeding too slowly, but the thing was in motion, and you people won't put it in 
motion any differently . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
You're waiting until Ipsco goes flat broke before you'll get going — that's what you're waiting for. Basically, 
Ipsco produces steel fabricators and gas pipe and that's what you people could have had them producing . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You want to ask a question? I told you. Well, then, if you want the floor to ask a 
question, I'll yield it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think the man may lack the courage of his convictions. 
He doesn't want his question recorded in Hansard. The only difference between yelling from your seat and 
getting up and answering a question is that Hansard records the question. 
 
I see I am lecturing the members again. I have once again, Mr. Speaker, succumbed to the awesome 
temptation to do something about that horrendous problem of the ignorance of the rules on the other side. I 
should leave that to your very able hands. 
 
The gasification project was something you could have done. It was ready to go, and you could have helped 
it. I wonder why you didn't. I think we got the answer today in the question period, when the Premier 
admitted he had no idea what it was going to cost him. He doesn't seem to have a pencil and a piece of paper 
to figure these things out with. When he gets into government and he goes and talks to the officials, all of a  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
290 

sudden the enormity of what he has promised suddenly begins to come home. The most surprised premier in 
the country . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — A politician turns mathematician. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don't think we'll ever make a mathematician out of him, but we are making a 
politician out of him in the worst sense of the term — someone who procrastinates, someone who says, 
"Yes, rural gasification is necessary but not as necessary as rural gasification." We're not going to make a 
mathematician out of him but, by golly, we're going to make a politician out of him. 
 
I say the reason why you people haven't proceeded with that project, which would considerably assist 
unemployment, is because you're finally starting to do some of the sums that you should have been doing 
months ago, which you should have been doing before you made those promises. You're suddenly starting to 
realize that you cannot implement all of what you promised — $1.2 billion . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
Yes, indeed! Indeed I will. I will table my notes when I'm done here. 
 
The final thing that I want to say, and I know this will come as a great disappointment to members opposite 
. . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, keep going. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, if there is a popular demand I will keep going. If you people are . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you have indeed. I have some hope for the member for Turtleford — he has 
indeed been listening. Unlike some members opposite, the member for Regina North West has been 
listening, and I have some hope for you. Yes, you're going to make it. We're going to make a member out of 
you yet. 
 
What you people really lack is a comprehensive plan, an industrial strategy. What you're doing is poking 
away at the problems one by one. I'll say to the member for Wascana you have a little experience with 
football. You Tories are like a poorly trained football team. You pick up a ball and run with it without any 
thought at all. You do the same with ideas. You have an idea and just pick the thing up and run with it. You 
haven't any overall game strategy as to what you're going to do to make a serious dent in this province's 
economic problems, and these economic problems will do you in. You will go the way of the last 
Conservative government if you don't deal with them. If you want to deal with them, you're going to have to 
develop an industrial strategy and a comprehensive plan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You better quit before there's dissension on your side. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Oh, I don't know. Do you think I may be causing dissension? You need to 
develop an economic strategy. I may say I have precious little faith that you ever will. It's not in your nature 
to plan; it's in your nature to react. You did that when you were in opposition. I hope you new members have 
a positive influence on those people because they certainly didn't plan any kind of strategy; they just reacted 
with a knee-jerk reaction. So, I say what you need is a comprehensive industrial strategy. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I, too, have some extra things I want to talk about, especially as they relate in 
this amendment to helping those people who don't have jobs, and also helping those people who can least 
afford not to have a job, deal with the severe hardships of rising prices. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
291 

While I was thinking about this, I thought about a remark the Minister of Labour made about a committee 
that was visiting while he was involved with a plant up at Yorkton at Morris Rod-Weeder. He was being 
derogatory when he said that I kind of recommended that maybe he should be selling his product to John 
Deere. I think Morris Rod-Weeder is in the same boots as my friend, Mr. Friggstad is and there are some 
slowdowns there. And I wonder if that was such a terribly bad idea. Kilberry for example, makes swathers, 
and I don't think Kilberry had nearly the same slowdown when he started painting some of his swathers 
green. In fact, I'd make a little wager that he sold more green swathers last year than . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . He talks about how many people are working and how many people have jobs. Exactly. And 
if you paint some green and you paint some yellow and you paint some blue, different companies sell them. 
I'm a farmer and I would like to tell the Minister of Labour that last spring I bought a red Morris 
Rod-Weeder from a John Deere dealer. They have a connection there. But if all the John Deere dealers 
would just sell Morris Rod-Weeders or Morris cultivators, there would be lots around. So I don't think it was 
that bad an idea. 
 
In fact, one of the recommendations our committee made when we were in Moose Jaw and we were listening 
is one the Attorney General will remember. He's just sitting there. I can't see him now. But he was on the 
committee as well. And the Attorney General today was on that small business committee with . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I thought you were going to talk about swathers. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — No, no. Just listen. The Minister of Health lives on a farm, and he does some farming as 
well, so maybe he knows about equipment. But Fairford Industries Ltd. came to our committee meeting and I 
made the same kind of a recommendation to them. They decided to get Poole to sell their building and 
Fairford made a heck of a lot more buildings than they did when they were trying to market them 
themselves. So, I think one of the ideas this government should take on and promote is discovering what 
kind of connections can be made to really put Saskatchewan in the forefront in manufacturing, so that they 
become an international company. 
 
I was pleased to see Fairford buildings last fall, when I was in Africa. I saw buildings from Moose Jaw that 
were erected over there, and I think that the base that Saskatchewan has in manufacturing can grow and 
expand. 
 
If you boys across the way use your imagination you can provide a little initiative and create jobs like that. I 
think that is a message that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Maybe the minister shouldn't laugh about it. 
Maybe he should sit back and seriously think about it, and make a recommendation to his company in 
Yorkton, the company he was involved with, and perhaps it can do some good. 
 
Now, about the housing construction and the slowdown in housing — the 2,100 or 2,500 housing starts that 
Sask Housing would have begun could have created a lot of employment that our country needs badly. In 
fact, when I was reading a clipping in the Regina Leader-Post, I learned that the spinoff from housing is 
much more intense than you people may realize. Northern Telecom laid off 19 more people, bringing the 
total to 44 laid off, and attributed the layoffs to a decline in orders for telephones and telephone accessories, 
adding that was not related to the strike. You people like to blame all the slow down and the depressed 
feeling in Saskatchewan on the construction strike. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
292 

It's not only due to that; there are other reasons. The complete standstill in house building has been the result 
of the layoffs of these people here, right in Regina — 44 people at Telecom. How many jobs and how many 
people are affected by that and by the painful situation? 
 
You don't have any imagination, as shown by that and by your throne speech. That's why we say in our 
amendment: 
 

but regrets that Your Honour's advisers, while recognizing that this is a time of severe economic 
strain for Saskatchewan, have failed to propose any adequate measures to: 

 
1. Help people who have jobs to keep them; 

 
2. Help students get summer jobs. 

 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that's great. I'm not saying anything about it . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I think that's one aspect of your throne speech that's great, but why get to be a one-issue government? 
Surely there's more in Saskatchewan than mortgages and the gas tax. There's got to be more; there's more 
and so you've made a lot more promises. 
 
There are spinoffs from sales of equipment; people selling bath tubs are out of business; people selling 
showers are having trouble . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I knew I'd get a reaction out of you with that one! 
Even the sale of telephone . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I was impressed, too. I watched my friend, your 
minister, Mr. Rousseau — what constituency is he in! He's in Regina South; he's the member for Regina 
South. I watched him on TV, and he had this white apron on, and he pulled a switch and he pushed a button 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, he wasn't in a bath tub and it wasn't a shower. He pushed a button and out 
came mud and he started making bricks. He just took all the credit, as if to say, "Look what our Department 
of Industry and Commerce has done. Yeah! Look what our Department of Industry and Commerce has 
done!" He got himself off his butt, off his chair, in two weeks, and he had a plant open that took two years to 
build. It took two years to build and he took all the credit in his department. 
 
Now, the interesting thing is that when I read the article about it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm getting 
too excited about it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Just keep your cool. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Keep my cool? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Just slow down. You have an hour and a half, yet. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I don't have to sit down in five minutes, they tell me. 
 
You know, you opened a plant that was started in good time, a plant that manufactures a good wallboard, 
and I think that the Hon. Mr. Rousseau's comments were extraordinarily brief. He said, "It's nice to see such 
a business opening up, especially in the current economic conditions." But his remarks were quite brief; he 
really didn't stay and dwell a long time on the opening. Meanwhile, company president Ken Sexton is not  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
293 

too confident, and he's hoping some quick orders from the government housing agencies will reduce his 
inventory and increase his cash flow. By way of reminder, the company makes a brick-type panel moulding 
of polyurethane and plywood which can be used as an insulating exterior . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
If you want to talk, you're going to have to tell the Speaker. Do I have to give him a lecture too? He's been 
around here for five or six years and he should know. Are you going to ask me a question? My hearing isn't 
so good and I'm proud to wear a hearing aid, so you'll have to speak up. 
 
Meanwhile, listen to this. While they were waiting for Mr. Rousseau to show up, the company notice board, 
which your agent subtly perused, reported that strict controls on purchase and rentals have been implemented 
and that the 18 employees could have a sort of combined holiday-layoff this summer. He opened the plant, 
took all the glory, and stood on TV in his white apron, and the plant was already planning layoffs, because of 
your inactivity, because your Minister of Housing hasn't got Sask Housing on the road. If our Sask Housing 
program would have been implemented, there would be 4,000 housing starts. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They didn't buy them. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — No, they didn't, but they're not going to be buying their panelling either if you're not going 
to get your program implemented. They are not buying this panelling either. The housing industry and the 
building industry, in general, are not exactly buoyant. But, now he is hoping some orders from the 
government for building projects will come through, and I'd encourage my friend to place a few orders. If 
you had the same people in Sask Housing, they would have been there; they know how to get things done. 
They know how to build some buildings. Get the plans out there, and get some contracts let. Get these 
people working. It must be depressing to have a grand opening and have the minister there, and then have a 
notice on a bulletin board that some layoffs are imminent. I think it's serious. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Does he know the meaning of depression? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Yes, I wish you knew what the meaning of depression was. Tory times are hard times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of Sundays ago we had a picnic barbecue at our farm, and about 200 people were out 
and some of them were older people. And one lady got me in a corner and said, "Tory times are tough times 
and things are getting tough." Things are getting tough even in the new industries that have just opened. 
 
Let me turn to a situation that has been raised by both the Leader of the Opposition and my colleague . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . He has a law office in my constituency in Coronach, and this is why I want to 
raise the issue about Coronach. It's the natural gas program that was planned earlier and that Sask Power has 
in place. It would include new trunk lines. You people are talking about plastic pipe. I don't think anybody 
would consider it wise judgment to use a plastic pipe for a main transmission line from one community to 
another. And from Assiniboia to Coronach is about 80 miles or 50 anyway. If you go as the crow flies 
(maybe you can get there in about 50 miles) you would touch the community of Willow Bunch and then 
Coronach and Rockglen. If a trunk line were placed down there, you could service the farms in between as 
well as  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
294 

these communities. These are towns and villages and communities and farmers whom you say you're going 
to serve with natural gas, and that one trunk line would make work for Ipsco. 
 
Here's a quote from June 5, 1982, under the headline "Ipsco Personnel in a Predicament." 
 

Ipsco layoffs this week provide yet another painful indication that the economic noose is tightening 
and many Reginans, even those without direct Ipsco connections, will feel the rope burns. 

 
I think the people who are going to feel those rope burns are the people in Regina who have direct and 
indirect connections with Ipsco — people who own 20 per cent of the shares; the people sitting on treasury 
board are the ones who are going to feel the rope burns. They expect you to do something about it. They 
know you cancelled contracts, and they know there were plans in place to lay that pipe and to service that 
community. 
 
Now, there's another reason to get the guys down there and keep these people at Ipsco working, and that's 
that power generating plant at Coronach. For your information, to burn coal at Coronach, you need to use oil 
to start it, and if they're going to shut down the burner, they use oil to slow it down. You can't just turn the 
coal off. I talked to engineers down there and they were explaining it to me during the opening and on a 
number of other occasions. If Coronach would use natural gas instead of oil for the start-up and the 
burn-down in that plant, that would be the cleanest, most efficient plant in North America. It has the latest 
techniques. You've inherited a wonderful plant there. 
 
The second phase is well under construction. It will likely be fired this fall, and I'd suggest you seriously 
reconsider your decision to put it on freeze, as Sask Power officials say. That project was put on freeze and 
they're not going ahead with a gas line now. I'd suggest you seriously consider building that gas line down 
there — building some pipe — keeping your people in Regina happy and the members happy, because then 
they can answer their constituents. Those rope burns would be pretty painful for all the members who 
represent Regina seats. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You should know. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Yes, I should know. I suffered the consequences sitting in backbenches and I've made 
excuses for the government. Don't get involved in that kind of an operation. Get in and tell these boys what 
should be done. Get in and make sure that that gas distribution system gets in place. I think that would be a 
tremendous asset to all of the people of Saskatchewan. Everybody would benefit. Those of us using 
electricity could turn the power down, and it would help people in lower income brackets deal with the 
severe hardships of rising costs. 
 
If that generating station would be efficient, you could maintain a lower rate of electricity. I think there are 
very important reasons to go ahead with that gas line. 
 
Another gas line that should be built and was on the program . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Did you feel this way last year? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I exactly did. I promoted that and that's why . . . 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
295 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Why didn't you support it when it was brought up? You changed your tune 
quickly. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Listen. That's why it was in this year's program. You cannot plan a program and get it 
operational overnight. It takes a year or more to plan it. That planning has been done. The design is in place. 
The maps have been drawn. The right of way has even been surveyed, and you people aren't going ahead 
with that project. 
 
I want to explain about another line that's ready to go. There's a gas line that comes down to Assiniboia that 
would tap off to this Coronach line. There's another line at Lafleche and another one over at Kincaid. The 
Shaunavon-Kincaid line get the major bulk of their feed of the gas on a trading system that they've got in 
place, where the gas comes in from the United States. Now, if you'd build the line from Assiniboia to 
Kincaid, you'd tap three lines by linking three lines together and completing a loop. That means you don't 
need to depend on American gas to handle our southwest corner, where you're buying gas and selling it to 
them at the other end. So I think to solve that problem, the link should be built this year. The design is 
drawn, everything is in place and I really wish you'd consider going ahead with the Assiniboia-Kincaid link. 
 
You know, there's even a personal reason to consider. We had organized a little group of farmers. There's 
seven on the loop where I live, where my own farm is. We were counting on getting that gas put in this 
spring. All of a sudden we got a letter that says: "Dear John, Sorry, we hate to write." They cut it off. They 
said not to go ahead with this program. Our young people wanted to work; it was a self-help project where 
we do the digging ourselves. An inspector from Sask Power would come out and watch us put it in. It was a 
wonderful program. I think you should consider that seriously, Mr. Deputy Premier; go ahead with that kind 
of program where we do our own thing, and everybody helps themselves. We can get it in cheaper that way. 
Maybe the only reason you are holding out on the gas installation thing, to make jobs at Ipsco, to make jobs 
for these young people, is that you don't like the contribution that Sask Power has. Maybe you're worried 
about that one. 
 
The program that was in place was a considerable injection of cash by Sask Power that would make it 
possible for a farmer to do it. Now, say the member for Moosomin wants gas to his place, and the project 
would cost $3,500. With no government contribution, he would pay $3,500. With this new program, Sask 
Power would put in the first $1,000; then the farmer would pay half of the balance, which would make the 
$3,500 come down to about $1,200. This would be attractive, and would put the gas in at an affordable price. 
 
I think you should seriously consider the gas extension program, particularly in the 40 communities which 
were ready to go. The designs are drawn; the plans are there. The jobs are there and you are sitting on it. 
 
When they announced this massive layoff, an Ipsco employee, a Mr. Phillips, said, "Let's hope it's not 
another case of too little too late." He was referring to the federal government as well. I think you people 
should seriously consider that. You have shares in the company. There is a tremendous hardship for the 
people in Regina, and the consequences are felt throughout the entire province. 
 
I just have one more area to discuss, and I'm sorry the Premier is not in for this. I want to talk about jobs in 
coal. I hate to say this, but the former member for Estevan was my best  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
296 

buddy. I just thought he was a wonderful big guy. He really was. He reminded me a lot of the Deputy 
Premier. I don't know if you and I could be so close friends, but I thought he was a good guy. I think if he 
was our member today, instead of the Premier, maybe this wouldn't have happened. 
 

Estevan Area Coal Mine to Shut Down. Manalta Coal Limited is shutting down its Climax mine east 
of Estevan for at least one month. 

 
The shutdown (now listen to this line), the first one in more than 18 years . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . (My colleague said that Tory times are hard times. He knew what he was talking about). The first 
shutdown is scheduled for July, and it means that 23 coalminers will be laid off. Layoffs have 
already started, with the people who were most recently hired laid off first. 

 
Early this year, Manitoba and Saskatchewan Coal Company, the other private coal company 
operating in southern Saskatchewan, laid off 33 workers from its Boundary Dam mining operation. 

 
Although May is usually the busiest month of the year for job vacancies (what happened this year, 
with 45 layoffs) the number of people registered for work during May remained high at 1,150 people. 
The 10-year average is 600. 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What was the date on that? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — June 8, 1982. 
 
I don't think you are doing a good sales job. If the Premier knew what is happening in Estevan, he'd be out 
there selling that coal, and the layoffs wouldn't happen. I think it is a sorry story for the people of Estevan. If 
you get those miners upset, I feel sorry for our Premier. I think there will be rope burns in more places than 
Regina. There might be rope burns in Estevan as well. 
 
Jobs in coal, jobs in Ipsco . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Is the member threatening me? 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it's obvious that the government's throne speech failed to recognize that this is a time of 
severe economic strain for Saskatchewan. It failed to propose any adequate measures to help people who 
have jobs keep them, to help students get summer jobs and to help those with the lowest incomes deal with 
the severe hardship of rising prices. Let me just give them one more idea to help those with the lowest 
incomes deal with the severe hardship of rising prices. 
 
Down in Willow Bunch they had a little make-work job that went every summer. The Department of Social 
Services hires 10, 11 or 12 people. It had a project that the town foreman would supervise. These people, 
instead of just taking home their welfare cheques — and the feds contributed half of this program — had 
these make-work jobs. It would be worth your while to go to visit Willow Bunch and see what has been 
accomplished. They've been able to clean up their park; they've beautified the town, painted fences, done 
work for senior citizens. I think this kind of thing could have been recommended in the throne speech. You 
could have set this money aside, you're going to spend it anyway. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
297 

All these people who are on unemployment and those who can't get unemployment — you're not going to let 
them starve. Tory times are hard times, but you're going to have a heart and you're not going to let them 
starve. You're going to give them some welfare. Instead of giving them welfare, you could have make-work 
jobs like that. 
 
I'd really like to talk to your people in social services who know about these projects, and who can create 
those kind of make-work projects. They included all age groups from young people — high school students 
coming from poverty-stricken homes — to older people who were on the job, who did what they could for 
the minimum wage, instead of getting welfare. That kind of program is really essential in times as tough as 
they are going to be this summer. Like my colleague said, "There will be a zipper around the province." I 
think you have zippers around just too many projects. There are just too many projects that are frozen and 
shut down. 
 
The construction industry is really something. I'm glad I haven't any more construction equipment because it 
wouldn't be working today. I was in the construction business for quite a long time, and by 1964 everything 
stopped. All the grants to the small towns were frozen and cut off exactly as they are today. I can see a repeat 
of what happened when Ross Thatcher got elected. I think you have people close enough to him to know 
what's happening. Take his advice if he gives you some recommendations . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I 
sure am. I sure am. And the only thing we can learn from history is that it repeats itself, and if you can't learn 
that lesson, that's why you're sitting on the outside corner, my dear friend. That's why you're on the outside 
corner. You should learn from history; you should learn how to respond to the needs of people . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . If you'd let me, I'd quit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you that I will not support the main motion, but I will support this resolution. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — I'm very pleased to have the opportunity to get into it. Mr. Speaker, I'd like to say a few 
words on the amendment that was proposed by my colleague, the member for Shaunavon. That motion 
expresses the regret that this government has failed to bring in programs. It has failed to state in its throne 
speech ways that it could help the people of this province keep their jobs, help students get summer jobs, and 
to help those with the lowest incomes deal with the severe hardships of rising prices. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
what this government should have been doing. It neglected to do that. 
 
I intend to bring some evidence forward that will indicate to this House that this government has not been 
trying very hard to do many of the things that the people of this province expected them to be doing. I 
believe that in the last few days the members opposite and the ministers have demonstrated that they are 
intent on studying and reviewing and considering and delaying as many of the programs as they possibly can. 
 
I don't know why they want to delay those programs, Mr. Speaker, because I think the people out there 
expected a little more than that when they elected them to office. My colleague says they shouldn't have, but 
they did. But nothing is happening now. They talk about some of the programs that they are going to be 
bringing in, and yes, I think there are some good programs. But even with the programs they are bringing in, 
we still have to improve them a little, because some of these programs, although they may appear to be 
reasonably good, may only assist a minimal number of people out there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member asks if I have really examined them. Well, I think in the next few days we'll have the opportunity to 
go through every one of those  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
298 

bills and see just what they will provide for the public, how many jobs they will create out there and how 
many of the people on low incomes are going to benefit from them. 
 
Somebody mentioned the number of jobs that these programs will create, and my colleague mentioned Ipsco 
and I just wonder how many of the people who have been laid off at Ipsco right now feel that 29 cents a 
gallon for gas is really a great big saving to them. If they have no job, they really don't need that cheap gas to 
drive to work with. What they need is a job and a pay cheque. This government has not been addressing that 
problem. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — If they would introduce some of the programs they promised during the election 
campaign, Mr. Speaker, and one is the rural gas program. . . I think a lot of people expected that they were 
sincere when they were making those promises. If they were sincere about those promises, it would help 
Ipsco to build pipe, it would keep those employees working, it would benefit the people out in rural 
Saskatchewan who are waiting for cheaper fuel, waiting for the natural gas up there. But what do we see in 
this House today? We don't see any action. We don't see anything happening with the rural gas program. We 
don't see much happening with many of their programs that are needed out there. 
 
We should be looking at moving ahead with construction projects. But that isn't happening, either. They 
have cancelled some programs that were out there, some programs that the people were expecting. For 
example, there are no senior citizens home repair grants. Many of the senior citizens were waiting for that. 
The people have been waiting, and if they could get the grants that were proposed, the construction industry 
would also be working. But the dropping of many programs has escalated unemployment in this province 
today. We won't be seeing the senior citizen housing going up there . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As my 
colleague is saying, "Nothing for the senior citizens." 
 
Frankly, it doesn't appear that there is much for anybody. There is absolutely nothing in the throne speech 
that would indicate that this government is going to provide any kind of assistance for the people of 
Saskatchewan that is really going to be of benefit to them. 
 
If it would go ahead with many of these construction projects, we wouldn't see all the layoffs that are taking 
place at Hudson Bay. The pulp mills would be going. They would be moving lumber out of there. The 
people would not be unemployed. They would be working. That would improve our economy. 
 
But no, we don't have that happening. We see a delay in highway construction projects. 
We have about three of them that . . . The minister said the other day that he had awarded about $3 million 
worth of projects so far . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right. Out of a $200 million budget, he let 
about $3 million worth of contracts. Even if we go with what he is proposing to let in the future, which has 
something like $14 million out of the $200 million, all that's going to do is put maybe a couple of stockpiles 
up someplace, and maybe build 10 miles of road and maybe oil a few miles of road. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
not going to create employment in this province. This government should be moving ahead and getting this 
work started, getting all of these projects under way, because I think that is what the people of this province 
are expecting from it. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
299 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — We have a lot of unemployment in this province, and what do we hear? I saw an article 
someplace in the paper that the Premier says that the answer to unemployment is keeping the wages down, 
that if the wages stay down then the employers are going to hire more people. I suppose that is Tory logic, 
that if you can keep people working cheap enough then somebody may hire them. But I don't think that is 
what the people expected out there. They expect a reasonable salary; they expect to be out there working. 
The member for Moosomin says that somebody is grossly overpaid. Talk about the pot calling the kettle 
black. He says somebody is grossly overpaid for what he is doing, and I don't know if he was referring to 
himself or who he was referring to but . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He's a good guy. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Somebody says, "He is a good guy." I'll accept that. I'll say that the member for 
Moosomin earns what he gets paid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don't mind the members giving me something to talk about. I think it helps. As long as they 
want to keep on talking from their seats, I'm willing to stand here all night if I have to. I really don't mind. 
 
But while that government is talking about lower salaries for people, about keeping down the minimum 
wage, what has been happening recently to the people they have been hiring? Do we see some of those 
political hacks working for minimum wage? They get $85,000 a year. That's right. They are making sure that 
they are paying their people well. But they are telling the public that they should be sitting on a lower 
minimum wage. They tell them that they should be working for less. If they work for less, somehow they 
will get more jobs. That's what they are telling the public. 
 
They recently announced that they will go ahead with the Nipawin power project. I think we should 
congratulate them on that. That will provide a bit of work. It took them a long time to get that program going 
again. It will provide some jobs for the people. 
 
The Nipawin power project wasn't the only delay by this government. It is not the only project they have 
delayed. I think we have to look at one other one, and that is the Canora ethanol plant. That was another 
project slated for this year. The engineering work was being done on it. What has happened? They have 
cancelled all of that. It is another project on hold. I suppose one could venture a guess as to why it was put 
on hold. Like some of the other projects out there that would have been of benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan, they put it on hold because very likely they will be giving it either to a private company, or 
they will cancel the program altogether. They will be saving some of that money to pay for the programs 
which they have been promising — programs they really didn't consider very closely when they made their 
promises during the election. They just went out there and promised and kept on promising. Now they have 
to start cutting to pay for them. 
 
I suppose if they wait long enough and delay enough of these projects throughout the year, before they know 
it, fall and winter will come, and they will save themselves millions of dollars, because they will not have 
done anything all year. There won't be anybody working out there. This economy will continue to go down 
and down as long as the government sits there and does nothing. The people expect the government to  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
300 

get this economy moving and get some projects going. 
 
What is happening to people with low incomes? We have many people with low incomes. Have they been 
proposing any programs to assist these people? As far as I can see, there have been none. They cut programs. 
They cut, as was mentioned, the housing program for senior citizens. They haven't provided anything for 
people with low incomes, who have a job at minimum wage or below minimum wage and who are trying to 
work. They haven't been assisting those people. They haven't increased the family income plan. The poor 
people really aren't benefiting that much. 
 
They are proposing a 13.25 per cent mortgage. Is this going to help those people with low incomes? Is it 
going to help someone with a small mortgage or no mortgage at all? Is it going to help the individual who 
will not qualify for that mortgage? According to the bill before us, there is nothing that would indicate that a 
person with a $10,000 or $15,000 or $20,000 income will qualify for that program. So there are a lot of 
questions there that have to be answered. I think we will want to see, before we totally agree with that 
program, just who it's going to help. It may help the member for Estevan. It may help him buy a house here 
in Regina, someone who is making about $90,000 or $100,000 or whatever his salary may be. It will help 
someone like that, and he would qualify for the program. But will the individual earning $10,000 or $15,000 
qualify? 
 
What are they providing for communities that have, in the past, been receiving grants to keep people 
employed throughout the summer? They're not providing any of these grants any more. There are many 
communities out there that kept people employed throughout the summer. They kept them employed and 
kept them off welfare. Are they providing any of that? No. They are saying, "We're going to give you 29 
cents a gallon, and that should be benefit enough." These people who don't have a job to go to and very 
likely, don't have a car — are they going to benefit from the 29 cents a gallon? Those people don't benefit 
from it. So it appears that the people who are going to benefit are really the people who don't need that 
benefit very much. It seems that that's the way all the programs this government has been introducing are 
designed. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You're doing great, Norm. Keep it up and you just may make some dent in them. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Well, we've only got about an hour to go, so maybe I should keep it up. 
 
What have they been doing for students in this province? Absolutely nothing. Many of them are out of 
school now. They are out there; they've applied for jobs or they've got their names on the list at the 
unemployment office, and how many do we see employed at this time? I have just to use a few statistics 
here, if you really want to look at it; I think it's a very sad situation out there. We have in Regina about 1,200 
of them who are registered and who don't have jobs. We have about another 1,200 in Saskatoon who are 
looking for jobs. You go to Prince Albert and there are about 650. 
 
You can go to every town and city in this province, and you'll find that there are people, students, looking for 
employment and it's not there. Why isn't it there? Because this government has not seen fit to release some of 
the projects that were ready to go. They have not initiated any new projects. Even if they didn't want to go 
ahead with some of the projects that the previous government was trying to go ahead with, they should have 
been working, in the past two months, to get their own projects going and to provide some employment out 
there. They haven't been doing that. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
301 

I think the Premier has stated that he was intending to open some offices in foreign countries. One of them, I 
think (there's a news clipping here), is in Japan. Now, that should help some of our employment here. He 
says he might even consider opening some offices in other countries. And he feels that will somehow help 
employ our people here. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Maybe sell them some coal. Get those coal mines going again. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Yes, they would have to. You mentioned a coal mine. Yeah, there's a number of people 
who are unemployed there. People who are looking for work and don't have it. And it's the coal mines; it's 
the lumber industries; it's the construction industries. And no matter what area you look at in this province, 
you see that this government has not been making any moves to create employment and to help the people of 
the province. 
 
I'm sure they'll be glad to see the 13.25 per cent interest, but I don't know whether that's really going to 
satisfy all the people. The thing I can't really see with that bill is how it's going to create employment. Some 
people who have mortgages may be able to renew them at a lower rate, if they qualify. That seems to be the 
thing, you have to be able to qualify. And if the banks want to be nice to you and if they feel you have 
enough money, I suppose they'll allow you to qualify for it. But if they don't feel that you can afford it, then 
you won't qualify for it and the very people this program should be helping will not be getting any benefit 
from it. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, I think, has been the shortfall of this government. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — One of many, one of many. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — As my colleague has mentioned, it is one of many. Yes, I think it is one of many and it 
will probably be one of the continuing many within the next four years. 
 
We haven't seen anything happening in the past six weeks. They have put holes in just about every program 
that they had. And it doesn't matter where you look. You can pick up any paper today and what do you see? 
You see layoffs. You see people becoming unemployed. You see companies that are going broke. And yet 
every bankruptcy that occurs in this province was one that was never supposed to happen if that government 
got into power. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They were going to. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Yes, they were going to get industry going. They were going to develop everything in 
this province. But after about six weeks in government, we don't see more industry; we see less industry. We 
see some of them going. We see some of them closing down . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member 
from across says, "What about the brick plant?" Well, they opened up one plant, but probably about two or 
three of them closed down. I suppose that's one way of boosting the economy in this province. 
 
They talk about agriculture being number one. I have seen, to this day, no indication that somehow 
agriculture is going to be number one with this government, because many of the things that affect farmers, 
they haven't been addressing. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
302 

The people were looking at the property improvement grant increase, which was introduced in the last 
budget. What happened? No increase in the property improvement grant. 
 
Nothing for the farmers. What have they been doing about the crowrate? And that's a very big concern to the 
people of Saskatchewan, to the farmers of Saskatchewan. They haven't talked to anyone. They haven't 
written any letters to the federal government; they haven't discussed it with them. They don't know what's 
going to be happening with the crow, or so they say. So, when you talk about making agriculture number 
one, we have not seen any action from that side of the House that would indicate that they are even interested 
in agriculture. 
 
But, I'm sure that eventually it will come to their attention that they should be looking at some of the things 
that they said they would be looking at. They should be looking at the one industry that is supposed to be 
number one: agriculture. I do believe that agriculture is the number one industry in this province. It's 
something that we should be considering very seriously when we look at programs in agriculture. 
 
The Premier used to be a teacher at the University of Saskatchewan — or a professor, pardon me. He was a 
professor of agriculture, he's a farmer himself, and yet, in this past week and a half we have hardly heard 
anything about agriculture. 
 
If farmers have the income that they should be getting, that would also improve the employment situation, 
because instead of farmers going bankrupt (like many of the industries are today), if they had the income that 
should be coming to them for the product they produce, then they would be looking at hiring people, too. 
 
Someone brought up the beef stabilization program. What have they done with it? That was a program that 
would have brought some benefit to farmers, and it did last spring when they received their subsidies. But 
now it's another one of those programs on hold. They don't know if it is going to continue. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That's right, the Deputy Premier wanted to hear it. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — I didn't realize that the Deputy Premier and the Minister of Agriculture are right here, 
and maybe I should be directing my speech in their direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past two weeks we have seen a typical example of what we are going to be seeing for the 
next four years, and that's a government with no action. We see a government that will delay and try to put 
money into the hands of people who donated, as opposed to people who need it. People who need help are 
the senior citizens, students looking for work now, the farmers, industry and small businessmen. There have 
been no programs introduced by this government for small business. There are many small businesses out 
there that employ people, and a lot of those have been having problems. Many small businesses were looking 
for programs that would help them keep their businesses operating in the small towns of this province. There 
is nothing for small business whatsoever. 
 
It appears that they intend to do very little about the economy and the unemployment of this province. They 
are going to introduce a couple of bills that will help some people but very few bills that will help all the 
people. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is going to be a mistake on their part if they do that. The people of this  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
303 

province will not sit back and allow any government to introduce programs that are going to benefit only a 
few people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I'm afraid I didn't hear the comment of the member opposite. Oh, 
the 38,000 families that it's supposed to help. 
 
I suppose many of those would be in the same income bracket as the Premier or maybe some of the civil 
servants. But, Mr. Speaker, the 38,000 families are just a few of the people that really need that help. I know 
some people in my constituency who don't make $1,000 a month and have a mortgage that's more than 
$50,000. Now they are on the verge of losing their homes, but under the bill that's been introduced, if the 
banks are allowed to decide who qualifies and who doesn't some of those people are not going to get the 
benefit of that program. That's a working individual who is going to have to lose his home if he doesn't get 
some kind of help. So, I think there are a lot of people out there who are not going to qualify under that 
program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those opposite seem to be very critical of the former government's programs, but I think that these people 
themselves are now failing to address the problems of the very people who need their help. 
 
The other night on TV, the Premier said that that program was going to help anyone, whether he lives in a 
trailer or a cabin, or what have you. Yet, when you listen to some of the comments coming from the bankers, 
I cannot see people living in trailers qualifying. A lot of people living in trailers are either minimum wage 
earners or have incomes that are far below what that bill is going to allow. 
 
Now, some of the members opposite say that is not necessarily true. If it is not true, I would like to see where 
in that bill it says that everybody is going to be eligible to receive under that program. I would like to see 
where it says that there will be no means test. We've heard it when they were the opposition. Whenever they 
would introduce a program, there would be no means test. Now they come out with a program that was 
supposed to benefit everybody, and suddenly, you have to qualify. There's a means test there . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
Somebody said there is not test. Well, maybe there's no test, but the test is going to be when you go to talk to 
the banker, and he says your income is not high enough to afford a $50,000 mortgage. He is going to tell you 
that you just went through the means test — you don't qualify. Now, if that happens, I think it's going to be a 
bad program. And I would like to see that program introduced, but I want to see it introduced in a form that 
is going to benefit a lot of the lower income people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The hon. member is not even able to get the floor. He has the floor. Would you 
give him an opportunity to speak? 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It was interesting to listen to some of the comments 
coming from the members in their seats, although they were coming from every side of the House, and I 
don't know if they were coming from our members or the opposition because I've got them on both sides of 
me. I have the opposition on one side and my colleagues on the other side. But I thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, for bringing them to order. 
 
I would have to say, Mr. Speaker, that the government has been talking about helping a lot of people out 
there. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
304 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You went through that already. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — How's that? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You went through that already. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Somebody said I went through that one. I was just looking at what the Royal Bank 
expects there, and I don't know if I want to bother going through that one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
That's a real bad one because what they expect out of it really isn't going to help the people that I would 
expect it to help. 
 
We have another article here with another 223 people unemployed at Northern Telecom. And when we're 
talking about telephones and the likes, again we have a government that was promising people — the senior 
citizens — free telephones. Here we have telephone companies that can't move telephones anymore. 
 
So we have a lot of promises that that government made that they are not addressing right now. And if they 
did, I think that would improve the unemployment situation in this province. It would improve it quite a bit. 
 
I see the Minister of Industry and Commerce moved in. We're just looking at the problems that even some of 
the telephone companies are having or the telephone manufacturer is. And I had asked when some of the 
promises that that government had made during the election were going to be introduced. And one of them, 
Mr. Minister, was the promise of free telephones for senior citizens. Those I am waiting for and the senior 
citizens are waiting for. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Don't you believe in that? 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Sure, I believe in that. But I'm waiting for it and it's not happening. The senior citizens 
are waiting for it. Northern Telecom is waiting for it. They're hoping that more senior citizens might get 
some phones. They might put an extension in if it's free. And that would assist Northern Telecom and that 
would help their employment. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I'll pass it on to him. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — He says he'll pass it on to the minister. So, that will be good. I'm glad to hear that. I'm 
glad to hear that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can see that the members opposite are getting a little annoyed. They are getting a little 
annoyed, I suppose, with the fact that we are out here today — the nine little members on this side against 
the 55 — and we're trying to keep this debate going. We are keeping it going because the members opposite 
could not seem to generate enough of their members to get up and speak. Fifty-five against nine, and you 
can't keep it going. They couldn't get their people to keep this debate going until 10 o'clock this evening. 
 
I wouldn't mind that so much, Mr. Speaker, if there weren't an agreement made with the government that we 
would have so many of our members speaking and they would have so many of theirs, and that would have 
filled in today. But we have seen that happen when they were in opposition. We see that happening now that 
they are in government, and they're a big government now. I think, Mr. Speaker, that only indicates  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
305 

one thing. That should indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that if they promise you jobs, or if they 
promise you industry, or whatever they may promise you, you can't believe them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know more of my colleagues would like to say a few words in this debate, so I will 
close and say that I think it is time the government realized that it is a government with a lot of members. 
And it should be getting out there and doing some of the things that it promised, and get on with providing 
employment for this province and improving the economy of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, it's my pleasure to get up and participate in this vigorous and 
exciting and scintillating debate tonight. Since I have not had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to speak in the 
throne speech debate, I will be addressing both the main motion and the amendment. 
 
I want to offer my congratulations to you, sir, first of all, for your re-election as the member for 
Rosetown-Elrose and, second, on your election as Speaker of this legislature. I think everyone of us who has 
served with you before knows and appreciates the respect and high esteem you hold for this House, and for 
its procedures and its traditions. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I know that you will preside over this House with a high degree of fairness and 
a strong sense of tradition, and I want to assure you that you will receive the greatest respect and highest 
degree of co-operation from members of the opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also wish to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Speech from the Throne. I feel a 
particular sense of pride in the speech of the member for Melfort in moving the motion. As some of you will 
be aware, my parents are constituents of his, in the small community of Gronlid, 20 miles north of Melfort, 
and I grew up in that area and went to high school in Melfort. 
 
I also want to congratulate all the newly elected members of this House. I want to particularly congratulate a 
long time friend and acquaintance, the new member for Cumberland, who received 67 per cent of the vote in 
the Cumberland constituency. 
 
I would like to congratulate individually each of the newly elected PC MLAs but there are so many of you, 
and so I hope that you will understand . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. Oh, you're unfair. You're unfair. 
You always seem to be out of the House when I'm being nice to you. 
 
I want to say to the new members that you're now part of a very small community of Saskatchewan citizens 
who have had, or who have, the privilege to serve as members of this Legislative Assembly. It's a community 
with special responsibilities and a community with a special set of relationships. 
 
Many of you may have been as surprised in first taking your seat in this House as I was when I first came 
here that members of the opposition and the government actually speak to each other and smile at each other 
and can be friendly on occasion. I think that  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
306 

the public is not generally aware of the special kind of relationship that I talked about. In this House, and on 
the hustings, politicians of all political persuasions fight hard because we hold strong beliefs and strong 
opinions. But it is important for all of us to remember that when expressing ourselves no personal malice is 
meant nor should it be taken because, while we may frequently disagree, for the most part we do respect one 
another. I for one very much value the friendships I have made on both sides of this House and I look 
forward to getting to know the new members. 
 
I want to congratulate the Premier and the members of the cabinet on first of all leading your party to what is 
clearly a resounding victory on April 26. I know that each of you has by now recognized that you take on a 
heavy responsibility and a heavy burden and again it is one that those who have not been there cannot 
appreciate. I think that if anyone tried to describe to you what the job of a cabinet minister would be like and 
what happens to you within a day (or sometimes three days if there is a weekend in between) of being sworn 
in, either you wouldn't believe them, or, if you did, probably you wouldn't take the job. But I suppose that 
one of the things that is common to most of us who engage in this profession is that we are seldom accused 
of choosing a sane and rational profession. I wish you well and you will understand and not take offence if I 
say but not too well. 
 
I want to particularly congratulate all the private members. I mentioned the member for Melfort and the 
member for Saskatoon Riversdale who moved and seconded the throne speech and did a commendable job. I 
want to congratulate every other new member who spoke for the confidence with which he began his new 
role in this Assembly, and with which he delivered his first speech. While I may occasionally have had some 
disagreement with some of the content, I nevertheless have a great deal of admiration for the delivery, and 
for the effort . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I say to the Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Speaker, that all those 
years he was in opposition, I tried to tell him that I really did like him. He was one of the guys in opposition 
who I thought was a good guy. I withhold judgment on him in his new role, but I hope my judgement will 
not be too harsh. 
 
I want to say to the private members and the backbenchers (some of them sit in the front), don't ever 
downplay the importance of your role. Through caucus, you are important participants — particularly 
because you are members of the government caucus — in the decision-making process. You, the private 
members, have the power. You hold power in your hands. Your constituents have expressed confidence in 
you, and, because so many constituents expressed confidence in so many of you, the cabinet ministers have 
their jobs. But never forget that they can't hold those jobs without you. It is you who have the power; it is 
you to whom they are obligated; it is you who have the responsibility and must answer to those people who 
placed their confidence in you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to just comment on the unusual seating arrangements in the 20th legislature. I suppose 
the most interesting experience for me is that I never have been nor did I ever expect to find myself, to the 
right of the PCS. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was interested that in the Speech from the Throne that the government chose to ignore 50 per 
cent of the geography of Saskatchewan. And again, in the maiden speech in this House made by the Premier 
there was no mention, not one reference, to 50 per cent of the province of Saskatchewan, and I speak of that 
part of Saskatchewan that we know as northern Saskatchewan. I know that many people  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
307 

would think that the member for Shellbrook-Torch River or the member for Meadow Lake or I from Prince 
Albert live in the North. Northern Saskatchewan begins 95 miles north of Prince Albert and we heard not 
one mention, not one word, about that very important part of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I was sorry to hear that although the government made no mention of that part of our province in the throne 
speech and although the leader of the new government, the Premier, chose to ignore that part of our 
province, there were others in the government caucus who attempted to speak knowingly, albeit with a sad 
lack of information, about northern Saskatchewan. I was glad that the member for Athabasca and the 
member for Cumberland were able to point out to the House and to the members of the Assembly and to the 
new government some of the things about the nature of that part of Saskatchewan and some of the concerns 
of the people in that part of Saskatchewan. 
 
I point out that we recognize and accept that south of the northern administration district, the Conservative 
Party did get 54 per cent of the vote and has a mandate to implement its program. We accept that. It's part of 
the process and we respect the process. On the other hand, I ask you in all fairness to recognize that in the 
northern administration district, in the area served by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, and in the 
only part of the province where there are people who have had the opportunity to deal directly with that 
department — the only people who have had the opportunity to judge directly the quality and the nature of 
its services, programs, policies and approaches in that part of Saskatchewan — 54 per cent of the people 
voted for the programs of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and the New Democratic Party. 
 
I ask you to consider that as you make your decisions about what you will do in the North because as far as I 
am aware (I may have missed it) the Conservative Party did not put forth a northern program, did not put 
forward ideas for the people of the North to judge, as they did for the people in the rest of Saskatchewan. So 
I take the position that because you did not put forth a northern program and because 54 per cent of the 
people of the North voted for the northern program of the New Democratic Party, your obligation to continue 
that program is equal to your obligation and mandate to implement your program in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Because some of the comments with regard to the North and northern people that were made by some of the 
members of the government caucus appear to be somewhat uninformed and somewhat lacking in a true 
perception of what has been taking place in northern Saskatchewan, I would like to spend a few minutes and 
take some of your time in this throne speech debate to clarify for you some information with regard to that 
very important part of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The last 10 years have been a most exciting chapter in the history of northern Saskatchewan — probably the 
most exciting chapter. That 10 years marks the end of an era in which the people of the North had been 
treated shabbily — their dreams quashed, their desires unfulfilled and their voices not heard. 
 
My own involvement in the North covers almost 20 years as a teacher, as a bush pilot, as an outfitter, as a 
consultant, as a community development worker and, for three of those 20 years, as the minister responsible 
for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. During that period of time I watched the phenomenal growth 
which occurred. I've seen the average annual income more than double while social assistance dependency 
decreased threefold. I've seen communities acquire their first  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
308 

schools, while others celebrated their first grade 12 graduation. I've seen the health care delivery system 
improve and the introduction of free children's dental care. I've attended graduation ceremonies for everyone 
from truck drivers to teachers. I've seen many of the 1,800 new houses, the new sewer and water systems and 
the extension of the electrical power grid. 
 
But more important than all of these things, I've seen northern people taking control of their own lives. I've 
watched with amazement as communities have adopted local government and, having acquired these powers 
and responsibilities, they began pressuring the government for more sophisticated systems of local control. 
My colleague, the member for Cumberland, talked about that today, and I think he gave an indication to the 
government that it may be well advised to tread softly if it has any ideas about quick elimination of the 
programs, policies and services to which northern people have become accustomed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — And when I'm talking about northern people, I'm talking primarily about the 
northern people who make up 70 per cent of the population of the North. I'm talking about the Indian people, 
the Metis people and the non-status Indians — the people who are always left out, the people who were 
forced to stand by as passive participants in what passed for a development process in northern 
Saskatchewan prior to 1971 and what still pass for development processes in other parts of northern Canada. 
 
But over these last 10 years, I've watched as Northerners took control of the education system, opened 
community day care and child care facilities, commenced alcohol rehabilitation centres and opened over 400 
of their own businesses. I've seen a steadily increasing stream of northern young people go to the universities 
and other institutions of higher learning in this province, and then return to take up positions of authority and 
responsibility in the North. The North is now embarking, Mr. Speaker, on what I call the third transition. 
 
I put the errors of change in the North into three rough categories. First came the fur trade, which changed 
forever the economic, social, and political foundations upon which traditional Cree and Chippewa societies 
had been built. 
 
The second era saw the first decade of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. This era began the process 
of addressing the almost overwhelming ranges of social, economic, and political inequities that had been 
allowed to grow over decades of neglecting and ignoring the North. During that time of neglect, the rest of 
Saskatchewan concentrated on agricultural development and, more recently, on the growth of the oil, gas, 
and potash industries. 
 
The third transition, Mr. Speaker, represents the stage at which the North is at present, after an intensive 
10-year period of trying to make up for those years of neglect. Its physical facilities are now nearly on a par 
with the rest of the province. However, northern people are only just beginning to take up the opportunity to 
exercise the freedoms, rights, and responsibility which have long been taken fro granted in the rest of the 
province. The third transition represents the future, and while it is the most important and stimulating era of 
the last 100 years, its success or failure is better left to the historians to determine. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
309 

The first 10 years of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan represent a remarkable achievement. That 
the North has come this far is a tribute to the strength and tenacity of its people. It is also a tribute to the 
Government of Saskatchewan for its philosophical commitment to redress the wrongs of the past, and to the 
civil servants of Saskatchewan who have themselves demonstrated determination and an openness to change. 
 
You know, the line which divides southern Saskatchewan from the northern administration district is really a 
mythical one. It is simply an administrative aid. The people on both sides of that line have worked hard 
together to ensure the unity of the province and to share a common destiny. I, for one, Mr. Speaker, am 
proud to have played a part over the past 20 years in the development of that destiny. 
 
Northern Saskatchewan's mineral resources, particularly uranium, have brought about a tremendous interest 
in the northern part of the province. The money being generated by the development of these resources has 
the potential to provide a substantial boost to the economy of the entire province for many years. It's not a 
new kind of situation. That situation is not unique. In the 19th century, the resource which created so much 
attention was fur, and it vaulted the North into world-wide prominence long before the first furrow was 
ploughed on the Prairies. None the less, when the fur trade ebbed, toward the latter part of the century, that 
prominence collapsed. 
 
The residents of the North were left with a much more lasting legacy. It was the legacy of disease and death, 
of dependency on alcoholism, of distrust and despair. Their initial contact with European communities 
altered the lives of northern people forever. 
 
What was happening in the North was easy to ignore. It may still be easy to ignore. The throne speech 
ignored it. The Premier's speech ignored it. The area was so remote, and its scant population, primarily of 
Indian descent, had no understanding nor willingness to take part in the development which was sweeping 
the rest of the province. 
 
The ever-widening gap between the two halves of the province did not go unrecognized. But it was easier 
simply to ignore the area which accounted for almost half of the province's land mass. It was an area of high 
death rate and higher birth rate, and of untended illness. It was a social and economic situation similar to that 
of a third world country — before that term was ever popularised. 
 
Governments did begin to extend some services to the area. The federal government was responsible for 
servicing the needs of treaty Indians; the province, the remainder. But it was not until the 1940s that the 
provincial government began to take positive steps to bring conditions in the North more in line with those 
in the rest of the province. 
 
Outpost hospitals, schools, fur and timber marketing agencies, government trading stores, and even a 
government air line were introduced in a two-decade span. The subsequent narrowing of the gap between the 
two unequal halves was barely perceptible. But something was being done. But then a change in 
governments in 1964 brought the process to a standstill. And I hope that the absence of mention and 
intention in the throne speech and in the Premier's speech are not signals that developments in the North, for 
northern people, with northern people, under the direction and control of northern people, are coming to a 
standstill. 
 
In 1971 a new government was elected in this province, and one of its planks had been  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
310 

a new deal for northern Saskatchewan. To fulfil that promise, the government of Allan Blakeney created the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan and made its headquarters the tiny northern community of La Ronge. 
The department was given a rather broad mandate of enhancing the quality of life in the North. The new 
department's objectives were to establish a single agency that would co-ordinate all provincial government 
services and programs in the North, as well as to develop programs and policies which were sensitive to the 
unique northern situation. 
 
A second objective was to establish local governments and assist northern people to acquire control over 
their own affairs. A third objective was to develop viable social and economic alternatives to reform and 
replace the prevailing welfare culture that had developed in the years 1964 to 1971. And a fourth objective 
was to develop natural and human resource potential . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I don't want, at this late time in the day, Mr. Speaker, to test the memory of the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce, or test the perceptions of the Minister of Industry and Commerce, so we will not respond to his 
question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, intergovernmental affairs. I'm sorry. The perceptions of the 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, with regard to the North, are well known. He is the discoverer of 
torture camps and the like. The discoveries subsequently were proven to be without foundation. 
 
The new department, Mr. Speaker, was envisioned as a facilitator of change, rather than as an implementer 
of that change. It was necessary for the department to undertake a mammoth construction phase — houses, 
roads, airstrips, schools and the like, in order to hasten the catch-up process, which was so desperately 
needed. In the first five years of its existence, the catch-up phase provided more than 600 new houses, five 
new airstrips, extension of power grid lines, telephone and television services, improved health care, new 
schools and much, much more. The provincial government's activities in the North for the next five years 
were something unmatched in any northern jurisdiction in Canada. 
 
The shift in emphasis began toward human resources, and the department became much more of a facilitator, 
as the North moved toward a standard of living much more in line with the southern part of the province and 
the rest of Canada. While The Department of Northern Saskatchewan Act did not contain a so-called 
"twilight clause," it was never intended to be a permanent institution. But the men and women who were 
responsible for its creation did intend that the North would never again be a riches-to-rags story. The people 
of northern Saskatchewan are not, and will not be, just hewers of wood and haulers of water in the 
developmental process. They are full partners in a shared destiny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I note that it's approaching 10 o'clock. I did want to move on to further discussion, to enlighten 
the members with regard to the development of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, but I will do that 
later in the debate. 
 
Just for a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, I want to outline the reason that we are in this rather lengthy debate this 
evening — a debate that all evening the opposition has had to carry. 
 
We have witnessed, Mr. Speaker, a government elected with an overwhelming majority of 55 members, a 
government unable to sustain a throne speech debate for three days. When one looks at what is not in that 
throne speech, one can understand why they cannot sustain the debate, and why they would not wish to 
sustain the debate. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
311 

The arrangements, as you know, Mr. Speaker, about business in the House, are traditionally made each day 
between the two House leaders, and the order of speakers established by the opposition and government 
whips. 
 
The understanding today, Mr. Speaker, was that this afternoon there would be two speakers from the 
opposition side: the member for Shaunavon, who would be followed by one or two speakers from the 
government side, and the member for Cumberland would speak, and the members from the government side 
would continue the throne speech debate until 5 o'clock. The government was unable to do so and attempted, 
through the inability of the member for Rosthern to resist any opportunity to demonstrate to the new 
members on his side that he has read the rule book, to force a vote on the amendment. 
 
I note that the Deputy Premier has called it 10 o'clock. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 


