






















































Hansard: November 23, 1982


(1006) 1007 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Twentieth Legislature 

 
Tuesday, November 23, 1982. 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Resolution No. 4 – Student Employment Program (continued) 

 
MR. WEIMAN: – Mr. Speaker, again it’s an honor and a privilege to be able to speak in this House. 
I realize that it’s an infrequent occurrence, but that is mainly due to the numbers that we have here, 
and I am sure it will become more infrequent in the future as we gain another member in the North 
very shortly. 
 
Before I begin my comments I would like to make some certain assumptions in clarification of 
terminology in the resolution. Not knowing the thoughts of the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone, 
whose absence I note, I can only surmise what types of thoughts he had in his head when he made 
the resolution or came to basic assumptions. If I may read the resolution and stop halfway through, 
the resolution reads: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan act immediately to implement a comprehensive 
student employment program . . . 
 

If the hon. member whose absence is noted meant by the word “immediately” the way that our 
government acted upon the elimination of the gas tax upon forming government, then I would have 
to agree with him with the word “immediately.” If he was asking what the word “immediately” 
meant and was making reference to the mortgage interest reduction plan which we initiated 
immediately during the first sitting this summer, then I have to be in agreement with him also. 
 
As to the word “comprehensive,” because it seems to be pivotal in the resolution moved by the 
member for Regina Elphinstone, if the hon. absent member was meaning to say by the word 
“comprehensive” a program that would involve all the varied participants in a democratic way that is 
well thought out and mutually beneficial to the people of this province, I think even the hon. 
members on this side of the House and the hon. members to your side would also be in total 
agreement. 
 
It is when I come to the second half of the resolution that I am disappointed with the phraseology 
used by the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone – the hon. absent member for Regina Elphinstone. 
Again, I would like to make reference to the actual words of the resolution: 
 

That the Government of Saskatchewan act immediately to implement a comprehensive 
student employment program in Saskatchewan, providing full-time summer jobs for 
Saskatchewan high schools . . .  

 
I wasn’t under the impression that Saskatchewan high schools needed jobs. I suppose then that it 
must be typographical error. 
 
As well, if you will read the resolution, hon. member opposite, you will see that it says 
“Saskatchewan high schools.” As for the phraseology “seeking employment,” surely one doesn’t 
encourage or create jobs for those people who are not seeking  



 
November 23, 1982 
 

 
1008 

employment, I was a little disappointed, at the stature of the hon. member, that he would use such 
ambiguous phraseology. Contrary to past practices, this government does not intend to create jobs for 
people not seeking employment, that is (and I want to clarify): we are not here as a government to 
create government positions to perpetuate government existence. The preference of this government 
and the vast majority of the people who elected us and concurred in our thinking and our plans is that 
we create a proper atmosphere in this province that will build confidence in the private sector – an 
environment that motivates job creation. 
 
The absent hon. member for Regina Elphinstone also made reference to this past summer’s 
employment for students. Traditional jobs, he mentioned, were not there – traditional jobs that are 
labor intensive in the area, particularly, of construction – jobs that would have been there, I might 
point out, had not settlements this past summer been hampered by a piece of legislation that was 
passed by the previous government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIMAN: – That piece of legislation that I allude to is formally known as The Construction 
Industry Labor Relations Act commonly knows as Bill 88. Not only have the previous government 
and the members in the opposition, and particularly the leader of that party who is absent this 
evening, alienated the students who could have found jobs this summer had not that bill been 
implemented but they have also alienated the fine union workers of our province, so much so that 
those fine workers of this province, this past summer, picketed and demonstrated in the Legislative 
Assembly. They did not picket this government that stands here before you today. They picketed and 
demonstrated against the previous government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIMAN: – I’m dismayed totally, particularly coming from the constituency of Fairview, 
which is in the west end of Saskatoon, a constituency that embraces a great number of these very 
people that we saw here this past summer. I was astounded when I found out the identity of that 
deputy minister, that deputy minister who was responsible for, and drafted. Bill 88 – that infamous 
bill. 
 
I can assume the people of Saskatchewan, and particularly the four members of the opposition who 
are present, but I am sure they will pass on my comments to the Leader of the Opposition who is 
absent this evening, I can assure the people of Saskatchewan that we as a government will not act as 
rashly and as irresponsibly when we deal with our job-creation program. 
 
The key words, and I want to remind you of statements that I have used previously, “are well 
thought-out programs,” and programs that are mutually “beneficial to the people of this province.” 
 
When I first became elected, I heard another terminology bandied about: the terminology of 
left/right. There are those people who are on the left and have a certain type of mentality, a certain 
type of philosophy. And then there are those who are right. Being right not only makes me proud, but 
gives me a very warm feeling, because the word “right” has the connotation of correctness. The 
people of Saskatchewan expect correctness in the dealing of this government, and we shall meet that 
goal. 
 
I am sure that the hon. members opposite will pass on my comments to the original hon.  



 
November 23, 1982 

 

1009 
 

member who is not there who brought forth this resolution, when he asks for immediacy and 
comprehensiveness in a program to create jobs. I want to remind that absent member of a ministerial 
statement that was made yesterday by the Hon. Paul Schoenhals in this very House November 22, 
and I quote to you: 
 

I wish to take this opportunity to inform the legislature of another step this government has 
taken to fight against unemployment. I will be striking a committee comprised of officials 
representing the Department of Culture and Youth, the Department of Labor, the 
Department of Industry and Commerce, and the Department of Government Services. The 
purpose of this committee will be to develop, in consultation (a rarity in this province) with 
individuals (a rarity in this province) and groups such as the Premier’s youth advisory 
council, a student employment program for the summer of 1983. 
 
In order to accomplish this task the committee will seek input from employer groups, such 
as provincial government departments and agencies, municipal governments, and the never 
thought of and most important private sector. 

 
Seeing that the resolution put forward by that hon. absent member of the opposition is redundant in 
the light of yesterday’s ministerial statement, I move an amendment to the motion, seconded by the 
hon. member for Humboldt: 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after “That” where it appears in the 
first line, and substitute therefor: 
 
this Assembly commend the Government of Saskatchewan for its performance in 
identifying full-time summer jobs for Saskatchewan high school students and university 
students seeking employment. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: – Mr. Speaker, I concur with the amendment from my colleague for Saskatoon 
Fairview, and I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – The member has asked for leave to adjourn debate. Is leave granted? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – No. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Agreed, agreed. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Debate continues. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – What do you mean that debate continues? Everybody agreed. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – No. He said no. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Who said no? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Ask him. 



 
November 23, 1982 
 

 
1010 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: – Well, Mr. Speaker, if the debate continues, I would like to inject a few 
words into this debate. And since we have now opened the debate up again and since I’ve added so 
much to it already, I would now beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 13 – Royalties and Taxes on Energy 
 
MR. GERICH: – In addressing the motion, Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that we, the Saskatchewan 
government, strongly voice our concerns to the federal government. The agriculture sector in this 
province is the single most important industry and factor that relates to Saskatchewan wealth and 
growth. When the agricultural sector is in good economic times – by this I mean the crops are good, 
grain and cattle markets are bullish, and we’re getting a fair return for the products we sell – the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said when the agricultural sector is in good economic times. We are not in that 
position today. Today the agriculture sector, the farmer and rancher, is in the most depressed 
economic slump that it has ever been in in depression years. The federal government is not doing 
anything to help this economic slump. In fact, they readily raised the energy royalties and taxes on 
energy fuel to bring in more revenue to fund their whims and wishes in purchasing Petro-Can and 
Petrofina. Through taxation such as this, they are directly hurting the agricultural industry in 
Saskatchewan. They are taxing the very people that produce the food. How long can the food 
producer be overtaxed for his efficiency and productivity? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the energy cost to the agricultural industry is a major concern to the producers. It is 
imperative that the federal tax be removed or lowered on farm-use fuel. That will greatly help the 
agricultural sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agricultural cost to the agricultural industry is a major concern to the producers. It is 
imperative that the federal tax be removed or lowered on farm-use fuel. That will greatly help the 
agricultural sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agricultural sector’s real income in 1982 will drop by 28 per cent by 1982. Only 
good yields and high deliveries of grain will keep the incomes from falling short. The farm prices for 
grains dropped below the cost of production late in 1981 and remained there for most of 1982. When 
the income for 1982 is adjusted for inflation, farmers will earn only slightly more than they did in 
1971, the lowest year of earning in the last decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the 1982 calendar year, the gross income of the agricultural sector prairie farmers 
will be down $0.068 billion while costs are up to $0.64 billion. Therefore, we realize a net income 
for 1982 will be down $0.708 billion as compared to 1981. Taking inflation into account, farm 
income in 1982 in deflated dollars was $0.678 billion. That was $0.337 billion down from 1981 and, 
as mentioned, the lowest income in deflated dollars since 1971. 
 
Compare the purchasing power of today’s dollars to the deflated dollar. What a farmer could buy for 
37 cents in 1971, he buys for $1 in 1982. Mr. Speaker, I will give you some fuel cost figures 
comparing the year 1973 to 1982. In 1973, for the price of one bushel of wheat you could purchase 
18.4 gallons of diesel fuel. In 1982, for the price of one bushel of wheat you can only purchase 2.4 
gallons of diesel fuel. Mr. Speaker, as you can see, the cost input of inflation in the energy field is 
truly hurting the agricultural sector. 
 
I would like to inform the Legislative Assembly of the farm fuel used in Saskatchewan  



 
November 23, 1982 

 

1011 
 

for November 1, 1980 to November 1, 1981, as given by the farm credit corporation agricultural 
statistics. Again I say farm fuel: 140,800,00 gallons of purple diesel, 107 million gallons of purple 
gasoline were used in the production of food for the consumer. On the 140,800,000 gallons of diesel 
fuel with the 54.8 cents per gallon federal tax removed from farm fuel, it would put $77,158,400 
back in the farmer’s pocket. On the 107 million gallons of purple gasoline, with 54.8 cents per gallon 
federal tax, it would put $58,636,000 back in to the farmers’ pockets. The total of the two fuels is 
$135,000,794. I’m sure the farming sector can use and put this money to good use. This money 
would stay in Saskatchewan, be spent in our local towns and districts, and in keeping the money here 
a multiplier effect would result stimulating the agricultural economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more machinery would be sold, Saskatchewan-built machinery. Set-up crews would 
have jobs, mechanics would be working, the repairs would be sold creating more jobs in the 
agricultural sector. Fertilizers would be on the move and sell. Irrigation sales would improve. The 
cost of transporting grain to market would also be cheaper. Less cost to the farmers would be less 
cost to the consumer. The spinoff and multiplier principles that relate to a buoyant economic state 
would show in everyone’s daily life in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that the Saskatchewan government urges the Government of Canada to 
lower royalties and taxes on energy to provide a reasonable cost structure to the producers of the 
food in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend my colleague on urging the federal 
government to lower royalties and taxes on energy for producers of food. It is essential to that the 
cost of energy be reduced to our farmers, since over recent years this has not only increased 
production costs, forcing farmers into cost-price squeeze, but has also increased costs to the 
consumer and the general public. A reduction in costs to the producer can result in more productivity 
throughout the whole economy. If the Government of Canada would follow our government’s lead 
with respect to the drop in the tax on fuel and royalty reduction, which is help investor confidence, 
then Canada’s economy would also benefit and a resurgence in investment could be initiated. 
 
Since the consumer in Canada is enjoying a reasonable price for food (Canadian per capita spending 
on food is one of the cheapest in the world), then it is only logical that the producers of this food 
should be able to have a reduction in the price of their fuel by having the federal government lower 
its taxes. This tax rate would allow farmers that extra cash that is so desperately needed now when 
the price of grain is relatively low compared to a few years ago. 
 
I would like to refer to the “Farm Energy Management Program” of March 1982, published by the 
Saskatchewan Research Council. On page 20 it has energy price forecasts. From table 2(3), forecast 
fuel and electricity prices for 1986 were exemplified with average 1981 prices used for comparison. 
Diesel fuel was running approximately 28 cents per litre, and in 1986 the forecast made was that it 
would amount to 64 cents per litre, an increase of 18 per cent average annual increase. At 64 per 
cents per litre this would amount to approximately $2.88 per gallon. 
 
Grain News has also forecast, for 1986, amounts to approximately $2.98 per gallon for  



 
November 23, 1982 
 

 
1012 

diesel. This kind of cost the farmer cannot absorb. These costs contribute to a large percentage of his 
input costs. There is also a lobby among farm organizations for a tax rebate from the federal 
government, particularly on natural gas used in fertilizer production. I refer you to page 36 in Grain 
News, May 1982, for reference. We cannot expect producers to pay higher energy costs when their 
produce that they sell is on the down side. On page 37 on a graph in figure 2 in Grain News, the 
forecast energy costs on a 1,280-acre grain farm in southeastern Saskatchewan would be $25,575 in 
1986 compared to $10,420 in 1980. This energy cost includes fertilizer, gasoline, diesel and 
electricity. 
 
Part of the problem, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal government has become too involved in its 
national energy program and it cannot see the needs of its own citizens. The energy program 
discouraged investments and chased some of the risk-takers out of the market and has left us with 
limited explorations. To obtain more money, the federal government has continued on a royalty tax 
and increased costs to attempt to bail out such companies as Dome, Petro-Canada and other 
companies at the taxpayers’ expense. This has resulted in larger deficits and has left producers 
bearing the brunt of additional costs. 
 
When the federal government sees fit to allow incentives for exploration for oil in Canada, the result 
would be that we would be closer to self-sufficiency, less reliant on imported fuels, our budgetary 
deficits would be reduced and this general saving would be passed on to the producer and the 
consumer alike. Such a step would give producers the stability needed, the long-range planning, and 
allow the family farm to remain since they would know tax reduction and one of their highest costs 
would be lowered. This saving would benefit other communities since farmers would be able to 
spend any extra money saved in the purchase of items in those communities. 
 
We can take this step a little further, Mr. Speaker. One of the major reasons for inflationary spiral 
began with the jump, the increase in energy costs. These costs had a total impact on the economies of 
the western world where a guarantee of a cheap source had been taken for granted over the years. We 
soon found ourselves in reduced supply, indeed, in almost a shortage. Canada, with its vast energy 
source, should never be in such a position. 
 
These unexpected increases in costs meant additional expenses to the business communities, who in 
turn had to increase their prices. As a result, particularly since we in western Canada are basically 
agricultural, the effect of these costs was quickly handed down to the producers. What he had to pay 
previously for parts for his repairs soon doubled. Sure, his price of grain had gone up, but only 
temporarily. It did not take long thereafter for the export price of this product to be reduced. But he 
still had to pay the higher costs for machinery, fuel and repairs. 
 
Here, Mr. Speaker, if the foresight of the Trudeau administration could have been used, the producer 
could have been saved this unnecessary additional expense. The administration in Ottawa chose to 
ignore the agricultural community and instead laid its heavy hand of taxation on one of our abundant 
resources, and that is oil. Who paid? Well, I tell you who paid. The Canadian public, by and large – 
those on fixed incomes, the workers, the employees, and this simply translates into the people of 
Canada who have been manipulated and used as pawns in the game that has so skillfully been used 
by the bureaucrats in Ottawa. 
 
A reduction in the royalty and tax structure implemented now would result in savings to  



 
November 23, 1982 

 

1013 
 

farmers of thousands of dollars. An emphasis should be placed on Ottawa to reduce energy costs to 
all producers, and the general trend would then lower costs for everyone. The effect of this, Mr. 
Speaker, would be to lower the inflation rate and this would improve investor confidence and at that 
same time lower the interest rate. 
 
Exploration incentives should be given so that we can achieve self-sufficiency in the next few years. 
This is not impossible if we are willing to roll up our sleeves and get on with the job that needs to be 
done. Insulated from the need for importing fuel, our budgetary deficit could be rapidly reduced and 
even eliminated. The people in Canada would have security of energy. The costs of energy could be 
down and inflation could be wrestled to the ground and our dollar could thus have the value it once 
commanded. 
 
MR. MAXWELL: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and no to the member from Moosomin, I was not 
expecting a standing ovation, but I’ll accept his rapturous applause none the less. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: – Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to join in the debate on this extremely important 
topic. I’m also extremely happy to see the Leader of the Opposition has joined us this evening 
because I did want to say that I greatly enjoyed his delivery this afternoon and his participation in the 
debate this afternoon. I always look forward with great anticipation, Mr. Speaker, to the participation 
of the Leader of the Opposition because he does have a tremendous delivery and a tremendous style 
when he speaks . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As opposed and in contrast to the style and content 
and delivery of the member for Regina Centre, Mr. Speaker. But I thank him for his timely 
intervention in giving me pause to consider my next couple of remarks because they are still with the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
I was going to say that as a rookie MLA, Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure and a privilege for me to 
occupy the seat I occupy because I have the opportunity to study some of the great debaters in the 
House, both opposite on the government side and of course to my immediate right in the form of the 
leader. And once again, I sincerely say I do appreciate his comments. I think his delivery is terrific, 
although the content is usually gibberish. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: – At which point I see our somewhat somnambulant opposition has taken heed 
of the remarks, Mr. Speaker, I must say that the preceding participants in this debate did an 
admirable job of addressing themselves to the topic. I heartily agree with what they’ve said, and in 
doing so I think most of it has been said, so I take some pleasure in begging leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Return No. 1 
 
MR. YEW moved, seconded by Mr. Thompson, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return 
no. 1 showing: 
 

With respect to construction projects in northern Saskatchewan announced  



 
November 23, 1982 
 

 
1014 

in the legislature in March, 1982, including the DeTox Centre and the Crisis Centre in La 
Loche, the Training Centre and the Crisis Centre in La Ronge, the Dillon Road, the 
Beauval-Pinehouse Road, the Cumberland Weir, and construction on Highways 102, 106, 
and 155: 
 
(1) for each project, whether approval has been given to proceed; 

 
(2) for each project, whether tenders have been called; 

 
(3) for each project, the amount of the provincial grant which has been offered; 

 
(4) the formula used as the basis for the calculation of the provincial grant. 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – Mr. Speaker, I stand to be corrected; I think the motion is in order in 
every respect, except as it relates to having a seconder. I didn’t hear that there was a motion put or 
that there was a seconder. If I am wrong, I stand to be corrected. I don’t have a monopoly on 
intelligence, as a lot of people think, I am prepared to carry on. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Freddy seconded it. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – That’s fine with me. I am not going to say a great deal in any event, 
except to say that we will be providing the information that the members opposite have asked for as 
it related to item 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. I think I was right in the first place. Maybe I do have a monopoly 
on that, Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point I want to make is that all items under motions for returns (debatable) have to 
have the language, cleared up just a little bit, so that it is clearly understood that these in fact were 
not approved projects, but were in fact a shopping list of the party opposite prior to going in to the 
last election. And we are going to clean up the language to make that clear and when we bring the 
amendments in next private members’ day to clear up that language, we will also – and I can give 
that commitment now – be providing the information . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . What are you 
talking about? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Nothing. I was talking to myself. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – We will be providing the information that we will be required or 
obligated to provide under the amended motion for return. 
 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, until I have that amendment ready on time, return 1, I beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Return No. 2 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER moved, seconded by Mr. Shillington, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no 2 showing: 



 
November 23, 1982 

 

1015 
 

 
With respect to the hospital construction projects at Lloydminster, Yorkton, Cut Knife, 
Melfort, Nipawin, Maidstone, Indian Head, Davidson, Regina and Saskatoon announced in 
the legislature in March, 1982: 
 
(1) for each project, whether approval has been given to proceed; 

 
(2) for each project, whether tenders have been called; 

 
(3) for each project, the amount of the provincial grant which has been offered; 

 
(4) the formula used as the basis for the calculation of the provincial grant. 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – Mr. Speaker, the same applied to return no. 2 as applied to return no. 1 
and I therefore beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Return No. 3 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER moved, seconded by Mr. Shillington, that an order of the Assembly do 
issue for return no. 3 showing: 
 

With respect to construction projects for special-care homes at Biggar, Shaunavon, Birch 
Hills, 

Fillmore, Saskatoon, announced in the legislature in March 1982: 
 
(1) for each project, whether tenders have been called; 

 
(2) for each project, the amount of the provincial grant which has been offered; 

 
(3) the formula used as the basis for the calculation of the provincial grant. 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: – Mr. Speaker, I rise to introduce an amendment to The Urban 
Municipalities Act to permit the extension of store hours in urban municipalities during special 
events. This amendment is another concrete example of our government’s commitment to having 
Saskatchewan open for business. I would like to take just a few minutes, Mr. Speaker, to outline the 
background to the provisions of this bill. 



 
November 23, 1982 
 

 
1016 

Urban municipalities annually hold a number of special events which attract visitors from other parts 
of the province, the nation, and indeed the world. Well-known examples include Agribition, Buffalo 
Days in Regina, Pioneer Days in Saskatoon. On an international level events such as the Silver 
Broom, to be held in Regina in 1983, attract many visitors in these and other communities, and, 
while smaller in scale, they are no less important to the community involved. 
 
At the present The Urban Municipality Act permits urban councils to pass by-laws to allow stores to 
remain open until 10 p.m. one day per week which must be either a Thursday or a Friday. The act 
also contains provisions for special hours of business for confectioneries, convenience stores, 
garages, and other selected establishments, Mr. Speaker, these provisions are not adequate to 
accommodate the influx of visitors wishing to shop during special events of the type I just 
mentioned. 
 
This government believes that a greater opportunity must be provided to our merchants to participate 
in the interest and enthusiasm generated by special events. Accordingly, the amendment before you 
today will give urban municipal councils the authority, if they so desire, of designating a maximum 
of two special events per calendar year during which stores may remain open until 10 p.m. A 
maximum total of 10 days per year can be designated for extended hours under this amendment. 
Thus the municipality will have the freedom to, for example, designate one special event and 10 days 
of extended shopping hours or two special events, one with three days of extended shopping, the 
other with seven, or any other combination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment respects and reinforces the local autonomy of our urban governments. 
Whether or not any special events will be designated are decisions that the councils will make. As 
well, the procedure a council must follow to designate the special events and extended store hours 
under this amendment has been streamlined. A simply majority of council is now sufficient. The 
procedure for other store closing by-laws currently in the act remains unchanged. 
 
The streamlined procedure for by-laws under this amendment will allow the city of Regina to 
designate this year’s Agribition as a special event. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure members are aware of how 
important this event is to Regina and, indeed, to the province, but we make it clear that this 
amendment to permit a limited extension of shopping hours during selected special events does not 
replace the current provisions regarding store hours during selected special events does not replace 
the current provisions regarding store hours in The Urban Municipality Act. Rather, it supplements 
those provisions. Thus, there are no changes with regard to the current provisions for Sunday or 
holiday shopping, nor are there provisions for extending store hours beyond 10 p.m. The amendment 
would, however, permit stores to open where normally there is Monday or Wednesday closing 
during designated special events. As well, if the special event occurs in December this amendment 
would make it possible for the council to extend late-night Christmas shopping beyond the four extra 
days now promised in the current act. 
 
The government is aware, Mr. Speaker, that the entire issue of store hours need to be assessed. This 
review is long overdue and will be addressed in the major rewriting of The Urban Municipality Act 
that we are now engaged in. However, we believe it is in the best interests of Saskatchewan’s 
communities and its economy to proceed with this  



 
November 23, 1982 

 

1017 
 

special events amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge all members to support this bill, in view of the opportunity it provides to our 
urban communities to assist in strengthening the provincial economy. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – I have a few remarks to make which will be almost, but not quite, as brief 
as those of the Minister of Urban Affairs. I want to say that I have had an opportunity to raise this 
with a number of people. I’m sure my colleague across the way has as well. I got much more mixed 
reaction than I expected I would, and I’ll deal with that in just a moment. 
 
I understand from my discussions with civic officials that the impetus for this came from Agribition 
and Mexabition, the two big Regina shows. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – And the chamber of commerce in Carievale. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Yes, it might have been in Carievale. It wasn’t the chamber of commerce 
in Regina. I’m going to get to that in a moment. 
 
I gather that those who are in charge of Agribition feel that they need to make the show competitive, 
that the show is being courted by our cities, and that night shopping is one of many things they have 
to do to keep this show attractive. I’m not convinced that’s accurate. I’m not saying they’re not being 
sincere, but I’m not convinced that judgment is sound. Each year it seems to be a different city. Last 
year it was Calgary with their new convention centre which I gather was turned down by the voters. 
This year it’s Edmonton with a $38 million centre, and I’m not sure which one it will be next. I’m 
not sure their judgment’s accurate, although I don’t in any sense question their sincerity. 
 
But we have an objection to the expansion of night shopping just on principle; it is never in the 
interest of the employees. The Saskatchewan Federation of Labor has a long-standing policy of 
opposing the extension of night shopping, and that is simply the reflection of their members’ best 
interests – the members who work in those stores. It is never in an employee’s interest to work nights 
or to work shifts. That interferes with people’s relationships with their families; it’s that much less 
time to spend with their families. 
 
It is not in the interests of the independent businessmen. When we were in office the retail merchants 
association presented a brief to us in which they opposed any extension of night shopping. I 
understand that they provided a similar brief to the current members of treasury benches. In fact, 
when I contacted them about this bill, I said, “What’s your position?” The answer came back: our 
position is that we are opposed to any extension of night shopping. They represent the small 
businessmen. 
 
There is a reason for that as well. The small businessmen are normally mom and pop operations. The 
small businessmen are managed by mother and father, and there’s nobody else to do it. There are 
probably a few clerks, but nobody who can lock the door at night. When you extend those hours 
there is no question of staggering the shifts for the management. That just means the owners of the 
business are back there for those extra hours. And, I think the vast majority of independent 
businessmen, the mom and pop operations, do not want any extension of night shopping. 
 
You people might try listening to the businessmen rather than listening to each other.  



 
November 23, 1982 
 

 
1018 

If you did, I think you would find this matter is not nearly as clear-cut as you think . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . We seem to have a number of experts over there. I’m glad they have learned so 
much by talking to each other. As I say, you ought to try talking to the real folk out there. 
 
I also contacted the chamber of commerce, and their position is that they take no position. They will 
readily admit that a lot of small businessmen do not want night shopping extended, but that some of 
their members do. 
 
The people who night shopping really benefits are, of course, the chains. They can stagger the 
management, they can stagger the employees, and extra hours are really not too difficult for them to 
manage. There is something about night shopping that seems to attract people to the larger stores; 
they don’t seem to like to go from one small store to another. They want to go to one big spot and 
stay there. Statistics will show that night shopping, in terms of who gets the bucks, tends to favor the 
larger centres – the chain stores and the malls. And for those reasons as well, the independent 
businessmen are not in favor of this. 
 
I am not convinced that this creates one single, solitary job. As the people I spoke to at the retail 
merchants association said: there are no more bucks; you must spread them a little thinner, and you 
make the independent work a little harder to make the same dollar. 
 
There is one other argument as well. I don’t know whether it sits well coming from a Regina 
member, but I think night shopping, particularly in conjunction with these exhibitions, tends to draw 
money in, from out of Regina, a lot of it from rural Saskatchewan, and I’m not sure Saskatoon will 
make any use of this. I’m not sure that the city should be drawing business away from the smaller 
communities. I’m not sure all Regina businessmen think they should. 
 
For these reason, Mr.Chairman, we will be voting against the bill in second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, bill read a second time and by leave of the 
Assembly referred to a committee of the whole later this day. 
 

Yeas – 32 
 
Birkbeck Andrew Berntson 
Lane McLeod Klein 
Katzman Duncan Schoenhals 
Boutin Hampton Weiman 
Bacon Hodgins Sutor 
Sveinson Sauder Glauser 
Parker Smith (Moose Jaw South) Hopfner 
Rybchuk Young Gerich 
Domotor Maxwell Embury 
Dirks Hepworth Folk 
Myers Zazenlenchuk  
 



 
November 23, 1982 

 

1019 
 

Nays – 6 
 
Blakeney Thompson Lingenfelter 
Koskie Shillington Yew 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 39 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act 
 

Clause 1 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: – I would like to introduce to the House Mr. Don Koop, grants branch of the 
Department of Urban Affairs. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Chairman, I have here a copy of the bill with an explanation 
provided to me by the House Leader. I read the explanation and I want to read it so that everyone 
understands what we think the bill says: 
 

The purpose of this proposed bill is to provide authority for urban municipalities to pass 
by-laws permitting stores to remain open during special events including fairs, exhibitions 
and other events designated by council. There is a limit of two events per year and a total of 
10 days, including the Christmas shopping period, that may be designated for extra 
shopping hours under the bill. 

 
That’s what the explanation says. I’m not sure the bill says this, but if that is what the bill says at 
least we know what the intention of the government is. I am puzzled by what the bill says as to the 
number of shopping hours: whether it is the number we now have plus 10, or the number we now 
have plus 20, or the number we have now have which adds up to 10, including the Christmas ones. 
That’s what this says, that it adds up to 10, including the Christmas ones. There is no other way to 
read that. There is a limit of two events per year and a total of 10 days, including the Christmas 
shopping period, that may be designated for extending shopping hours. We all know that the bill now 
says, the act now says that there are fur Christmas shopping period days which may be designated for 
extended shopping hours. Now, I would be curious to know what he minister feels the bill says. 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: – The copy you have in your hand was a working draft that we were dealing 
with earlier. The intent of the bill is to allow 10 extra days of shopping above and beyond the four 
that are already allowed as pre-Christmas shopping. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – I am constrained by reading what the government offers . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It may well have been. If you explain this to mean 10 plus 4, it certainly is 
confusing. You have certainly succeeded. The House Leader has admirably succeeded in mudding 
the water if he has said that this means 10 plus for, and I assert that that explanation means 10 in 
total. However, I understand from the minister that the intent is 10 plus 4. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 



 
November 23, 1982 
 

 
1020 

Clause 3 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – I trust the Clerk has provided the minister and the House Leader with 
copies of the amendment. 
 
When we read the bill, the bill was quite capable of the interpretation of 20 days plus 4 for 
Christmas. That is an eminently reasonable interpretation of that bill. And as used to be said to me 
when I was responsible for legislation, don’t tell me what you think the bill means, tell me what is 
the worst interpretation that could be reasonably put on it. I read the amendment. As I read that 
amendment, that current amendment is capable of meaning 10 extra days in a period 20 days before 
the special event, and 10 days in a period 10 days following the event – a total of 20 days . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well unfortunately for the member for Souris-Cannington, it’s often 
lawyers who are responsible for interpreting this legislation and I know that’s nothing but trouble for 
the other 99 per cent of the population who are eminently reasonable and use their common sense. 
But unfortunately it is lawyers and I say that’s quite a reasonable interpretation. 
 
I took it upon myself to lend my assistance, knowing it would be welcome, to the Minister of Urban 
Affairs to clarify his bill. I want to say that I’ve made a mistake. I know now that the only 
conceivable way to know what he government is doing is to get the ministers in the corner and ask 
them. Don’t read what they say. The Leader of the Opposition has already read to you that opening 
paragraph. That opening paragraph clearly says a total of 10 days including the Christmas shopping 
period. Assuming that was your intent and assuming that you were not going to accept our 
suggestion that the bill be defeated, we drew up this amendment in order to ensure no one will 
interpret this to mean 24 days. We thought it was 10 and that’s what my amendment clarifies – four 
days at Christmas plus six additional days. That’s what my amendment says, because I made the 
mistake, as I say, of reading what you people were courteous enough to give us on Friday. 
 
Now you tell me it’s 10 plus 4 days; it’s 14 days. That may well be what you intended. I will say this 
to the minister: I think an additional six days is really all they reasonably need – that’s three extra 
days for each event. They’ve already got Thursday night shopping; three additional days would give 
them Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday. Surely that’s all they reasonably need extra days per event. If 
the minister, however, feels that they absolutely have to have five extra days per special event, then 
amend the six and change it to 10 days, but please, I urge the minister, do not leave this bill as it is 
because you’re going to find an extra 20 days available for special events; I think that’s an 
interpretation that could be reasonably put on it. 
 
I can appreciate that this bill may have been drafted somewhat hastily. I have a suspicion because I 
know the routine. Three days before the session opens, somebody shows up on your door and he’s 
absolutely got to have a bill. Will it wait for the new year? No, it won’t. It’s an emergency. So you 
draft it up and you bring it in before you really have a chance to consider it; I know the routine with 
these things. I think the drafting of this thing needs to be improved. I have offered you my 
suggestion. I think what we have put forward is eminently reasonable. I urge the minister opposite to 
consider it and adopt it. 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: – It seems a little strange that anyone could come up with a 20-day 
interpretation when it says in the bill (and I understand the pages delivered you a copy of the bill) 
“may specify not more than 10 days per year.” The intent with the  



 
November 23, 1982 

 

1021 
 

20 days is to allow the councils to determine the days on either side of the special event they wish to 
specify. 
 
I agree with you on Christmas shopping. I think the amount of time you’ve indicated is plenty. But I 
have enough confidence in the municipal councils around the province to expect that they will make 
intelligent decisions in this regard. And I am prepared in this bill to let them make those decisions. 
The intent is to allow 10 days additional shopping at the discretion of the councils, with no more than 
10 days total additional shopping. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Perhaps we’re just beating in a dead horse. I really don’t see why the 
minister doesn’t clarify this. I ask you to look at it sincerely. The existing subsection 3(b) is simply 
not clear. It can be reasonably interpreted to mean 10 days before the special event and 10 days 
afterwards That is not an unreasonable interpretation of that bill. I suggest to the minister it should be 
clarified. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: – The amendment reads: 
 

Amend section 3 of the printed bill by striking out clause (b) and substituting the following 
. . . 

 
Is the amendment agreed? 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 and 5 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division and bill read a third time. 
 

Yeas – 32 
 
Birkbeck Taylor Andrew 
Berntson Lane Sandberg 
McLeod Klein Katzman 
Schoenhals Boutin Hampton 
Weiman Bacon Hodgins 
Sutor Sveinson Sauder 
Glauser Parker Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Hopfner Rybchuk Young 
Gerich Domotor Maxwell 
Embury Dirks Folk 
Morin Myers Zazenlenchuk 
 



 
November 23, 1982 
 

 
1022 

Nays – 6 
 
Blakeney Thompson Lingenfelter 
Koskie Shillington Yew 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:19 p.m. 
 


