






















































Hansard: December 14, 1982


1727 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 14, 1982 

 
 

EVENING SESSION 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to repeal The Land Bank Act and to make Certain Temporary Provisions 
for Lessees 

 
HON. MR. GARNER: — This is Mr. Jim Webster sitting at my right. John Hoffort is sitting 
immediately behind me to Mr. Hepworth’s right, and two Legislative Secretaries who are just very 
qualified and talented. 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. ENGEL: — This is interesting how much stress a government has decided to place in moving the 
land bank into the second row, but I am pleased to see the Minister of Highways is going to tackle this 
bill. He is the one now who is going to be wearing the uniform of the chief executioner and is going to 
be doing the honors that, according to the minister, are going to be applauded by the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, if the Tory government feels that the land bank legislation wasn’t fulfilling a purpose, and if the 
Tory government feels that their loans program is going to fill the gap and stand in the gap and take care 
of the land transfers from the young farmers who are on the land that’s coming up, that’s fine. The bill 
that’s before the House would then repeal The Land Bank Act and transfer the leases into the lands 
branch under the able leadership that department officials have given it in that area. I think the 
government would be doing some of the things they promised, and we in the opposition would say just 
so that the tenants are taken care of and just so that the lease contracts are taken care of, we’d feel that 
you are doing what you promised and the lessees would have a long-term contract. But I don’t think, 
listening to the statements of your minister . . . I feel that this is quite irresponsible of him taking off and 
leaving the legislature early. I really think that you or somebody speaking on his behalf owes us some 
kind of an explanation as to why he thinks these bills can be passed. And we would have to refrain from 
asking him particular questions on pieces of legislation that he called hallmark in Saskatchewan’s 
history, pieces of legislation that are second to none in the history of our province. 
 
So, I suppose the first question I would have is: do you feel comfortable that the tenants’ agreement and 
contract that they had, as being transferred into the lands branch, gives them the same degree of security, 
the same assurance on their rent and that the rates they are going to pay are a similar formula as they 
signed? In other words, can you stand up in this House and say, in your sincere, honest way that you 
deliver; that you are not betraying the trust that the tenants had with the Government of Saskatchewan 
when they signed their contract; that you actually aren’t tearing up their leases; that they’re going to be 
as good under the new bank that they’re in (instead of being in the land bank, they’ll be in the lands 
branch), but they’ll be just as secure as they were before? Can you stand up and assure the House that 
that is the case? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes, quite correctly. And just the set the member straight for the  



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1728 

evening’s proceedings, everything that I do state I believe is honesty. I hope members opposite can say 
the same about themselves. And, yes, it is definitely better because now they can buy their farmland; 
they don’t have to wait five years. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — If it’s going to be so much better for them and if there’s nothing to worry about, why 
do you suppose nearly 1,000 of them got all excited and came in here to check? What do you suppose 
motivated them? Why do you think they feel that they’re being left out in the cold with this new 
contract? What is your answer to: the most people that in my memory ever donned the steps of this 
building on one exclusive issue, the most times they’re in? I grant you that there have been more people 
around on these ground before. There have been larger demonstrations, but not on single group that just 
represented farmers, and where the farmers came along and took time to drive in here. Surely they must 
have been worrying about something. There must have been something that was bothering them. What 
do you suppose they were worried about? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, there were about 300 land bank tenants supposedly here 
the other day. And I imagine one of the main reasons they were here . . . I don’t want to belabor this 
point, and I would like the proceedings to run as smoothly as possible tonight, but once again, you 
know, it’s another scare tactic by the NDP. They terrified the senior citizens on medicare in ’78; they’re 
trying to scare them again in 1982. This government isn’t concerned about scaring people; we’re 
concerned about caring for people and helping young farmers buy their land. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — You call it a scare tactic. Right off the top — why the title of the bill? If you’re not 
trying to scare the farmers why would you call the bill “certain temporary provisions,” if you are saying 
that this is the cure and that the tenants’ agreement is engraved in stone, that it won’t be changed, that if 
they want to rent they can rent in perpetuity and pass it on to generations to come? Why are you saying 
that to make . . . (inaudible) . . . Why didn’t you say an act to repeal The Land Bank Act and to transfer 
the leases in to the lands branch? Why not just a straightforward title? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, for the member opposite’s information, certain temporary provisions 
for lessees are now going to enable many young land bank farmers in the province of Saskatchewan to 
buy their own farm, courtesy of the Devine government. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — How many farmers would you say were in that position prior to the introduction of 
this bill that had land bank leases and could have bought their land if they wanted to? How many people 
are we talking about? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — For the member’s information, Mr. Chairman, as of December 31, 19S1, 
about 1,151 tenants were eligible to buy back their farms that they had rented from the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Well, I think to point it out further, that in 10 years, 10 years, Mr. Chairman, only 
approximately 152 farmers had bought that land. I don’t call that a very responsible program by the 
previous administration. We are expecting results that will snowball the results of the NDP. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Well, I’m supposed to hide my face in shame. I’m supposed to hide my face in 
shame. Well, I’ll do that for 30 seconds, Mr. Chairman. Thirty seconds is sufficient because, Mr. 
Minister, you just told me that 1,181 were eligible, so before that time you’d add 152 to that and you 
would have 1,333; 1,333 were eligible before the purchase. Out of those 1,333, 152 decided that you 
were right that they were going to purchase. Doesn’t that tell you something? Don’t you hear that? 
 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1729 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes, it tells me something, and it tells me that you had a hell of a poor record 
in selling land back to the people of Saskatchewan. You’re doing nothing more than building up a state 
monopoly for yourself. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I don’t need to use quite that colorful and descriptive language as the minister does, 
but let me get on to selling back to the tenant some of this land. 
 
What about the home quarter; what kind of a deal was available for him to purchase the quarter he was 
living on? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — There was a rebate of $5,000 over five years on the home quarter, but for the 
member’s information our mortgage rebate program does also apply to the home quarter. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Will you repeat that last sentence? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — The mortgage interest reduction program applies to the home quarter. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — On the former program how much of a discount would he get? Let’s say that quarter 
was wroth $100,000 at the assessed price, what would the purchaser have to pay for that quarter under 
the old program, before the election took place? When these 1,181 people were eligible to buy land, 
what was available to them in interest reductions on the home quarter? . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Okay, using your scenario of $100,000, he would still have to pay $100,000 
for the home quarter. This was previous to April 26. And he would get back $1,000 a year for five years, 
but not till the end of five years. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, under your new program what do you intend to sell land back to the 
tenants for? What are you going to determine is going to be the price for a quarter of land? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — We intend to sell it back to the young farmers of Saskatchewan at a fair 
market value. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — That’s quite different than was discussed by your party when you were sitting over on 
this side of the House. That is quite a different story. 
 
I want to quote from the treasurer, for example, Mr. Andrew: 
 

I have a question for you, Mr. Minister, with regard to the brief presented to the government by 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture on April 14 . . . 
 



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1730 

Be it resolved that the provincial government amend the necessary legislation which would 
permit the land bank to sell land to the son or daughter at the price originally paid by the father 
or the mother. 
 
I think that concern has been raised in this House — where a person, perhaps the father, uses it 
as a transfer vehicle to the son or daughter. Five years down the road, when it is time for them to 
by the land back, the equivalent interest rate which you are charging will be around 60 per cent 
to 70 per cent with the increased price of land. 
 
I think the federation of agriculture is saying that perhaps you should be selling it at the price for 
which it was originally purchased plus a fair rate of interest — perhaps the same rate that farm 
credit is charging, or something else. 
 
Is your government looking at that proposal? Is there any chance we could see a change in the 
legislation as it relates to land bank? Could we move in this direction so that we’re not seeing 
these people who are trying to get a start in farming through a land bank vehicle (perhaps it’s the 
only vehicle available to them), paying loan sharking interest rates when they buy out? 

 
How come the big change by the Minister of Finance and by your government? 
 
I am quoting from April 21 of Hansard, page 2351. 
 
My question is: in light of your informing the farmers throughout Saskatchewan that you are introducing 
a $350,000 loan program, and you are going to sell them the land back what their mothers and fathers 
got, plus a reasonable rate of interest, how come you changed your mind? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Okay. The information the officials give me is that the individuals already 
. . . The value of the lease over 10 years would be approximately $187 an acre; taking into effect a $200 
price would bring that current market value of that land up to maybe $387 on an individual case. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I beg to differ with the minister. You take your last will and testament of The Land 
Bank Act, the annual report, 1981, and 10-year-old land was $53 an acre. I’d like you to calculate that 
one for me. If you’re taking the interest for 10 years, take $53 an acre; that’s what it was 10 years ago. 
You can’t take 10 years if you take a new price. Try and get that one up to $300. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — We could stand here all night and go through evaluations. I’m quite prepared 
to, if you will engage in a little bit of concentration. I have given you the opportunity to ask me the 
question; please be courteous enough to allow me the opportunity to answer. Is that not fair enough? 
Okay. 
 
The land bank has bought land anywhere from $53 an acre to $400 an acre. How many of these 
examples do you want us to give you? Right from $53, $54, etc., right up to $400 or $500? I gave you 
the example of $200 and the $187 an acre value of lease over 10 years — one example. How many more 
do you want? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, if you’re going to give me $200 an acre, that land will first 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1731 

 be purchased in 1989 . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — ’79. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — That’s in ’79 it was $200 an acre, so the purchaser isn’t going to buy it, and you’re 
projecting me to 1989. I’m saying what he’s going to buy now — the land he is buying today. You’re 
only paying interest on one year at $200 an acre. Ten years ago the price was $53 an acre; I asked you 
what that parcel of land would be worth. One simple question; give me a simple answer. Calculate $53 
an acre for 10 years. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, I mean, I gave you the one example, and I guess we’re going to come 
back down to the bottom line, that we’re going to sell it at fair market value. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — So, in other words, the members who got involved in this debate which included Mr. 
Andrew and the Speaker and different ones who were involved . . . You are saying to them that the word 
that they gave the farmers out in the country isn’t worth the powder to blow it up. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, I think we come right back to who we believe the farmers of 
Saskatchewan (I believe) trust. I believe they trust the Progressive Conservative Government of 
Saskatchewan. We are going to sell that land to them at fair market value. They are going to have the 
opportunity to purchase this land because of a Conservative government, not because of an NDP land 
bank program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — We’re back, Mr. Chairman, to the basic question of why there were 1,000 people on 
the steps yesterday; why there were 1,000 people on the steps yesterday. The point I’ve been raising is 
that you weren’t in this House just one . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! Order! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, on April 21, before the session was adjourned and we called an 
election, just prior to the session, the member for Moosomin got into the debate. 
 

You have a very regressive program in this land bank program . . . There was a suggestion by the 
member for Rosetown-Elrose (and I’m quoting from him on page 2356) that you take the huge 
profit you’re making now on the sale of land bank and use that to help new farmers, or the 
farmers who have leases which are up in five years, to buy their land. Let me put it to you this 
way: when you remove an individual’s ability to accumulate capital, you’ve removed his right to 
ownership. How can he improve? The government is profiteering on the number one resource in 
this province (40 per cent of the arable land for agriculture in Saskatchewan, he said, and the 
government is profiteering in the province of Saskatchewan on agricultural land) through that 
regressive land bank program. 

 
And here the minister’s saying he’s picking it up right where we left off, and he’s selling it for that price. 
I’m saying you made a commitment to the farmers of Saskatchewan to sell it to them for what their 
mothers and fathers get — especially in the family transition and I think you’d better keep the 
commitment. That’s what the people are  



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1732 

trusting you to do. 
 
If you calculate $53 an acre parcel of land with the interest rate over 10 years, it comes to about $79. 
And I think that’s what you promised you’d pay them; and you sell it to them at 8 per cent interest. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, I think there’s a big difference. The member states about the 1,000 
members that were in here on the steps the other day. His mathematics are a little different than mine 
and, I believe, the members of the media. We’re looking at our new farm purchase program to help in 
the first 15 months 3,500 people buy and own their own land in the province of Saskatchewan. And 
those are facts and figures that are positive, and a new direction for people to own their own land. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Highways is echoing the same hollow words, and he’ll 
get the same response from the farmers as the minister did when he was out on the step talking to them. 
When he talked about “You can trust us,” I didn’t hear very much applause. I was out on the steps 
yesterday, and I listened, and I didn’t hear a great big thumping applause for the minister saying, “Trust 
us,” when the farmers were coming in and saying, “You’re tearing up our lease.” 
 
I’m just going to ask one more question and I’m going to turn it over to our caucus chairman. Have you 
got a legal person in the province, somebody who is a lawyer? Our leader of our party talked about that. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How about Lane or Andrew? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — It can even be Lane or Andrew. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! Let’s hear the member’s question. The minister can’t hear the 
member’s question. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you. If we have to keep this up to get through for three more hours, it’s going 
to be hard on my vocal cords. Does the minister have a legal opinion that he can cite for me that the 
press or anybody (with the document we had in with Hansard) that we can relate to the farmers that they 
have some security of tenure under these new provisions that are so temporary under the temporary 
provisions for the lessees? Have you a legal opinion that talks about what rights have they got, say, 
under section 4? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Regarding your question as to whether we have a legal opinion on section 4, 
I would like to inform the member opposite that it was the legal profession that drew this bill up. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — You’re not kidding anybody, Mr. Minister. We know that. But the legal profession 
drew it up from a point of view saying that the farmers are a bunch of peasants; they are a bunch of 
dudes. Those are the words you used. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You said that. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I never once used those words about the farmers. The Minister of Agriculture stood in 
this House and he called the farmers “peasants” and “dudes,” and  



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1733 

they don’t matter. Now, I now you got a legal opinion to draw up this bill, but I ask what kind of a legal 
opinion you had that gives these farmers some protection. The legal opinion I wanted to know is . . . I’d 
like at least one ounce of legal opinion that tells us that these farmers have some protection in this bill. 
You have protection as a minister; your staff have protection. Your staff have protection; anybody 
working for the crown has protection in a right. But show me where the farmer has one ounce of 
protection. 
 
Don’t talk so loud; you’re making me shout. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, for the hon. member’s information, we’ll go to section 8, where I 
believe it does give that lessee some protection. This clause assures the lessee that the government will 
honor the length of the lease to age 65 and, secondly, the right to assign that lease to a family member. 
 
We can go into name calling, and you can say what the Minister of Agriculture has stated. I have never 
heard him in this Assembly condemn the farmers of Saskatchewan or call them peasants. Maybe the 
members opposite have. The Minister of Agriculture in the province of Saskatchewan has the highest 
respect for all the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Just in general terms, and before we get to section 8, when I read section 8, I see the 
roll-over provisions there. I see the roll-over provisions there, but I also see provisions there that you 
could lease it to somebody else, while he’s holding the lease. Read section 8. You’ve made provisions 
there that you could lease that land to somebody else. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — I don’t know where you’re finding these sections, but 8(2)(a) simply means 
to continue leasing the land. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says we should be dealing with section 8, but a portion of 
this bill, a section in this bill, he insists says the lessee can continue to lease the land that he now has. 
And that’s true in section 8; it does say that. But it gives no guarantee that the lessee is going to be able 
to continue to lease that land at the present rate of lease or rental that he’s paying. There is nothing in 
this bill whatsoever that says that the lessee will be paying, as is in his agreement, a rental based on the 
productivity of that land. Is the minister prepared to put into this bill a section that will guarantee that the 
lessee can continue to lease that land on a productive basis, as has been provided for until now? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — I just have some more information on you . . . I mean on that for you, but 
basically it states in there (I mean, if you can read) that the terms and conditions of leases held by 
persons in respect of crown land on the day this section comes into force continue in effect to the extent 
that they permit the lessee to continue leasing the land. How much plainer do you . . . 
 
I’ve got some further information for you. Just a minute. There is no provision in the present act right 
now. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — The contract that the lessees have at this point states what their rental is going to be. 
Be it the 5 per cent on some of the original ones or the productive rental formula on the later ones. So 
they know what it is going to cost them on that lease. In this bill, now they can continue to lease that 
parcel of land, but there is no guarantee whatsoever that they will be able to continue at the present 
rental rate that they have. It could go up to $30 or $40 an acre. There is nothing are that guarantees that 
they can continue to lease that land at the same rate as they were enjoying till now. 
 



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1734 

HON. MR. GARNER: — That is simply made under regulation and the previous administration 
brought in many pieces of legislation the same way. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, that is fine to say on other pieces of legislation. We are talking about 
The Land Bank Act and the repeal of The Land Bank Act through Bill 46. And the lessees had that in 
their contract. 
 
Now, if the minister says this is going to be provided in regulations, this is fine. But none of the lessees 
know that. We don’t know that by looking at this act What is the minister prepared to do at this time to 
provide some protection for those lessees, and to assure that they don’t have anything to worry about? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — The contract is made on the basis of regulations as it is today. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, if the minister says that their contracts are based on regulations, in 
those regulations is specifies certain things regarding the lease; in their contract it specifies what they are 
going to pay. Why doesn’t the minister put into this act that they are going to honor all the contracts as 
they have been drawn up in the past for any lessees who currently hold land bank land; that they will be 
able to continue with their agreements that they have made previously? Why not put that in this act that 
all lessees will enjoy and be able to continue with the agreements that they have without any changes to 
them? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Once again for the member’s information, the regulations are set by order in 
council. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — As my colleague mentioned, that is the trouble. The order in council that leaves 
everything to the discretion of the minister to decide what the regulations are going to be, what the rental 
is going to be — that is where everything is left. And that is where the problem comes into this bill. 
“The regulations” is stated in different sections of the bill. Everything is set by regulations; section 15, if 
you want to go to specific sections, but I’m not going to do that. 
 
In this bill everything is left to regulations, and nothing in this bill provides any protection for the lessee. 
Now, if the minister would put into the bill a section that says, “All leases to this point that have been in 
agreement with land bank and the lessee will be honored as they have in the past and there will be no 
changes made whatsoever to the agreements between the crown and the lessee” — is the minister 
prepared to do that? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — The regulations, number one, will determine the formula for the rental rate. 
And, since the member seems to be quite hung up on regulations, I remember being in this Assembly 
when the beef stabilization bill was brought forward, and we asked for many hours, for many days: 
where were the regulations? “We haven’t got them. We haven’t got them,” was the reply from the 
government then. So, don’t try and dump the monkey back on me. You birds did. You did it; you set the 
precedent. Don’t call me . . . don’t use me as scapegoat. Regulations will come in due course. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, it appears that every time the minister gets into a bit of a bind he 
right now goes to something other than Bill 46. He talks about the beef  



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1735 

stabilization plan or he talks about just any act that you can find that this government may have passed 
over the past 10 years, but he totally ignores the question that is being asked on Bill 46. The statements 
that have been made by members that are presently sitting on that side of the House have been totally 
contradictory to what they are saying today, what they are saying in the act that they are passing. 
 
Now, if there is any integrity in any of those people on that side of the House, they would go to the land 
bank lessees and say, “Look, we always said that you should be purchasing your land at what it costs the 
government, and we are going to continue to do that.” But that is not happening. They said one thing 
when they were in opposition, but when they are in government that no longer applies. Now, I can only 
say to the minister that if there is any integrity in your office then you should be doing and proposing in 
this legislation exactly what you were saying when you were in opposition. Are you prepared to give 
these lessees some protection? Protection similar to what they had until you decided to repeal The Land 
Bank Act? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Under section 67 (l), for the member’s information opposite. I will read you 
the regulations they have put in place. 
 

Establishing a formula to be used by the commission in calculating rents and other consideration 
for commission land, chattels or improvements which formula shall take into account the 
productive capacity of the land, marketability of the crops, value of land, interest rates and such 
other factors as (now please listen) the Lieutenant Governor in Council considers relevant and 
advisable. 

 
Don’t dump it on me. You did it first. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — That’s right, it’s in there. And that is part of their agreement. That is part of their 
agreement. It specifies in their agreement what they are going to pay. They knew what the regulations 
were when they made their agreement with the land bank commission. But they do not know what the 
regulations are when they are going to have to accept Bill 46 and the repeal of The Land Bank Act. They 
do not know what the regulations are when they go to whatever department this land is going to go to. 
That is the question. Are you prepared to put into this legislation, or to propose or introduce regulations 
that will let these lessees know exactly what it is going to cost them and what formula is going to be 
used to determine their rental rates? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am going to read to you a bit from the contract from 
the Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission long-term agriculture lease and improvement purchase 
agreement. And I have my own comments on that purchase agreement when I see only about 152 
farmers that purchased their land to date, under the NDP administration. We got to section 25: 
 

This agreement shall be subject to The Land Bank Act and regulations as amended from time to 
time, and the said act and regulations are embodied in and form a part of this agreement. 

 
Now, maybe I can explain it to the member opposite. In every government there is an Executive Council 
which means the cabinet. The cabinet pass orders in council and regulations. They meet on the second 
floor, right beside the Premier’s office. That is where regulations are made or changed. It’s right in the 
contractual agreement that the NDP government had put out. It’s there, in place, and you are 
condemning me for not  



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1736 

having regulations here today? 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, the minister can read parts of that agreement. He can read parts of 
that agreement and not read the total agreement or what the individual lessee had, the agreement that he 
had with the land bank commission. Now every lessee knows what this rate was going to be. He was 
advised so by letter. He had an appeal process that he could use if he wasn’t satisfied with it. He was 
informed as to what it was going to be. There were not regulations that were changed by cabinet every 
Tuesday, or whatever time they would happen to meet — Wednesday as this cabinet does, fine. They 
may change their dates as they are a little late with everything. But it still applies that there has to be 
some form of information sent out to the lessees to inform them as to what they are going to pay. 
 
Now this government to this point, at least I am not aware of it, has not sent any letters or any kind of 
information to the lessees stating what they are going to be paying or what regulations they are going to 
be governed by when this act is repealed. The least that the government could have done was to inform 
them how they’re going to be affected by this bill, and just what they are prepared to do to guarantee 
that it is not going to put them in a position where they can not continue to farm their land, where the 
rates will not go so high that they can not continue to farm their land, where the rates will not go so high 
that they would have to relinquish their leases and turn them back to the crown. This has not been done 
by the government and I am saying that this is what this government should be doing. They should at 
least notify the lessees as to what intentions they have regarding their leases, their rental rates, and how 
long they can continue to hold that lease without having to give it up. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well I’ll try to explain it to the hon. member opposite once more. Here we 
have a copy of a long-term agricultural lease and improvement purchase agreement. Anyone obtaining 
land bank land has to sign one of these; there aren’t 10 different ones. Now we’re going to go to section 
25, and I want the member to listen carefully. I’m trying to convince him. 
 

This agreement shall be subject to The Land Bank Act and regulations as amended from time to 
time. 

 
You didn’t draw anything, and it wasn’t cut in stone or drawn in blood. You had the regulations there on 
the legal document; the information on the legal document that the regulations would be changed from 
time to time. Don’t blame us. Don’t blame us. I didn’t see the regulations on the table when you 
introduced the beef stabilization bill. Once again, when we have the contractual agreement and The 
Land Bank Act, and regulations, “as amended from time to time,” it doesn’t mean they were set forever. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — In that lease it was however, set for a certain period of time. To begin with it was 
three years, I believe or whatever it was. At three to five years they had a guarantee as to what it was 
going to cost them for a number of years without that lease being increased. Now it was set, now from 
time to time they could look at changing the amount of the rent on it. The lessee knew how many years 
he was going to have that lease at a set rate. He knew when it would be up for renewal or for change. He 
would be informed of what the amount of the new rate would be if there was an increase, or if there was 
a decrease he would be informed of it. He had an avenue by which he could appeal that decision. None 
of that exists in this bill. 
 
Now at least some of that could be given to the lessee. This government could provide 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1737 

some of that protection for him so the lessee would know exactly what is going to be happening with his 
lease. But that is not being done, so it doesn’t matter how many times the minister continues to read 
portions of that lease without really telling the people what it totally contained in that lease and what 
protection the lessee has from that lease. He totally ignores that. He continues to go on all kinds of 
statements: the farmers should trust us; they should buy their land; and now they will be able to buy 
their land under bill 45 which has nothing to do with Bill 46. They will be able to own it. I suppose the 
question would be then: when will these farmers own that land? They can buy it, but it will be 15, 20 or 
25 years before they can possibly own that land. 
 
They had a better deal under land bank. They could buy it after five years. They had to make a 
commitment to become a farmer. An after five years they could buy it. But none of them, very few of 
them decided to buy because the majority of them realized that renting from land bank was a far better 
deal than they could possibly get by trying to own that land and trying to get the money — be it from 
farm credit or any other financial institution. They couldn’t come close to being able to borrow enough 
money at a low enough interest rate to own that land as what they were able to get from land bank and 
continue to farm that land and make a profit on it. And make a profit on it. This was the key. These 
lessees knew that they could continue to farm. They could make a profit on it, and if they had some 
money to spare, there was always some other land available that they could go and buy and add to their 
unit. This was what they enjoyed. 
 
But that is not being provided for them now. Now, they cannot even go and buy extra land other than 
land bank land that they may be leasing. They are forced (and I say forced) by this government to buy 
land bank land that they may be leasing before they can get any benefits from this government. What 
they are doing then is putting that big hand of government, that big majority that they feel that they show 
that they have, and they are going to destroy many of those young farmers out there and create nothing 
more than big farmers and a lot fewer farmers than what we have today. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, okay. We’ll deal with two or three parts here, Mr. Chairman. First of 
all, I think many of the farmers in Saskatchewan, and especially the young farmers in Saskatchewan, are 
looking forward to purchasing their own farm. You call that a problem? I know many young farmers in 
my constituency who are very pleased with our new program. It’s a positive step. Instead of the 
government building up a great big land bank program to grab . . . And I might just add for the hon. 
member that I know many specific cases where land bank forced up the price of land in my constituency 
and all over the province of Saskatchewan. A young farmer, in many cases, was bidding against land 
bank in order to try and add to his operation. So in essence what was happening? He was having to bid 
against his own tax dollars to expand his farming unit. You maybe call that fair; the farmers in my 
constituency say that’s not fair. That’s bad pool I won’t say you’re dishonest. I don’t believe you are 
dishonest. But I believe there is some shadow of doubt as to your real intent with the land bank program. 
 
Further on, the rent was set previously by regulation under the old act. It will be set by regulations under 
the new act as well. Mr. Berntson, in the Chamber, December 13, 1982, replying to a question from Mr. 
Engel: 
 

Mr. Speaker, again, and I go slow (and I see why), and I’ll try to keep it in monosyllables. I said 
the rents for 1983 will see zero increase. 

 
Now there are positive steps, a positive statement by the Minister of Agriculture: The  



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1738 

previous rental structure was set by regulation under the old act; it will be set by regulation under the 
new act. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, the minister reads a statement that the Minister of Agriculture made a 
couple of days ago, or whenever it was, that the rents for the 1983 would not be going up; they would 
remain the same. Well, I’m sure all those lessees who have long-term loans are real happy about that, 
one year that their lease rates will not be going up. But there is no other guarantee that they will not go 
up in 1984. And if you look at the price of grain, if you use the productive formula, those rates should 
probably be going down a little rather than staying static. But that is not what is happening. They say 
that they will maintain them at the level that they are now, and they won’t be going up for ’83. But in 
’84, ’85, or ’86, or up to 1990, if you should be fortunate enough to be able to hang onto that lease, there 
is no guarantee that those rates will not escalate. That, Mr. Chairman, is what this government is saying. 
 
The minister goes back into what was in The Land Bank Act or what may not have been in there, and 
that land bank was escalating the price of land. In your words, Mr. Minister, you said that land bank was 
competing or bidding against individuals for purchase of land. Land bank didn’t go out there and bid 
against any land. Land bank was in Regina. If somebody applied to them to sell land, they made them an 
offer. They made them only one offer, and that individual could take it or refuse it, and they were never 
contacted again. No one was given more than one offer, and there was no competition with land bank 
and individuals. 
 
Again the minister somehow was trying to say that maybe somehow I, or some other members of the 
former government, may have been a little dishonest or whatever. Well, I wouldn’t want to say that this 
present government is dishonest either. I wouldn’t even want to suggest that, Mr. Chairman. But one 
would have to question what it being said in Bill 45 and Bill 46 and wonder whether what this 
government is saying is really true, whether they are totally honest with the individuals that these bills 
are going to affect. And, Mr. Chairman, I would say that I don’t think they are being totally honest, 
because they are not making it clear as to how these bills, especially Bill 46, are going to affect the 
individuals who have land bank land. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, once again, we’ll try again. Rent is established by regulation under 
The Provincial Lands Act. This has been the case ever since 1930. Land branch lessees are presently 
paying lower rent than land bank lessees. Now, are you telling me that this system is not good, it’s not 
working, and yet they’re paying a lower rate than the land bank? Is this what you’re telling me? 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, when you try to compare lands branch to land bank, this may be fine. 
But you’re comparing agricultural cultivated productive land to pasture land. Now, if you’re doing that, 
I can understand why thousands of acres in the south would be a lot cheaper than some good productive 
land in the north or central part of the province. Let’s talk about the same quality, the same productive 
land, in the central part, the northern part, or the south. And then tell me if lands branch land is that 
much cheaper. If it is, then I’m sure that you’ll be willing to put into this act, or to tell the public that 
you are going to be renting these agricultural cultivated leases to the lessees at the cheaper rate of lands 
branch contracts. If you are going to do that, I am sure that these land bank lessees would be very 
pleased to hear you tell them that they are going to be enjoying even cheaper rates under lands branch, 
according to your opinion, than they have been till now. Tell them that. 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1739 

HON. MR. GARNER: — What we’re tying to point out . . . I think the farmers in Saskatchewan 
understand it; it’s the members opposite that are having a bit of difficulty. We’re trying to bring some 
consistency between the lands branch lease and the land bank lease. We’re trying to bring some 
consistency into scope here. And for the hon. member’s information, he was saying we’re comparing 
apples and oranges, or whatever phrase he used. Right now there’s 350,000 cultivated acres under lands 
branch. Now, I mean, I don’t think we’re comparing apples and oranges. Cultivated acres: that means 
workable land, not land that cows walk on and graze on — cultivated land. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, there are a good number of cultivated leases under lands branch; it’s 
true, there are. But, are you telling me that the leases, or the formula applied to lands branch cultivated 
leases, are so different from land bank cultivated lease rentals, that there is that large a variation between 
the amount that the lands branch lessee is paying on a cultivated lease, as what the land bank lessee is a 
paying on a cultivated lease? If we’re going to compare cultivated leases, let’s compare cultivated 
leases, and not pasture leases. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, they’re basically under the same formula, but they’re based on a 
different year, and that’s where we’re trying to bring some consistency through for both sides. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — I wouldn’t object to that, Mr. Chairman If the minister is saying that all they are 
going to do with this act is to just move the formula to a more current year when they set the rate for a 
lease, that they will be using a slightly more current year in assessing that formula than has been used 
through land bank before, then fine, I would not object to that. Let’s use the rate of 1982, or the formula 
based on 1982 prices and then set that rate for the lessee. If we’re going to do that, that’s fine. I don’t 
think anybody would object. But that is not stated anywhere. 
 
And if the minister says that this is what they’re going to be doing through regulations, I would like to 
hear him say that and put it on record, that all they are going to do through regulations is just maybe 
move that formula that has been used that was maybe a year, a year and one-half behind — move it up 
to a more current formula. If they are going to do that, that’s fine. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — What we’re basically saying is that we want to bring them both in line and 
bring about a reasonable rent for both types of leases. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, when you change the formula in the 
lands branch to calculate the leases, what is your base line? How do you adjust the rental rate on lands 
branch land today? Let me just back up one step so I can give you a fair question to answer. What’s the 
difference between the rent on a half section of land, a cultivated parcel of land from lands branch, from 
last year to this year? What change is being affected on their rate that is being announced, on a 
grain-cultivated lease? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — As it was before, we had the same formula for land bank and lands branch. 
These will all be coming down in regulations in due course. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — That’s not what I asked the minister. I asked the minister: if there is a half-section 
parcel, say it’s in the R.M. 100 (or any number at all), but a half section of land  



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1740 

that was being rented in this particular R.M. for the year ’81-82, and now the new lease is calculated and 
the notices will be going out saying what the rent will be for this coming spring, for the first half of the 
year. What is the difference in price between last year’s rental rate and this year’s rental rate, in lands 
branch? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — If nothing is done to correct the formula, they will go up approximately 15 
per cent. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, on what basis are you calculating that, that there would be an increase 
of 15 per cent if the price of wheat last year was a total of $7.50 and this year it’s $4.50? What 
indication is there in that lands branch formula that would indicate a 15 per cent increase? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — One will be based on 1980 and the other one would be based on 1983. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — What happens with ’81 and ’82? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Okay. Mr. Chairman, 1982 rent prices were based on 1980 grain prices. 
Follow me? 1983 rent would be based on 1981 grain prices. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — You’re not answering my question. When the price of grain jumped and took that 
escalation to $7 and some a bushel, the next year the rent reflected that increase in price, so they got a 
fairly large increase in the price of their rent. Now, the year they got that increase in the price of the rent, 
the grain fell by 30 per cent. So, consequently, this year when the rent is announced, the price of their 
rental agreement should indicate that that price of grain came down by 30 per cent. The farmers all over 
Saskatchewan are expecting a reduction in their rent this year because of the large drop in the price of 
grain. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Just to clarify it for the member, the lands branch was the former scenario 
that I gave you. I’ll read you once again . . . I mean, Mr. Chairman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
that will be announced in regulations. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Is the minister saying that he’s tearing up the contracts for the lands branch tenants as 
well? This bill says, “To repeal The Land Bank Act.” But what are you doing with the lands branch? 
There are 350,000 cultivated acres of lands branch land. Are you tearing up their contracts as well? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, once again, the minister has stated that for 1983 there will be a zero 
increase. What we’re trying to do is bring this up so that we are consistent on both leases. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I’m aware of what you’re trying to do, and I know the government wants to get their 
dirty, little, muddy fingers into the pockets of the farmers, and now they’ve moved into the lands branch 
pockets as well. I didn’t know that. I didn’t know you want to get your sticky little fingers into the lands 
branch pockets as well. And a zero increase is a 25 per cent increase in rent, because the contract that 
they had, if it followed the price of grain . . . You know, as a farmer, that the price of grain in Wilkie is 
just as low as it is in Rockglen or Assiniboia or in Gravelbourg or in Shaunavon. The price of grain 
came down from $7 plus a bushel to $4.50, which is a 30 per cent increase, but it you calculate the other 
grains in it, the farmers were expecting a 20 to 25 per cent decrease in their rent. 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1741 

That was in their contract, and the lands branch were expecting that. The lands branch were expecting 
that. Now, if you’re saying the increase is zero, you’re giving them a 25 per cent increase. And the land 
bank people are up in the air about that, but if the lands branch people had known that, Regina wouldn’t 
have been big enough to hold them all, let alone the legislative grounds. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, once again we will try it again; you know what I mean. I could read 
you part of the contractual agreement. What we are trying to do is bring consistency in between lands 
branch and land bank land. Zero per cent increase for 1982. The minister has stated that. I have stated it 
about five or six times. The regulations will be coming out in due course. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Minister, you have never yet answered the question that the price of the rent is 
calculated on the basis of their income. Is that the case or isn’t it? Is that going to be in your new 
regulation, or how are you changing it? What are you doing to change the regulation so that you can 
hold the rent as high as it was when the price of wheat was over $7 a bushel? That’s what the farmers 
want to know. You are charging them the same rate as if we were getting $7 a bushel for our grain, and 
we are only getting $4.30. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — You know, the farmers will know, Mr. Chairman, as soon as we can get this 
bill passed. The member talks about having sticky little fingers. Well, that’s his problem. That’s not 
ours. We don’t want to put our fingers in anyone’s pocket because somebody should slap them And on 
April 26, Mr. Chairman, the people of Saskatchewan did slap their sticky little fingers and shot them out 
of office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, the regulations are not here. I have stated they are coming in 
due course. The people of Saskatchewan showed on April 26 they had an awful lot more confidence in 
the Progressive Conservative Party to administer their affairs than they did have in the NDP 
government. I think the jury was out; it came in; they lost; we won. If you want to blame someone, I 
think that the people of Saskatchewan made a wise choice. We are moving toward selling land to young 
farmers, not buying it away from them, renting it from cradle to grave. We want to sell land bank to 
young farmers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — That would be all fine and dandy, Mr. Chairman, and on the land purchase bill that 
the people so sorrowly inherited just before supper that was what the intent of that piece of legislation 
was. We are not now dealing with land purchase. We are talking about people that thought they had a 
long-term agreement. Some of the longest-term agreements in Saskatchewan are agreements that were 
administered by the capable and able Department of Agriculture called the lands branch. Everybody in 
Saskatchewan trusts the land branch. Everybody knows that if lands branch has an agreement that is 
calculating the price of their rent on the basis of income, that that should be adjusted according to the 
income. 
 
The question I have for the minister is: did the price since the last adjustment of grain go up and down? 
It’s as simple as that. You shouldn’t have any trouble answering that question. Since the last agreement 
was adjusted on $7 a bushel of wheat, what are you going to do when the wheat is at $4.50 a bushel? 



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1742 

HON. MR. GARNER: — To answer your question, that will be established by regulation when we get 
this bill passed. And the hon. member had stated about the confidence people of Saskatchewan have in 
the lands branch. I agree with you. I have a great deal of confidence in them And, guess what? That’s 
where the land bank land is going. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — We’re happy about that, that you are putting it into that department. What I’m trying 
to establish is: are you changing the regulations for lands branch? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Once again. Everything isn’t yes or no. I mean you take that in kindergarten. 
My little five-year-old daughter is taking yes and no right now. What I’m trying to explain to you is, 
we’re trying to make things consistent between land bank and lands branch. This will come forth in 
regulations in due course. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — The question I will repeat until I get an answer. Are you changing the regulations to 
present lessees that they hold in the lands branch? Not bank, branch. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — That will come forward in regulations in due course. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, I’m going to ask this question till I get an answer. Are you changing 
the regulations that presently exist in the lands branch? You haven’t answered that question yet. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — The regulations have not be set yet, Mr. Chairman. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — There have been regulations in place for lands branch. Lands branch tenants thought 
they had a long-term lease agreement. Is that lease agreement being changed? Are you changing 
regulations that affect the long-term agreement on the lands branch cultivated land? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — It has been set and it can be changed by regulation. The regulations are not 
here and will be coming in due course. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — So the minister is afraid to admit, Mr. Chairman, that he is changing the contracts that 
the lands branch tenants have. He’s saying that there are new regulations coming in that are going to 
affect the leases. If he’s afraid to say it, I will say it. I have new question, Mr. Chairman. I have a new 
question. About how many tenants (just the approximate figure; I don’t need the exact number) are we 
talking about who have this 350,000 cultivated acres in lands branch? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Approximately, I mean we don’t have all the agricultural staff here tonight 
. . . I’m sorry; I didn’t know we were going to do agriculture estimates. But approximately 1,200. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Let’s go back to land bank. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — How many were in that category, say two years ago? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Could you tell us what category? We’ll try and peg it down for you. Okay, 
once again, this is only a very rough estimate. It could have been 1,400. They tell me there is 
approximately, and these are approximate figures, 200 fewer to date. 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1743 

MR. ENGEL: — These 200, I gather, were purchased since it was advertised that these small parcels 
could be sold? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Some of the land was purchased. Some of the leases were transferred to land 
bank. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Can he give me approximately what percentage went each way? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I mean, I don’t mind dealing with the bill here tonight. We 
only have a couple of members of the agricultural staff. If the hon. member wants to ask these questions 
in agriculture estimates when we have all of the personnel here, we’re quite willing to give him the 
information. We’ve got an open-door government. We proved it today in crown corporations. When the 
televisions cameras came in we didn’t chase them out. Open-door policy of the Progressive 
Conservative government. We’re not trying to hide anything. But we’re not doing agriculture estimates, 
for the member’s information. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I don’t know what the minister is getting so hoppy about. All the point I’m trying to 
make is that . . . If the minister would offer just one iota of co-operation. I had to ask him the same 
question 20 times. And if you think my patience isn’t wearing as thin as his . . . He’s afraid to admit that; 
he’s afraid to admit some simple questions. He’s afraid to admit that they’re planning on changing the 
lease structure for lands branch land as well as land bank land. And you tell me there’s approximately 
1,400. I’m sure that the staff knows about how many of those parcels were sold. That’s all I’m trying to 
determine. Because the farmers aren’t anxious now to buy lands branch land out of the 2,7000. I was 
just trying to determine how many of the 1,200 picked up their option over the last year to buy lands 
branch land. I’m trying to make a valid point that relates to this bill and your farm purchase plan. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, approximately — once again, I hope the hon. member takes this in the 
context that it is given — approximately, and this is a guess, 70. I mean, this is very hard without all the 
additional information to bring forward to the hon. member. I want to co-operate. I don’t want to drag 
this out to 2 o’clock in the morning. But if need be, we can. I mean, it’s up to you. I don’t care. Now, 
I’m giving you the answers: approximately 70, but I mean, once again this is a rough estimate only. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — So the point is established, and it took us an hour and one-half. It took us a long time. 
 
But, the minister is bragging how this new piece of legislation is going to help some numbers of farmers 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, there’s 3,900. There’s 3,900 involved in leasing land today; 2,700 or 
approximate to the land bank, and another 1,200 to me is 3,800 or 3,900 whichever number happens to 
be right (I never did get the answer to that question), plus the amount that bought some land this spring 
when they couldn’t qualify under land bank land and were able to buy some land, so there’s another 200 
there, that don’t qualify. 
 
You’re really going to stir up a lot of new people with the purchase plan. You’re really going to stir up a 
lot of new people, Mr. Chairman. Here we have a bill to destroy the land bank and they’re going around 
laughing; what a wonderful, wonderful program  



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1744 

they’re going to have because only 150-some purchased, and got in there and bought their land. Here we 
have a minister that sits there and says that I’m supposed to let this bill sneak through; pass it off in a 
hurry, and he’s going to announce some regulations that not only affect the land bank tenants. 
 
I was anxious to get the land bank tenants moved into a stable program: the lands branch. And, tonight it 
took us an hour and one-half to find out that the lands branch tenants are in as big a jeopardy as the land 
bank tenants are. They’re no more secure, and they’ve had this land for generations, and generations. 
There has been generations involved. That’s exactly what they did. If you had something to say, where 
were you when we were discussing this bill? How come you were so mum and now all of a sudden they 
want to talk from the seat of their pants, and I think, that’s where they do all their thinking? 
 
There are some serious aspects of this bill that affect the rights of people all over Saskatchewan. You are 
limiting the rights of farmers not only in the land bank like you’re saying here, ”An Act to repeal The 
Land Bank Act and to make Certain Temporary Provisions for Lessees” . . . I finally found out what that 
second line is all about. That’s the kind of trustworthy government we have. I didn’t know till right this 
minute why you’re making certain temporary provisions for lessees, and those lessees are the lands 
branch lessees, not the land bank. Not the land bank. The temporary provisions are for the land bank 
lessees because they now are going to get a new contract as well. They are going to get new rental rates 
as well. And, I would like to have the minister respond to that. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, the member opposite is so confused, he’s even starting to get me a 
little confused. But I’ll hang in there, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The NDP had 11 years to improve their land bank leases. What did they do? Nothing. Regulations 
governing fees, etc., have been in place since 1930 -—the lands branch, pardon me. Lands branch 
regulations have been in place since 1930. Now if it was all so wrong, and all so bad, what took you so 
long to change it? I have stated to you the regulations are coming in due course, as soon as we get this 
bill passed. They are not here. I can’t give them to you. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, what the minister has been saying is that now land bank lessees are 
going to be moved into lands branch. They are going to be moved to the lands branch. What he is saying 
at the same time, what’s very obvious, is that they are going to be governed by new regulations that will 
be set down by this government. And those regulations will also govern lands branch lessees. I think it is 
very obvious that all of a sudden we are going to have a bill that is introduced to repeal The Land Bank 
Act, and at the same time gives this government the power to go changing the total picture regarding 
lands branch. Also they are going to be able to set forward regulations that will govern both land bank 
and lands branch lessees. I think that is where the land bank and lands branch lessees will be finding 
something they are not totally aware of, and it’s going to affect them in a way they will not be expecting. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I see no reason why we should belabor this point, because it appears that this government 
has decided they are going to go ahead with the repeal of The Land Bank Act. They are going to go 
ahead with whatever regulations they come forth with which will affect all the lessees who have crown 
land in this province. They are not going to give those lessees an opportunity through any appeals 
procedure to defend themselves against increases or anything else that may affect them on that land. 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1745 

That is very obvious, Mr. Chairman. This government is going in that direction without any 
consideration whatsoever for those lessees I believe, if that’s the direction they are going into and they 
don’t even want to listen to any of our amendments (we will be putting some forward), I suppose that 
the lessees will be the ones who will decide in the future. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 4 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I can see where the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of Agriculture would love to 
have clause 4 agreed with no discussion and no debate at all. You know if you fellows wouldn’t be in 
such a rush to steam-roll this bill through . . . The other bill is passed. The other bill is law. It’s statute in 
this province. The farmers can get out and borrow the land and do anything they want as far as your bill 
is concerned. There’s no big rush and there would be nothing the matter, Mr. Minister of Health, in 
giving your farmers a chance to talk about section 4 and the heavy arm of the government. We have a 
slight amendment to section 4. I would really like it given serious consideration because here you’re 
tampering with the rights of not only the lessees in land bank but the lessees in the lands branch as well. 
 
These certain temporary provisions affect a lot more new people; 1,200 new people have just been put 
under the meat axe of this vicious government. I think that if you’re not that vicious and if you’re not 
that anxious to get them and you don’t want a real “gotcha” to go home and laugh about over your 
Christmas dinner, I would suggest that you would seriously consider the amendment which I have in 
section 4, that my colleague will move. I move that section 4 of the printed bill be struck out, and the 
following substituted therefore . . . and if we don’t do it tonight, we’ll do it three and one-half or so 
years from now and make it retroactive and maybe the Minister of Highways will have a little land for 
sale. Nothing in this act . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s really funny. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Maybe that sounds funny to you, but there are some land bank tenants that aren’t so 
anxious to be hurt. Section 4 should be struck from the records and should be burned and destroyed 
completely so nobody ever knows it was even printed. 
 

And nothing in this act shall affect the right of a lessee who suffers any loss or damage as a result 
of the repeal of The Land Bank Act to take action against Her Majesty in the right of 
Saskatchewan for compensation for that loss of damage. 

 
I so move. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — The concerns that the member opposite has I believe are covered in section 6 
and 8. I will just read you a section of The Land Bank Act that is in today. Section 59(1): 
 

Subject to subsection (2), the Lieutenant-Governor in Council . . . 
 
Pardon me, I have just a bit of a paper flow problem here. Well, basically I believe that  



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1746 

this section the member opposite is quite concerned about is covered under section 6 and section 8. 
 
Now, we go to another act — The Fire Prevention Act, section 34(1): 
 

No action lies against the minister or a fire inspector for any loss or damage suffered by reason 
of anything done with reasonable care or omitted to be done in good faith by the fire inspector in 
the exercise of his powers of the performance of his duties under the act or regulations. 

 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t think anybody disagrees with having a provision in there that 
would absolve any individuals of any responsibility for loss that may be suffered — be it the minister 
himself or a member appointed by the minister. But what we’re saying is that the crown should be 
responsible. If there is any loss or damage suffered by these lessees, the crown should be responsible, 
and there should be some recourse for them to go and take some action against the crown to protect 
themselves against that loss. 
 
Section 6. The Legislative Secretary says section 6 and section 8. Section 8 protects any creditor. We’re 
not talking about the creditors; let’s talk about the lessees. Give the lessees a way that they can at least 
appeal a decision or take some legal action against a decision by the crown, and that is not in here. That 
is what we are saying in our amendment: that the crown is still responsible, but not any individual 
member or a department. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — The question before the House is the amendment. Are you ready for the 
question? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — No, I’m still waiting for an answer where he tries to tell me that a lessee has any right 
to action against the government. According to some legal opinion — one of the lessees sent this to me 
and said that this was the legal opinion he got on section 4, and I’ll just read it into the record: 
 

No law suit may be commenced against the Government of Saskatchewan or any of its 
employees for any loss or damage suffered by any person as result of the repeal of The Land 
Bank Act. I must indicate that I find this section very vague because any damage suffered by a 
lessee, in our opinion, would be as a result of the breach of the terms of his lease and not 
necessarily as result of the repeal of The Land Bank Act. It would appear to us that this section 
was intended as a catchall to cover any type of situation where loss or damage might arise, not as 
a result of the breach of the terms of the lease but as a result of some other provision in The Land 
Bank Act. However, (and here’s the catch) because the act varies certain terms of your lease, and 
the regulations will undoubtedly vary certain terms of your lease, the act therefore breaches 
certain terms of your contract. On the face of it, you would have no right of action against the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
HON. MR. GARNER: — I’ll just try to explain our position once more, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite. Section 4: this is a precautionary provision in case the transfer of a program to the Queen from 
an independent agency has created an unforeseen legal problem. This clause is basically a safeguard. 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1747 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, that’s exactly the point we’ve been trying to make for days. It’s a 
safeguard, and it’s not, for the farmer hasn’t got the protection. He doesn’t care if you have safeguard or 
not. Why do you put yourself in armored car? Why do you put yourself in an armored vehicle and leave 
them out in the cold? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — The honesty and credibility of a government comes forth, I believe, Mr. 
Chairman, in regulations that will be coming in due course. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — If you’re planning on covering that in regulations in due course anyhow, why did you 
need this section? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — We needed this section to . . . protect the employees of the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Executive Council. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 6 
 
Blakeney Lingenfelter Shillington 
Engel Lusney Yew 
 

Nays — 33 
 
Birkbeck Duncan Domotor 
Taylor Schoenhals Maxwell 
Lane Weiman Embury 
Muirhead Bacon Dirks 
Pickering Hodgins Hepworth 
Sandberg Meagher Folk 
Hardy Hopfner Morin 
Garner Martens Myers 
Klein Rybchuk Zazelenchuk 
Katzman Young Johnson 
Currie Gerich Baker 
 
Clause 4 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 8 as amended agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 9 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — We have an amendment to 9(2) of the bill striking out “his spouse or” in the 
third line; and strike out 9(3) of the bill and substitute the following: 
 



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1748 

Where a lessee (a) express an intention in writing during the term of his lease that upon giving up 
his lease for reasons other than termination, upon his death his spouse continue farming the land; 
or (b) express no intention with respect to his lease under subsection (2) or clause (a), the 
minister shall upon application enter into an agreement to lease the land to the lessee’s spouse. 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — No, not yet. What are you doing there, minister? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Basically what we are doing here is we’re changing it back so that the wife 
does now not have to meet any special criteria to obtain the lease. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 10 and 11 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 12 to 14 inclusive agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 15 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I have some corrections, basically to clear up a spelling error. 
Clause 15(c) of the printed bill be amended by striking out “prescibing” and substituting “prescribing" 
therefor. The word “prescribing” is spelled wrong. That’s where it comes in. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 15 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 16 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 17 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, this act fails to protect land bank tenants the way we think they should 
be protected. The minister made sure that he had his little orchestra around him stand exactly at the right 
time and to the best that he’s dictating to them to make sure that his little backside is covered on this 
one. There was no way they were going to get to the minister or to any of his assets that he has been able 
to accumulate. But what about protecting the farmers just a wee little bit? What about just a little clause? 
The farmers are concerned about possibly having to give up the improvements they’ve made to their 
land, their buildings, their chattels, the security of tenure. There’s so much that is missing in this piece of 
legislation that the only way we could correct even a minor portion of the harm it’s going to do is by 
moving an amendment that would make a new section 18 be added to the printed bill as follows: 
 

Nothing in this act shall diminish any legal options available to lessees to defend their rights and 
to protect the terms and conditions of present leases concerning: 
 
(a) their ownership of all improvements on the land, including buildings and 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1749 

chattels; and 
 

(b) their security of tenure. 
 
And I shall move, seconded by my colleague, the member for Pelly. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, just to clarify it, the proposed amendment by the member 
opposite, section (a) is covered under regulation, and section (b) is covered under the act. And we go 
back to 9(2), where the tenant is also protected to continue leasing the land; that’s section 9(2)(a). 
 
Amendment negatived. 
 
Clause 17 agreed to 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Birkbeck Schoenhals Maxwell 
Taylor Weiman Embury 
Lane Hodgins Dirks 
Muirhead Meagher Hepworth 
Sandberg Hopfner Folk 
Garner Martens Morin 
Klein Rybchuk Myers 
Katzman Young Zazelenchuk 
Currie Gerich Johnson 
Duncan Domotor Baker 
 

Nays — 6 
 
Blakeney Lingenfelter Shillington 
Engel Lusney Yew 
 
Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Conflict of Interests Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Statutes Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1750 

The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act to repeal The Land Bank Act and to make Certain Temporary Provisions 
for Lessees 

 
HON. MR. GARNER: — With leave, I move the amendments be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — I move third reading of this bill. 
 
Leave not granted, and bill ordered for third reading at the next sitting. 
 
Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Conflict of Interests Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I move this bill be now read a third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Statutes Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I move this bill be now read a third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 
43 — An Act respecting Powers of Attorney be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, this amendment will permit Sask Tel to increase its borrowing limit 
to $1 billion from $750 million, which was set in 1977. Effectively this act will permit Sask Tel to 
increase its investments in the communications future of this province. This is a reduction from the $1.5 
billion proposed by the previous administration. The increase will permit the corporation to undertake its 
proposed construction program through into 1986. Its construction program includes the completion of 
the fibre optics network and cable television distribution system associated with that network, as well as 
the major expansion of the switching network and other normal capital expenditures associated with 
meeting demand growth and  



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1751 

improvements in the system. 
 
This additional borrowing power will help ensure that the necessary facilities are in place to provide not 
only the best possible service, but also to explore ways that can make service even more cost effective 
and useful to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Telecommunications Act. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment appears to be merely housekeeping, except for section 
8 of the amendment that raises the limit to $1 billion. I hope that the minister uses that money to benefit 
the people of Saskatchewan, as he states he will, and that it will improve the services to the residents of 
Saskatchewan. We have very often in the past heard the members opposite, when they were in 
opposition, criticize the government when it came to increasing the loan levels or the borrowing power 
to any of the crown corporations, yet today we see a $1 billion amendment added to Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications. 
 
The member says it is merely housekeeping. I hope that they use the money wisely and we will not be 
opposing the bill at this point. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t let the opportunity pass completely. I would like to give 
an assurance to the hon. member when he raises the question as to whether the money will be spent 
wisely. I would like to give him the assurance that the $1 billion will be spent far more wisely than the 
$1.5 billion proposed by the previous administration. 
 
I would also suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the comments of the hon. member perhaps are reflective of 
society today. I never thought I would hear in this Assembly that increasing the borrowing limits of 
anybody to $1 billion was merely housekeeping legislation. We happen to believe, Mr. Speaker, that 
these funds are in fact a public trust. It is not a housekeeping amendment. It is a serious piece of 
legislation designed to carry Sask Tel into the future. We treat it accordingly, and as I said, Mr. Speaker, 
I would just like to give the hon. member the assurance that the $1 billion borrowing limit will probably 
go much further than the $1.5 billion previously proposed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Election Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments are in consequence of a decision of Mr. 
Justice Sirois who ruled that prisoners on remand are entitled to vote. The decision held (under the 
charter of rights) that remand prisoners had their right to vote violated to the extent that no voting 
procedures, as applied for patients in sanatoria or hospitals, existed for remand prisoners. Given the 
strong possibility of a by-election, it was felt that the proposed amendment would be brought in line 
with the judgment of Mr. Justice Sirois so that there would be similar voting provisions for prisoners on 
remand in a by-election. The whole question of remand prisoners in a general election we would 
propose to deal with in subsequent amendments to The Election Act. 



 
December 14, 1982 
 

 
1752 

This I believe, puts remand prisoners in the same position as patients in sanatoria or hospitals. It should 
in fact for purposes at least of the by-election, ensure that Mr. Justice Sirois’ judgment is complied with, 
and the concerns that he raises are in fact dealt with. I move second reading of the bill. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I haven’t had an opportunity yet to peruse the bill in any 
detail. I have looked at it briefly and I do not think that objection will be taken to it. I do wish to check a 
point or two, and accordingly, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Heritage Property Act 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, the amendment to Bill No. 52 is purely of a housekeeping 
nature. Consequently, I’ll try to keep my remarks brief. 
 
The Heritage Property Act is an instrument with which the province of Saskatchewan has encouraged 
municipalities to preserve numerous sites of historical and aesthetic significance. The act also allows the 
Minister of Culture and Youth to designate sites as provincial historic properties. This year alone, the 
designation of Veregin Doukhobor Prayer Home, the Wolseley Courthouse, and the administration 
building at the University of Saskatchewan have taken place. 
 
Section 66(1) of the act provides that every archeological or vertebrate paleontological object found in 
or taken from the land of Saskatchewan after the act came into force (that is, after November 28, 1980), 
is deemed to be the property of the crown. 
 
Section 66(2) of the act, which this bill proposes to amend, states that all objects found before 
November 28, 1980 belong to the individuals or groups that found them, provided that the objects are 
registered with the Minister of Culture and Youth within two years or the act coming into force. If such 
objects were not registered within the two-year period, they became the property of the crown as soon as 
the minister gave the person possessing these objects written notice of the crown’s claim to ownership. 
 
Bill No. 52 proposes to amend subsection (2) of section 66 in order to allow owners of such objects an 
additional three years to register their collections (that is, until November 25, 1985). These three years 
will allow officials of the Department of Culture and Youth time to design and implement an appropriate 
registration program. Considering the sheer numbers of archeological and vertebrate paleontological 
objects in our province in private hands, registration will provide a valuable base of scientific 
information. A sample survey of 3 per cent of the households in the province showed that there could 
exist as few as 5,000 collections and as many as 12,000. The amendment has two advantages, Mr. 
Speaker. It gives owners of collections an additional three years in which to register them. Secondly, it 
allows Saskatchewan Culture and Youth a more realistic amount of time to design and carry out the 
registration process. Until recently, no authority for registering the collections had been designated. The 
Museum of Natural History now has that authority and will begin the registration process early next 
year. However, a few other matters must also be clarified. We propose to make further amendments in 
this act in the future. For instance the act as presently worded only implicitly states that owners of 
collections retain ownership after registering them with the crown. The retention of ownership must be 
explicit and there are a number of other amendments that will be forthcoming. 



 
December 14, 1982 

 

 
1753 

Although the act is a complex piece of legislation, the amendment to subsection 66(2) which I outlined 
is fairly clear and straightforward. The amendment simply extends the deadline for registering 
archeological and vertebrate paleontological collections for another three years. I see no reason why this 
should not pass through the current session. I urge members to support it and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
move second reading of Bill 52 — An Act to Amend The Heritage Property Act. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will be quite brief. I think we’re going to let this bill 
pass and pass this evening. 
 
I want to say that I am disappointed with the insufficient staff to implement this program. I think it is 
quite possible — indeed it is almost inevitable — that the province will be losing irreplaceable 
archeological and paleontological material that simply cannot be replaced. However I think the proper 
place to have a run at the minister on that subject is in estimates. The problem is not a legislative 
problem. The problem is, as your explanatory notes admit, staff shortage. I shall be suggesting in 
estimates that staff shortage should not exist and we cannot afford it, but that doesn’t affect the fact that 
you need an extension of time in which to implement the program. We’ll therefore be allowing the bill 
to pass this evening, and I’ll be saving my complaints for the estimates. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:20 p.m. 


