






















































Hansard: June 24, 1982


(232) 233 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 24, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to give notice of motion for extended sitting hours 
next week. Not that we would necessarily act on this motion, but if it appears that we could wrap up and be 
out by the long weekend by doing this, with that co-operative spirit, we may just do that. 
 
So I would give notice that on Monday, June 28, 1982, notwithstanding rule 3, this Assembly shall, on June 
19, 1982, and Wednesday, June 30, 1982, meet from 10 a.m. until 1 p.m. in addition to its regular meeting 
hours 
 
I also give notice, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Minister of Mineral Resources, that I shall on Monday, June 
28, move first reading of a bill. An Act to establish the Department of Energy and Mines to repeal The 
Department of Mineral Resources Act. 
 
I also give notice that on Monday, June 28, 1982, I shall move first reading of An Act respecting 
Consequential Amendments resulting from the establishment of the Department of Energy and Mines. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to the Assembly some 
26 grade 12 students from Lumsden High School in Lumsden. They are accompanied by their teachers, Ken 
Langford and Gordon Bonoskoski. I would like all members to join with me in welcoming the students from 
Lumsden, certainly one of Saskatchewan's prettiest communities, in the Qu'Appelle Valley and the Lumsden 
Valley. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in welcoming the students from Lumsden to this 
Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have two introductions to make and, with the leave of the House, I'll do them 
one after the other. I want to begin by introducing to the House 48 students from the Plains Community 
College, who are seated in the east gallery. These, Mr. Speaker, are students who are learning English as a 
second language. They are accompanied by their teacher, Joanne Zikman. These, Mr. Speaker, are, by and 
large, new immigrants to Canada. I think the members of the House will want to join me, not just in 
welcoming them to the legislature, but in welcoming them to our country as well. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
234 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — It is appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that I, at this point, make a second introduction. 
We have behind the bar one of our federal counterparts, elected in 1976. And although he has not sat in the 
House as long as some members, he has made a very significant contribution in a number of areas. One of 
those areas in which he has made a very significant contribution is in working with new Canadians. 
 
I, therefore, want to introduce to the House, Simon de Jong, the federal member for Regina East. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, I take a great deal of pleasure in welcoming to this 20th 
legislature some students from Saskatoon, from the Saskatoon Region Community College. I can't see them, 
but I believe they are in the Speaker's gallery. Their instructor is Mr.. Robbin Stonehouse. With him are four 
of the students from the community college in downtown Saskatoon. 
 
Welcome to this House and welcome to Regina. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to introduce to the members of the House this 
afternoon 24 grade 4 students from St. Joan of Arc School in Regina. They are seated in the Speaker's gallery 
along with their teacher, Miss Shuker, and four other adults, Mrs. Brehm, Mrs. Toth Mrs. Myers, Mrs. 
Gordon and Shauna Frank. So would you join with me in welcoming this grade 4 class to the Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GERICH: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and to the House 20 grades 7 and 8 
students from the Marcelin School in the Redberry constituency. They are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. 
They are with their teacher, Mr. Murray McLellan, and Miss Carol Leask, the librarian of the school. I t rust 
that they will enjoy their stay in the House this afternoon. 
 
Theses students will also be visiting the Museum of Natural History and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police 
academy. Through you, Mr. Speaker, I greet them and ask the members of the House to welcome the 
Marcelin students. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
Federal-Provincial Conference 

 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier. I wonder if the Premier can 
advise us whether he has received an invitation to, or notice of, a federal-provincial conference to take place 
in the next few days? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I have received notice of a first ministers conference to take place on 
Wednesday of next week. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
235 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Anticipating that the conference will deal 
with matters arising out of the budget which we are advised the federal government will bring down on 
Monday next, would the Premier advise us of the position of his government with respect to any proposals 
for wage and price controls which might come forward at such a conference? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, nobody knows for sure what will be in the budget on Monday. 
We have put together our recommendations and have forwarded them through several avenues, with respect 
to having the federal government do the kinds of things that we are doing in the province of Saskatchewan to 
fight inflation and stimulate the economy. We have made recommendations in this regard, and all we can do 
is wait and see what is in the budget and respond after that. 
 
I would add that we are willing to co-operate with anything that meets with general common sense to get this 
country back to work. We see that there is a lot of work to be done. We have disagreed with a lotngs that 
have been going on at the federal level, and we would like to see some changes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it the policy of the government that at this 
time a policy of wage and price controls would accord with general common sense as viewed by the 
Premier? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the budget, I am sure, will be a package of things, and it is really 
quite hypothetical. It would be very dangerous for me to begin to speculate now what will be in that budget. 
If they are looking at a whole range of possibilities, then I would like to have that whole range of 
possibilities before me and before this government prior to making any specific recommendations on any 
one part of it. 
 

Natural Gas for all Saskatchewan Farms 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I note in the press recently that the Premier has 
announced a new program to bring natural gas to all farmers in Saskatchewan. I read a report in the Moose 
Jaw Times-Herald, concerning an address given by the Premier to a gathering here in Saskatchewan of 
people who were from the livestock marketing congress, I think. This one is from the Moose Jaw 
Times-Herald, but I'm sure the report appeared in many others. 
 
My question to the Premier is this: is it the policy of the government opposite to bring natural gas to all 
Saskatchewan farms during its present term of office? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we plan on being here a long time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — It is difficult to speculate what we might be able to do in our term of office. I 
would say that it is our intention to control costs rather than control farmers, and we're going to do whatever 
we can as quickly as we can to extend natural gas to as many farmers as we possibly can. That will begin this 
year, and it will continue every year from now until the job is done. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Premier would  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
236 

be a little more specific with respect to the time frame of the program. Obviously one could say that one will 
start now and continue until the job is done, and that could mean 3 years or 30 years. I wonder if the Premier 
could give us an estimate of the number of years it will take in order to complete the program which he 
announced to the livestock congress. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the Leader of the Opposition will remember that a 
former premier of this province suggested that he was going to bring electricity to rural Saskatchewan. He 
announced that sometime, I believe, prior to 1944. Subsequent to that, over the years, he did whatever was 
necessary to help bring it to rural Saskatchewan. We said and I said, I believe two years ago at a SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities' Association) convention, that it was our intention to bring natural gas 
to rural Saskatchewan. We are going to be doing that. We'll start this year and we'll move as quickly as 
possible. In many communities, the line is already into the community. We will begin to work on a gradual 
basis to allow farmers to tie in to that. 
 
Some communities, indeed 40 per cent of them in this province, don't even have access to natural gas. We 
have to take it to places that don't have it at all. That takes a little bit longer. It is our objective and our target 
to take it to rural Saskatchewan completely. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has indicated that the program will 
commence this year. Obviously, therefore, there are some plans, since clearly something couldn't commence 
this year unless there were some plans. Would the Premier advise whether those plans include taking natural 
gas to, let's say, the communities of Meota and Vawn in the Redberry constituency? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That's a crown corporations question. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, may I continue my question. I would ask these questions in 
crown corporations if, in fact, the crown corporations committee were meeting, and if, in fact, I were asking 
questions with respect to the previous year. I am now asking about the future and these questions are 
properly asked here. I am asking the Premier whether those plans require that there will be natural gas taken 
to the communities of Meota and Vawn this year in the Redberry constituency, and to the communities of 
Goodsoil and Peerless in the Meadow Lake constituency? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, because the former administration had virtually left out 99 per cent 
of all the farmers in the province of Saskatchewan with respect to natural gas, we have to begin someplace. 
The process of deciding which communities we can begin with is being carried out as quickly as possible, as 
efficiently as possible, with the least amount of cost, and without reinventing the wheel, because other 
jurisdictions have already done it. We're doing that. That is going to be decided and released as quickly as 
we can get the job done and we're making sure that we're doing it at least cost to the maximum number of 
people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has announced a program of taking natural gas to 
farmers and a program of taking natural gas to small communities. He  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
237 

has advised this House that it will commence this year. I asked him to name five communities where this 
natural gas will taken this calendar year. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we will be announcing the communities in due course, when we've 
completed the kind of information that is necessary to make sure that we get it done right. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier. I wonder if the Premier 
can advise what agency of government is responsible for the design of this program which the Premier 
announced last week? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the research and the responsibility for the program are primarily and 
currently taking place in Sask Power, but they're not isolated to that. There are people who I have working in 
my office looking at the possibilities, who are in touch with other jurisdictions throughout Canada and 
finding out how they brought natural gas to their rural areas, so that we in fact do not, as you might put it, 
reinvent the wheel or make any of the mistakes that former jurisdictions did when they brought it in. So it's 
being examined by me personally, it's being examined by people on my staff, and certainly by Sask Power. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the design of the program, when it's 
evolved, have to be considered by the public utilities rate review commission in view of the possible effects 
of the design upon rates charged for natural gas? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, when the public utilities review commission's guidelines, which I 
believe have not been presented to the legislature yet, are presented, then we'll see what's included in their 
bailiwick. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Premier, trying to get details of the 
program announced. With respect to the rates chargeable to farmers under the program announced by the 
Premier, will the rates be set to yield a break-even figure? If so, will the loss be borne by other users of 
natural gas, or is it proposed that a subsidy be paid to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to deal with any 
loss which may be encountered with respect to the farm gas program? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons we're doing the research that we are today 
and talking to neighbouring jurisdictions about their programs is to find out if there's any way that we can 
provide the natural gas in a fashion that will cut costs, at least below those that were estimated by the former 
administration. 
 
For example, there are certain transfer units that allow the natural gas to come from the large lines to the 
smaller lines. Now it seems to me that if we can design a system that allows 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 farmers to share 
in that conversion process and cost and reduce it for farmers, then we can provide natural gas at a much 
smaller portion of the cost than was estimated under the former administration. And we're going to do that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A final supplementary, Mr.. Premier. I'll direct this question to  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
238 

the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. I wonder if the minister could give us a 
report on the present state of the planning and design of the new program announced by the Premier? Is it 
well along? Has it commenced? And what senior official of the power corporation is in charge of the work? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to report that we had our first meeting last night. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A question to the Minister of Labour or to the Premier if he would prefer to 
answer it. What do you estimate to be the cost of bringing, as I read in the headlines in the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, natural gas to all Saskatchewan farms and villages? What do you estimate to be the cost? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we have the target of bringing natural gas to all of rural 
Saskatchewan. That will take some time and some doing, as bringing electricity to rural Saskatchewan did 
under a former administration. 
 
Anybody who would want to start a program would say he would begin and move as quickly as he could 
with as little cost as possible to get it done. The whole question is under review. Obviously, when we were in 
opposition we didn't have the research facilities to get all the answers that the administration might have had 
after 11 years of being there. But now, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to do it. We have committed ourselves 
to it and we will be introducing it as fast as we can. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you telling this House that your party in 
opposition, and your government now, has been irresponsible enough to announce a megaproject without 
any estimated cost? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, what I am saying is that this administration has the courage and the 
foresight to see that natural gas goes to all of Saskatchewan when there is a 50-year surplus of it in this part 
of the country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — There is enough natural gas in western Canada to last for 40 or 50 years. We have 
so much of it now that we are building a pipeline across Quebec to Sable Island to give it to other Canadians 
and pipelines to Americans, yet our people haven't been allowed to have access to it. It is cheaper than fuel 
oil. It is about one-half the price and it gives a competitive edge to our people. 
 
We are going to begin by providing that as quickly as we can. We have had studies this deep, which we have 
had for a year and one-half, with respect to the kinds of programs other jurisdictions have brought in. We are 
trying to find out what the best program is with the best technology, the kinds of plastic pipes to use, and the 
kinds of rural municipal organizations to design to implement it. When we are prepared to go on that, we 
will announce it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
239 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Surely, Mr. Speaker, the reason why you people have been procrastinating 
endlessly is that you are just getting around . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the hon. member have a supplementary? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think I could quite simply repeat my last question because it wasn't answered. 
What is your estimated cost for this megaproject that you have announced? What is your estimated cost, or 
are you so irresponsible that you don't have one? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, obviously it will be one year at a time. We'll get as much done this 
year as possible, and as much done the next year as possible. As we bring in our projects, we will be able to 
announce what the costs are when we know the exact areas that we are bringing them into. For this year, it 
may be several million dollars; for the next year it may be several more. I can't add any more than that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. The Premier indicates some reluctance to 
announce his spending programs 50 years hence. Has the Premier thought as far ahead as April 1, 1983? 
Would you just tell us what you estimated you will be spending this year? Have you that figure, or have you 
been so irresponsible that you don't even know that? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I don't have that figure. 
 

Job Creation through Government Program 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. The SPC program previously 
announced would have created 1,000 jobs directly in construction and many more spinoff jobs, at Ipsco in 
Regina, Pacific Plastics in Saskatoon and Grandview Industries in Weyburn. Can the Premier tell us, as a 
result of the meeting last night, how many jobs the government expects will be created in 1982 by the 
program that he has said will begin in 1982? 
 
HON. MR.. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the members opposite that on April 26 the people 
of Saskatchewan rejected their proposals and ideas, because, frankly, they didn't trust them any longer. When 
they came in with a proposal in their budget to copy our ideas, the people told us to make sure that we 
examine what you were going to do. Fifty-four per cent of the popular vote didn't trust you any longer, and if 
you did have some program designed, we have to make sure we take a look at it. Mr. Speaker, we are 
looking at it. We are looking at it in detail. I would support their idea of trying to bring in natural gas. I don't 
necessarily support the way that they were going to do it, and we are going to do it our way because we are 
going to do it right. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. HAMMERSMITH: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I don't deny what happened on April 26. Now 
I'm just trying to give them a reason to trust you. Would the Premier tell us, since he has said that his ideas 
were stolen, why he now has no ideas? Would he tell us whether, as a result of the meeting last night, those 
ideas will be coming forward in  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
240 

one week, one month, two months or six months — when will you be announcing your program? 
 
HON. MR.. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we will be announcing the program in due course. And I don't 
believe it would be fair to anybody else, or to the public, to be any more specific than that at this time. 
 
MR.. HAMMERSMITH: — Finally supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Unemployment is at record levels and it 
is increasing daily. Consumer spending is in a nosedive. Small businesses are going bankrupt daily. Will the 
government start immediately on those parts of the program for which the system is designed, the planning is 
done, the survey work is already done and construction will begin? Will you start on that part of the program 
— recognizing you can't do it all in one year. Will you do a little bit of it and will you tell us how many jobs 
that will create in 1982? 
 
HON. MR.. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I'm glad to hear that the member opposite has acknowledged that we 
can't do it all in one year, that we do it in stages, one step at a time. We said, Mr. Speaker, that we were 
going to take the tax off gasoline and we did. We said, Mr. Speaker, that we were going to bring in a 13 per 
cent interest rate program and we did. And, Mr. Speaker, we said we would start a natural gas distribution 
system this year and we will. 
 

Gilson Report 
 
MR.. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. Would the Deputy Premier 
tell the House if he has received, or has access to, the Gilson report on the future of the statutory crowrate? 
 
HON. MR.. BERNTSON: — Yes, I will tell you; no, I haven't. 
 
MR.. ENGEL: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Has the minister received any advance information on what 
the Gilson report might contain or what might be the future for the farmers in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR.. BERNTSON: — Well, from the same sources, probably, that the hon. member opposite has — 
the media sources. I have no direct pipeline to the Gilson people or Pepin people or whoever might have 
that. I understand that the report will be made public on Tuesday next, and I will have a copy at that time. 
 
MR.. ENGEL: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister saying that he has not been briefed on 
the Gilson report, has no information at this time as to the importance of this report to the farmers? Has he 
had no contact whatsoever with the federal government on this matter? 
 
HON. MR.. BERNTSON: — No, that's not what I said at all. What I said was I had no access to the report. 
I've had representation from several commodity groups, from the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, from SFA 
(Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture), among others. And until I see the final report, anything that I may 
say about it would be speculative. Therefore, I have resisted the temptation and have not said anything. 
 
MR.. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs or the 
Premier. Have you had any contact with the federal government regarding the Gilson report and the status of 
the crow? 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
241 

HON. MR.. LANE: — We have not. 
 
MR.. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would ask a question of the Premier. Has the Premier 
had any contact, either personal or in writing, with members of the federal government regarding the Gilson 
report? 
 
HON. MR.. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, no, I haven't had any personal contact with either the Minister of 
Transport or the Prime Minister with respect to the Gilson report, or any federal minister with respect to the 
crow. 
 

Increase in Operating Grants for Universities 
 
MR.. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Continuing Education. In order that 
our universities can continue to provide quality education at tuition rates students can afford, will the 
minister give his commitment to this House and to the students and university faculty of this province that 
the 17 per cent increase in operating grants for the universities proposed in the budget of the previous 
administration will indeed be implemented by him? 
 
HON. MR.. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I would like to give the hon. member assurance that it will be 
go. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. KOSKIE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I just want to commend the minister. There is at least one 
member opposite who recognizes a good budget. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the hon. member have a supplementary? This is not a time for comments; it is a 
time for questions. 
 

Increase in Funds for Bursaries 
 
MR.. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that there is just a little over two months prior to the 
opening of the universities and colleges, I wonder if the minister will follow the lead of the previous 
administration and commit himself (take another progressive step) to a 24 per cent increase for funds for 
bursaries as was undertaken by the previous minister? 
 
HON. MR.. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not sure I got the full implication of the question from the hon. 
member, but I don't think we're prepared to give that information at the present time. We are aware of the 
problems that were left by the previous government with regard to the funding of university education and 
secondary education. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. CURRIE: — All I can say is that having been involved in education for 35 years I would 
certainly be most interested in doing whatever we can to enhance the opportunities for young people in 
Saskatchewan to get the best possible education. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
242 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Awarding of Nipawin Hydro-electric Project 
 
HON. MR.. McLAREN: — I am pleased to announce to the legislature today, and to the province as a 
whole, that the provincial government has completed its review of the main civil contract for the Nipawin 
hydro-electric project on the Saskatchewan River. The contract has been awarded to a consortium of 
contractors who are: Ramsay Construction, Peter Kiewit Sons, Gary F. Atkinson Construction, and 
Commonwealth Construction. After having been in office for only approximately six weeks, the government 
has been able to renegotiate the contract by some $10 million. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. McLAREN: — This is a saving of over $10 million. The $0.25 billion contract will have other 
major economic spinoffs besides the direct employment. The consortium has committed itself to spend $160 
million within the boundaries of Saskatchewan for purchase of such items as steel products, cement 
products, construction equipment, work camp facilities and general purchases. The direct employee benefits 
from the project will total approximately $82 million. Between now and the end of the year, 200 persons will 
be employed in the construction phase. That figure will swell to approximately 800 in 1983 and will peak in 
1984 at 900. Besides that, it is estimated that at least 200 more jobs will be created through project spinoffs, 
as well as an additional 330 on-site jobs through additional contract accruements, totalling over 1,400 jobs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. McLAREN: — This major project will assist not only the overall economy of Saskatchewan 
for the next four years, but will be a tremendous shot in the arm for the communities within the vicinity of 
the facility, communities such as Melfort, Tisdale, Nipawin in addition to the obvious benefits for Prince 
Albert, Saskatoon and Regina. The three electrical generating units will provide 252 megawatts of power, or 
about 10 per cent of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation grid, when the plant comes on stream in 1986. 
 
These kinds of projects are significant in that they produce electricity from water power, a renewable source 
of energy, rather than the conventional coal or diesel generation which uses up precious non-renewable 
energy resources. 
 
The Saskatchewan government, in making the announcement today, is giving notice of its commitment to 
provide the electricity requirements of the province into the 1990s in a manner that is as efficient and 
productive as possible. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we welcome the news that this government has picked up on 
the Nipawin hydro project and has not aborted this project, as some of us feared, but only stalled it for the 
period that they were examining it. We agree with the minister that this Nipawin project is a good project. 
We obviously would not have commissioned it had it now been the case. We thank him for the information 
that this hydro-electric project is going to produce power from water. Some of us knew that before. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
243 

We welcome the fact that employment will be provided and only deplore this lengthy delay, while the 
government was reviewing a project which was sound in all of its points from the outset, Mr. Speaker. We 
welcome the fact that they are going to proceed with this project. We deplore the fact that they delayed the 
project and deplore the fact that, during this very considerable period of time, jobs were lost when they could 
have been had. But we welcome this belated effort on the part of the government to make amends and look 
forward to the completion of this successful project. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Relief for Livestock Producers 
 
HON. MR.. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, from May 28 to May 30 a severe, unseasonal snowstorm struck 
parts of southwest Saskatchewan. Weather reports indicate that much of the area received up to one foot of 
snow and some areas received much more. Department of Agriculture offices began receiving many calls 
from producers reporting extensive livestock losses and missing animals as a result of the storm. 
 
On Monday, immediately following the storm, Department of Agriculture staff offered assistance to 
producers to locate herds and assess losses. A helicopter was put on stand-by alert at Medicine Hat and small 
planes were on stand-by at Swift Current. Also, some producers made direct contracts to obtain the services 
of small planes. I am pleased to indicate the department will share with producers the costs of these rentals. I 
raise this item as an example of the responsiveness to producers on which our government places a high 
priority. 
 
After farmers and ranchers began to inspect their herds, on May 31 and June 1, it became clear that in some 
cases losses would be substantial. I announced on June 2 that producers experiencing losses due to the storm 
should keep records of the numbers of animals lost, the age of the animals and the cause of death. This 
information was to be confirmed by a veterinarian or a Department of Agriculture staff member. 
 
This process of inspecting deaths before the animals were disposed of became a time-consuming task. A 
number of department staff members worked over the following weekend so that this task could be 
completed as soon as possible. Two veterinarians from the provincial diagnostic laboratory in Regina spent a 
number of days in the Southwest. A number of local practising and retired veterinarians were also employed 
to speed up the inspections. Department inspections indicate that 627 producers lost a total of 2,218 head of 
livestock. Losses consisted of 2,045 cattle and calves, 117 sheep and lambs, 56 horses and colts. Some 
producers lost as many as 35 to 40 head of cattle and calves as a result of the storm. Losses of this magnitude 
are of substantial financial significance to the producers involved. It is important to note that while the 
livestock losses have been severe in some cases, they are not immediate cash losses, but are, rather, losses of 
future income. However, I have indicated to producers that once we have the figures we will consider what 
form of financial assistance might be provided. 
 
Accordingly, I am pleased to announce to the legislature today, Mr. Speaker, the details of the financial 
compensation the government will be providing to ease the burden of losses for the livestock producers in 
the Southwest hit by the snowstorm. In announcing these details, I wish to note that livestock producers 
normally expect to  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
244 

lose each year a small proportion of their animals due to many different causes. Producers accept these as 
normal losses. Thus the compensation policy does not provide coverage for all losses reported, but rather is 
aimed at providing financial assistance to those producers who suffered an abnormal level of loss due to the 
storm. 
 
The policy will provide financial assistance as follows. Compensation will be paid to any producer in crop 
districts 3 and 4, where losses exceed a certain deductible. The deductible will be either $2,000 or 5 per cent 
of the calculated value of the producer's herd or the producer's livestock inventory as of May 27, 1982, 
whichever is greater. The per animal value to be used for calculating both the deductible and the total losses 
for compensation purposes will be as follows: bulls, $2,000; cows, $850; calves, $150; yearlings (8 months 
or over is categorized as yearlings), $450; sheep, rams and ewes, $85; lambs, $25; horses, $1,000; and colts, 
$250. 
 
Application forms for compensation payments will soon be available through the ag. rep. offices in the 
Southwest. The department will also be mailing forms to producers who have recorded their storm-related 
losses with the Department of Agriculture. It is estimated that compensation payments will be in the order of 
$200,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to reiterate, in announcing the details of the policy, that it demonstrates the positive and 
sensitive approach this government will take in responding to the needs of Saskatchewan farmers and 
ranchers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a short comment. I am pleased that the government has 
responded to the request made by my colleague from the area. He has pressured you and you've followed up 
on that. 
 
I'm a little bit concerned about the point you made regarding so much a head. There is quite a difference 
between yearling calves and breeding stock or purebred stock. I was wondering if you've taken that into 
account. Eight hundred and fifty dollars is okay for a standard stock cow but not for a purebred cow. 
 
The other thing I'm wondering about is the $2,000 deductible as a base deductible, and then 5 per cent above 
that? I haven't studied the policy closely enough but I think some of the smaller people would suffer more 
severely than somebody with 300 head . . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's a basic deductible and 5 per 
cent plus? 
 
I'm pleased that you've responded to the requests that were made. Some assistance is better than no 
assistance at all. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 
 
HON. MR.. LANE: — I move that a bill to amend the Statute Law be introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
245 

HON. MR.. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a bill to amend The Legal Profession Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Provincial Courts Act 
 
HON. MR.. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a bill to amend The Provincial Court Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 
 
HON. MR.. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a bill to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Regulations Act 
 
HON. MR.. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a bill to amend The Regulations Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
NOTICE OF MOTIONS 
 
HON. MR.. LANE: — I give notice that I shall, on Monday, June 28, 1982, move first reading of a bill, An 
Act to amend The Interpretation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall, on Monday, June 28, 1982, move first reading of a bill, An Act to 
establish a Public Utilities Review Commission. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply by Mr.. Hodgins. 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure and honour that I rise in this Legislative Assembly 
today. My congratulations to you. This Assembly has placed in you our trust and confidence in your wisdom, 
discipline and patience, all which you so capably display. Your past years in local and provincial government 
have served you well, and I might add the service has been returned to the people tenfold. 
 
My congratulations and thanks to the mover and the seconder of the throne speech. Congratulations on a job 
well done. And thank you for your enthusiasm, faith and youth in an old, timeworn institution called 
democracy. 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
246 

Mr. Speaker, this indeed has been an interesting week, a week of first-time experiences for many, maiden 
speeches, speeches from the experienced. And I might add I've enjoyed them all, including the retorts, 
humour and wit exchanged between some of the members. 
 
It is a pleasure also to take note of five women in government, with two in cabinet for the first time in 
history. This week, we have heard many reasons for the turnaround of the voters on April 26. There have 
been observations, opinions and perceptions expressed. The perception of the voters, when coming to 
women candidates, is indeed one that is often talked about, but not particularly hard to deal with. During the 
campaign, I had the unique opportunity of meeting face to face an elderly gentleman who, when questioned 
for his support, said, "A woman in politics? Why. I'd sooner vote for the devil himself." And I said. "Quite 
so. But just in case you cannot vote for the NDP, would you consider placing your vote with me?" Since that 
time, Mr. Speaker, I've concluded from the results of how he voted, that the opposition now bears a slight 
resemblance to the earth, not a perfect spheroid because it's flattened at the poles. My sincerest 
congratulations to all members, including the opposition, and in particular to the hon. member for Estevan, 
the Premier of Saskatchewan. To the member for Regina Elphinstone (who isn't here but I'm sure you'll pass 
it on for me), the former premier, now Leader of the Opposition, I extend my admiration and respect for his 
statesmanship and, as the hon. member for Thunder Creek said, his dignity and class. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the honour of representing the constituency of Swift Current, a small city but a city with 
potential given some encouragement, a city of 14,000 people who will be celebrating the 100th anniversary 
of their home this year. Swift Current is surrounded by the heritage of Saskatchewan — agriculture. It is 
endowed with the resources of oil and gas, and it is the trading centre for the great Southwest. 
 
When facing west, it is just slightly over there and a little to the right of Shaunavon. I invite this Assembly to 
visit the constituency and share in the 100th anniversary celebration on July 1 of this year. And I extend a 
special invitation to the member for Shaunavon. It's only about 70 miles over what I hear are reasonably 
good roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 26, 1982, the seeds of renewal for democracy in Saskatchewan were sown. The 
germination of 55 seeds out of 64 gives indication indeed of a fruitful harvest, given the opportunity of 
adequate care, attention and time. This week in this Assembly much has been said about the reasons for the 
outcome. Listening to the debate, I was reminded of a conversation I had with the defeated candidate of the 
opposite persuasion on April 27. He said to me, "I just don't understand it. How can this be? Where did we 
go wrong, and what did we do wrong?" Now I wasn't sure if he wanted the answer I thought he wanted, or if 
he wanted the truth. And I reminded him of the baseball pitcher for the Mets who in 1960 on the mound 
walked seven batters in a row. Out walked the coach, Casey Stengel, and gave him a nod, and the kid said, 
"No, I'm not leaving." He gave him another nod, and he went to the showers. He couldn't understand it. He 
said, "What did I do wrong? Just when I had a no-hitter going, they pulled me out of the game." 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, the message was loud and clear. 
 
The throne speech is a breath of fresh air, one of simplicity — simplicity defined as knowing what cannot be 
left out and what must be attended to: relief from taxation,  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
247 

assistance for high interest rate mortgages, a recognition that agriculture is the mainstay of the province and 
this country, preservation of family farms, recognition of a need for protection of health, security and 
education, a commitment for less government intervention and less government growth, a commitment of 
encouragement for growth in the private sector, and a concern for greater efficiency and delivery of services 
and cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech recognizes the hard economic times. It recognizes also that excessive 
taxation and high inflation, coupled with high interest rates, have hurt our province and, indeed, our people. 
They have brought our Saskatchewan economy and our growth and our opportunities to the point of 
paralysis by prescription. Mr. Speaker, if we are to progress to create jobs, to give people breathing space on 
taxation and to allow self-initiative, then the prescription must and shall be changed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our economy must become more viable if we are to retain and improve the social fabric of this 
province. This government is committed to social programs which help those who need it most. We are 
committed to ensuring that the delivery of such programs is as close to the grass-roots level as possible. In 
the delivery of such programs we want to ensure further that the dollars are going to those who need them 
and not into higher administrative costs creating larger bureaucracies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also recognize that we live in an aging society. We have gone from baby boom to baby bust 
in this province. The problems and the needs of the aged in Saskatchewan will be addressed by this 
government, and we stand committed to the well-being and independence of our senior citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in March 1982, the former minister of social services suggested in a speech to this Assembly 
that Tories seem to think that social planning and programs are inappropriate priorities. He went on to ask of 
the members who they would eliminate. Senior citizens? Single parents? Persons who are disabled? Mr. 
Speaker, today I wish to answer the former minister of social services, the member for Shaunavon. Sir, I 
rather like my father, my favourite senior. As for single parents, even Tories are single parents. And the 
disabled? Well, what is there to say? Some of them are near and dear to my heart, and you might conclude 
that I've become rather attached. On the other hand, you might say I have a vested interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only Tory plan which should have concerned the gentleman opposite was the elimination of 
the previous government. 
 
The past few days have heard the criticism of paralysis by analysis. What are you doing besides studying, 
reviewing, and studying? That has been the question. To the people of this province, I make no apology for 
thinking carefully before making decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to many years of debate in this Assembly under the leadership and prudent 
wisdom of our Premier. In accepting the responsibility our Premier has placed in me as Minister of Social 
Services, I recognize the special challenge to be faced in Saskatchewan today. It is to balance ever-increasing 
social needs at a time of economic and financial stress. And we intend to work very hard to rationalize 
existing programs in order to get the most benefits for our Saskatchewan people. It poses a unique and very 
difficult challenge in tough economic times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with pride and confidence that I support the motion. It is a beginning  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
248 

for new direction with potential for stimulation of growth and opportunities for people. It gives us hope for 
freedom of choice and improvement in the human condition. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. LINGENFELTER: — It is indeed a pleasure and an honour to rise to take part in the debate in reply 
to the Speech from the Throne. First of all, I would like to say congratulations to you, sir, on your 
appointment to the high and time-honoured position of Speaker of the Assembly. As was mentioned earlier 
by my colleague, it is not an easy task, and from time to time I'm sure you will find it very trying, but I'm 
sure you will find the opposition in this Assembly much easier to deal with than that with which speakers in 
the past have had to deal. 
 
I would also like to say congratulations to the many new members, including the member for Swift Current. 
Her maiden address was enjoyable, and I appreciate her invitation to visit her in Swift Current, and I intend 
to do that. 
 
I would also like to say congratulations to the many new members in the Assembly, because I very well 
remember my first term. I was elected in 1978. I believe at that time, I can't be sure, I was the youngest 
member in the Assembly. I can tell you you don't stay young very long here. In fact, to look around, I think I 
would be in the elder part of the Assembly at this time. Particular congratulations go to the mover, the 
member for Melfort, and to the seconder, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. I enjoyed their speeches as 
well. The elocution and delivery was good. The content I wonder a little about. But I must say that I enjoyed 
the speeches very much and, in particular, that of the member for Saskatoon Riversdale who commented that 
she didn't believe medical premiums had any part in medicare in Saskatchewan. I agree with her on that, and 
I want to comment on that later. 
 
I think the role of government, Mr. Speaker, is one with which we are very familiar. I think that from time to 
time, though, we lose track of what the role of the government backbencher, better called the private 
member, is all about. The opposition role is very clear. It is to criticize and analyse what the government is 
doing in spending public money and in delivering programs. On the other hand, the role of cabinet is very 
obvious. It is to make policy, which is taken to caucus for approval. I think it is important to note, though, 
that the caucus in our democratic system is the power base, even more so, I believe, than the Legislative 
Assembly. While we debate and concentrate on improving legislation, I think the backbench caucus of 
government is the most important role in government. I think if you look back over the last four years, you 
will see that there are two ways for the private government member to carry on. One is to act as a rubber 
stamp for decisions made by cabinet, and the other is to let his views be known in caucus, in the Legislative 
Assembly, and in the press. I think there were good examples in the last government, Mr. Speaker, and you 
will be well aware of them. The former member for Saskatoon Sutherland and the former member for 
Regina Victoria are two prime examples of people who went out of their way to make sure that their 
constituents' views were well-known to this Assembly and to the public in general. I think it is a very 
important role that each and every one of you have undertaken by coming into this Assembly. It is an 
opportunity for you to let your views be know about special projects or even controversial issues, such as 
planned parenthood and the like. 
 
I would like to say, as well, a few words about my constituency, Mr. Speaker. The Shaunavon constituency 
is a vast rural area, the third largest constituency in the province — third only to Athabasca and Cumberland 
constituencies. It stretches along  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
249 

the U.S. border for 150 miles and runs along the Alberta border for 50 miles, as well. It is a constituency 
made up of people who believe very much in individual freedom. They believe in individual freedom based 
on co-operation and a co-operative spirit, because I am sure you are aware that in Saskatchewan co-operation 
in the early days was not a luxury. It was an absolute essential. Out of that has grown a system in southwest 
Saskatchewan whereby people have always got together, whether in credit unions, the co-ops, or the wheat 
pools, in order to deliver service to members. As well, we can look back, in the early days of medicare, to 
R.M.s which got together in our area of the province to hire a doctor to deliver medicare services to the 
people in those R.M.s. 
 
So the co-operative and neighbour-helping spirit has actually enhanced freedom and the spirit of 
individualism in the southwest part of Saskatchewan, as it has in the rest of the province. I think it is fair to 
say that Saskatchewan, with the type of government we have had in the past, is now and has been and, I am 
sure, will continue to be the most free society that the world will know anywhere. I say that because, in light 
of some of the comments that have been made over the last few days, you really have to wonder about where 
the people opposite have been in terms of looking at what really exists in terms of freedom in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The throne speech debate is, I suppose you could say, everything we expected and less. The four-minute 
speech removing the 29-cent tax on gasoline, which is the fulfilment of the promise of a 40-cent tax 
removal, and the 13.25 per cent mortgage program are basically the two items which highlight the throne 
speech. The 29-cent tax removal needs very little comment to be made about it, other than the fact that it 
gives the members of government a chance to pat themselves on the back and say what good guys and what 
good women they are. I suppose that's fair. 
 
The 13.25 per cent mortgage program is another matter, Mr. Speaker. I think we will be looking very closely 
and scrutinizing what actually is involved in that bill. It seems to me that there are a large number of people 
who will be left out of that program. It seems to me it is a little bit like the old days in trying to get a bank 
loan — when you had to prove that you didn't need the loan, then you were eligible. We will have to be very 
critical of what is contained in that bill and what isn't contained in the bill in order that the majority of the 
people in the province will have an opportunity to take advantage of it. 
 
I think it is fair to say that everyone who is earning $100,000 in the province of Saskatchewan and has a 
mortgage will be eligible — little question about it. I wonder if, on the other hand, couples who are 25 years 
of age, have two or three children and earn $20,000 will be eligible for a loan at 13.25 per cent, or if they are 
the people who will be paying the mortgage subsidy for those who are earning $100,000. These are questions 
which we will be looking at when the bill is before us for debate on second reading and in committee of the 
whole. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, it is fair to say that some of the things which were left out of the throne speech are 
even more important. The members in opposition were very interested in seeing a farm mortgage program 
brought into place this session. There were comments made during the election campaign and shortly 
afterward that the program would be delivered very quickly. The Minister of Agriculture is now indicating to 
us that the program will be brought in this fall. While I don't know if his word is as good as it was earlier, we 
may see it next year or the year after, or the year after. 
 
It is a program which is very important, because of the fact that the land bank program, which we believe to 
be the way of transferring land from one generation to the other, is  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
250 

the way that we should go in terms of agricultural development. 
 
It is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that the new government has a mandate to introduce its programs. I think it has 
three alternatives: 
 
1. Carry on with the land bank program for this summer until their new program is introduced. 
 
2. Bring in a new program right now, during this session. We will sit here for the next two, three or four 
weeks to get it passed, to co-operate with the government and get it in place. It is that important. 
 
3. Do nothing and wait. That is apparently what the new government is doing in terms of agriculture in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it is important to note as well that the expected reduction in farm fuel prices, which many farmers 
were waiting for, is nowhere to be seen or mentioned in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
The other comment I would like to make, Mr. Speaker, is a few short words about what has come to be 
called the "sanitizing our civil service." I think everyone will be aware that after April 26 when our 
government last met, we went through the process of removing 69 people we thought to be the political 
advisers in government. We did it for two reasons. One was to avoid the embarrassment, I suppose, that 
those people would have to go through each day waiting for the axe to fall after the new government took 
over. The other, and as important I suppose, was the fact that we wanted to give the new government the 
opportunity to move into its offices, bring its people in and move quickly with the programs that it had 
promised and, I would imagine, believed in. 
 
Since then we have seen little more than studies, tampering, vacillating, trying to find out where things are, 
and, more than where things are, where people are. First it was the transition team in the government 
departments and now it is the committee set up to check the crown corporations headed by one Wolfgang 
Wolff, which is commonly called "the Wolff pack." I think that if you look at the people they are dismissing 
at the present time in the crown corporations — it was announced a couple of days ago that two secretaries 
out of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) were fired — it makes you wonder how low 
they are really going to stoop in terms of firing people. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Just hang around and watch. 
 
MR.. LINGENFELTER: — One members says, "Just hang around and watch." I am sure the civil service 
is hanging around and watching and that's the other reason that things are on hold in the province of 
Saskatchewan at the present time. First of all because the government can't make decisions, and, second, 
because members of the civil service are afraid to move for fear of being fired or being identified as NDP 
supporters. 
 
One note we would like to make to the civil service of Saskatchewan is that we are proud to have worked 
with the civil service, some of whom worked in the BLAKENEY government, some in the Thatcher 
government, some in the Woodrow Lloyd government, and some in the Tommy Douglas government before 
it, and who are now faced with the harassment and the wondering from day to day whether or not their jobs 
will be there in the morning. And we sympathize with them for the fact that they are  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
251 

being treated in this manner and encourage them to go on and carry out the duties of the province of 
Saskatchewan to the best of their ability. 
 
In the area of health care, Mr. Speaker, I alluded earlier to the fact that medicare was not something brought 
in by politicians, or by governments, or by bureaucrats. It was a process of people getting together and 
setting an example by hiring a doctor to meet the needs of a few R.M.s in the southwest corner of the 
province. The member for Swift Current will be well aware of that process. 
 
After the election of Tommy Douglas in 1944, the Swift Current Health Region was established based on 
this concept of R.M.s getting together to hire a doctor to meet the medical needs of their seniors or of their 
citizens. And so we saw the development of a medicare system in the province of Saskatchewan that was 
very much based on co-operation, neighbour helping neighbour, and the spirit of co-operating to meet the 
needs of individuals. It wasn't until 1962, after that experiment was well-tested, that a full-fledged health 
care program was brought into place by the government in 1962. It is a program of which we feel very proud 
and we will be watching very closely to see whether or not any changes are made. 
 
I suppose if you look at the experience in the Tory provinces across Canada, you might get an indication of 
what we might expect. In Tory Alberta, a family pays a premium of $230 a year. I suppose that might be all 
right in Alberta, but I will tell you it is not all right in Saskatchewan. In Tory Ontario, premiums were just 
recently raised to in excess of $600 per year and that won't be all right in Saskatchewan either. As well, we 
see a deficit in hospitals in Ontario in excess of $100 million and the encouragement of doctors to direct and 
extra bill. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, it's fairly obvious that we, on this side of the House, are very proud of it, and will 
encourage, the development and improvement of the health care system in Saskatchewan. We had made a 
good number of commitments in the area of health spending in our recent budget, and I would just like to go 
through them to get them on the record. 
 
First, there was a promise in the budget of an increase (which is a little more than a promise, but a direct 
balancing of the budget in order to spend the money) of 21 per cent in the 1981-82 fiscal year. 
 
There was a commitment to increase the number of level 4 beds in the rural hospitals and a commitment to 
improve basic provincial grants for hospital construction. There was a commitment to 10 communities for 
new hospitals, $6 million for University Hospital, $10.4 million for the Pasqua and $10.1 million for the 
Regina General Hospital. 
 
So I think it's important to note, Mr. Speaker, that we will be watching very closely what the new 
Conservative government is doing in the area of health care. I think we'll sound one warning to them: don't 
tamper with the medicare system in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. LINGENFELTER: — I say that, Mr. Speaker, because the public of Saskatchewan will not tolerate 
it. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
252 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk, just for a few minutes, about the economy and the mention of the economy 
in the throne speech which was read in the House last Thursday. As the throne speech mentioned, the 
economy of Saskatchewan is very quickly slipping into a recession. In light of that and the fact that this was 
mentioned in the throne speech, it is almost unbelievable that there was no mention made of what we were 
going to do about helping out the economy, to avoid the bottom falling out as a result of hesitating and Tory 
policies. 
 
I think that if we look at the many areas where job creation could be enhanced and should be going forward 
at the present time, we need not look very far. There are major projects, such as the 144-bed nursing home in 
Saskatoon, hospital construction, nursing home construction, Nipawin, where a hospital is on hold at the 
present time, which all take structural steel in their construction. Combined with the layoffs at Ipsco at the 
present time, it wouldn't seem to take too much imagination that that steel should be being made at the 
present time and stockpiled for those projects. 
 
The same thing exists in terms of the 4,000 houses that were planned by Sask Housing and the layoffs in the 
forest industry, that comparison can be made there as well. It seems to make little sense that many of these 
projects which are on hold are in opposition ridings. The design is there and all they have to do is make the 
commitment to go ahead with them. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I think that even if the priorities of the past government were not accepted, even if they 
had wanted to move some of the projects from one area to another, I think that we would say very little if the 
government were to build a nursing home or a hospital in a location other than we had decided. The simple 
matter is that we would like to see construction go ahead, get the economy rolling and stop this hesitation 
and vacillating on the very important issue of where to construct and when to construct projects in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it is obvious that what we will see from the Conservative government, if you look at some of the 
planning which is going on at the present time (and I mentioned the mortgage plan earlier on), is the David 
Stockman theory of economics which the Reagan government has tried to set in place. This policy, where 
you pour the money in at the top and a little trickles down to the bottom, is one which has been tried and 
found wanting. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that the members on this side are well aware that that plan was used 
in the era from 1929 to 1934, and when people talk about the biggest devastation of a political party, I think 
they would do well to remember those days of the big Depression. Things on the horizon certainly indicate 
that we are headed in that direction, if that policy is followed at the present time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the comments I have made it is fairly obvious that I will not be supporting the 
motion. 
 
I wish at this time to move an amendment to the motion, seconded by Mr.. Koskie, that the following words 
be added to the motion: 
 

but regrets that Your Honour's advisers, while recognizing that this is a time of severe economic 
strain for Saskatchewan, have failed to propose any adequate measures to: 

 
1. Help people who have jobs to keep them; 

 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
253 

2. Help students to get summer jobs; 
 
3. Help those with the lowest incomes to deal with the severe hardships of rising prices. 

 
HON. MR.. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed an honour to stand in this House and participate 
in the debate arising from the speech of His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor. 
 
Before proceeding with my remarks, I would like to congratulate the members of the Legislative Assembly 
for Melfort and Saskatoon Riversdale, who did such outstanding jobs of moving and seconding the motion. 
 
Next, I would like to add my sincere congratulations to the many others that have been directed your way 
regarding your appointment as Speaker of the House. It has become obvious over this past week that 
members on both sides of this House hold you and the office in very deep respect. That is probably one of 
the few things that we all seem to agree on after a week in the House. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the re-elected and newly elected members of the House. I'd like to make 
special mention of the most recent member of the blue wave, the member for Prince Albert, who will be 
taking his place shortly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. SCHOENHALS: — I am, indeed, proud to be a member of the outstanding group of ladies and 
gentlemen who form the government of this province. As was indicated by the hon. member for Thunder 
Creek, I believe that the contribution of this group will be immense in future years, as they work with (and I 
would like to emphasize the word "with") the people of this province in solving the problems which we all 
face. 
 
Finally, I would like to congratulate the Premier, the member for Estevan, on his tremendous success at the 
polls and on his outstanding performance in the few short weeks he has been in office. Early in the recent 
election campaign, the NDP said that the key issue was leadership. "Tried and trusted," was the line we 
heard. The Liberals also indicated that leadership was a key issue. Our party agreed whole-heartedly. The 
other two chuckled, smirked and said something about the invisible man. On April 26, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of the province agreed that leadership was indeed an issue. They emphatically declared that the leader 
with ideas, energy, drive, the policies and the ability to carry them through was Mr.. Grant Devine. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. SCHOENHALS: — While I'm offering congratulations, I should congratulate the member for 
Shaunavon on his fine, funny speech. He did an excellent job of paraphrasing the speech of the Leader of the 
Opposition, the speech we sat through earlier in the week. I'm beginning to wonder if there will be any new 
ideas coming from across the floor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am indeed grateful to the people of Saskatoon Sutherland that they saw fit to elect me as part 
of this Devine government. I must thank the outstanding group of people who worked to make my election a 
possibility. I believe that the most striking aspect of my campaign team was the fact that a very large number 
of these tireless  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
254 

workers were people who had not been involved in a political campaign before. They were people, like so 
many others in this province, who simply said, "Enough is enough." They decided it was time for a change 
and they worked ceaselessly to bring that change about. Obviously they are not unique; they are merely 
examples of a large number of the people from across the breadth and width of this province who felt it was 
indeed time for a change. The people of the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland also felt it was time for a 
change. 
 
The constituency is located on the eastern extremity of Saskatoon and is almost an exact cross section of the 
people who reside in urban Saskatchewan. Railway workers, labourers, students, senior citizens and blue 
collar workers reside in the town of Sutherland itself. Professionals, semi-professionals and a large number 
of white collar workers reside in College Park and Forest Grove. In the history of this constituency, it has 
been represented by a Liberal MLA, a PC MLA and, most recently, by an NDP MLA. Obviously, the people 
of this constituency have done some comparison shopping. On April 26, they assessed these comparisons 
and I'm glad to say they chose a PC member. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. SCHOENHALS: — The fact that the most recent member to represent this constituency, Mr.. 
Prebble, could never quite figure out whether he was part of the government or the opposition may have 
influenced the decision in some small way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the campaign went on, it became very obvious that the people of Sutherland were going to 
vote against the tired, out-of-touch, arrogant government of the NDP, and turn, in large numbers, to the 
positive, fresh and energetic policies of the Progressive Conservative Party. Many of the policies have been 
enunciated in the Lieutenant-Governor's speech. I am quite sure that the people I represent are very satisfied 
with that speech 
 
I would like to direct some comments on two departments that our Premier has seen fit to entrust to my 
direction. Before I do that, however, I must say a few words about some of the statements I have heard 
coming from the small collection of seats to the Speaker's left on the opposite side of the House. 
 
First of all, the member for Regina Centre has expressed deep concern over the changes made in the upper 
levels of the civil service. We recently heard this enunciated again by the member for Shaunavon. Mr. 
Speaker, they were most vocal, in the median, in the press and in the House. I believe the term 
"McCarthyism" was used. I don't propose to stay here and lecture the hon. member on points that are obvious 
to most of the people of the province. However, it would appear that loyalty and philosophical consistency 
are absolute essentials in order for any government to have its policies put in place by its civil service. 
 
I would like, however, to approach this matter from another angle. Immediately after the election, the former 
premier indicated that his government was defeated because it had lost touch with the people. I would like to 
suggest to the member for Regina Centre that this righteous indignation over civil service changes indicates 
that he is still a long way out of touch with the people of this province. 
 
The people of this province gave us the job of cleaning up the mess that was created by the previous 
administration, and we are committed to doing just that. We will make the changes that we feel are necessary 
and we will have, as our Premier indicated, a  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
255 

professional civil service that accepts and agrees with our philosophical approach. The people of this 
province expect nothing less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also heard a great deal about the fact that we are studying a number of different 
problems from different angles. The opposition has indicated that this leads them to believe that we are not 
capable of making decisions. As usual, the facts do not agree with the members opposite. The day we took 
power the Premier removed the gas tax, a decisive move that benefited everyone in this province. The 
primary reason we are in this Assembly now is so we can legislate a 13.25 per cent ceiling on mortgage 
interest rates, an obvious aid to the people of the province. 
 
As to some of the other concerns expressed by the opposition regarding what they see as inaction, they 
remind me of some of the experiences I had while working with people in fitness and recreation areas. All 
too often, when people realize they are badly out of shape (physical shape, that is), they attempt some type of 
high-powered short-term program to get back in shape and are immediately turned off and return to their 
sedentary ways. Fitness leaders are continually saying, "It took you 20 years to get out of shape, don't expect 
to get back into shape overnight." I believe there's an obvious parallel. It took the previous administration 11 
years to get this province twisted out of shape, and it may just take us a little more than six weeks to get it 
back into shape. However, we will get the job done, no matter how time-consuming or demanding. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. SCHOENHALS: — I would like to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, about the two departments 
and how the throne speech relates to them. Urban governments throughout the province will receive direct 
benefits as a result of the removal of the gas tax. Urban residents will be direct beneficiaries when the 
mortgage interest reduction plan becomes a reality on July 1. The changes that will be introduced to the local 
government elections act are changes that were proposed by SUMA, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities' 
Association, and they are being introduced to allow them to be in place for the fall elections. These measures 
are of great assistance to the urban municipalities, and I'd like to assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the urban 
centres would disagree strongly with the opposition's suggestions that this government has not taken 
immediate action to aid their villages, towns and cities. 
 
In the Department of Culture and Youth this government has also moved quickly to bring about 
improvements and changes. The freeze on the utilities rates and the long overdue introduction of a utilities 
review commission will undoubtedly aid the community recreation facilities which find increased operating 
costs a very real burden. 
 
We have also introduced the new lottery game in the province which we feel will stabilize the SaskSport 
trust fund, and put the funding of athletics, culture, and recreation on a sound footing. By this fall we will 
table a culture and sport policy for the consideration of this Assembly. The objective is put the whole area of 
sport and recreation, as well as art and culture, on a solid footing in terms of development, funding, and 
administration for at least the next five years. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, a great deal has been done in these two departments in the short time we have 
been in office, and both will benefit immensely from the measures introduced in the throne speech. For these 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, it will appear obvious that I will be voting against the amendment, and it will give me 
great  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
256 

pleasure to support the motion before the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to be joining you and members of this legislature in our throne 
speech debate. I wish to start, Mr. Speaker, by congratulating you on your election to the office of Speaker. 
The position you hold has been filled with distinction by many former members of this legislature. While 
each brought his own style and personality to the office, the fairness and impartiality of previous speakers 
have made this legislature a place that all members can respect. I know that you will bring the same fairness 
and impartiality to the position. In the way of congratulations, I also want to congratulate all members who 
have been elected to this legislature. Many of us are new, and it will take a little time to learn some of the 
ropes. It is my sincere hope that all of us will be fair, tolerant, and understanding, and work hard to represent 
the people who elected us. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. YEW: — At this point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a few words in my native tongue, particularly 
for my constituents — people throughout the northern administration — by way of expressing my 
appreciation to them, letting them know what this legislature is all about, what my feelings are and what the 
issues are. As well, I want to express to them what type of commitment and work I hope to achieve in the 
next four years. With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I will now say a few words in Cree. 
 
(At this point the hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
It is my honour, Mr. Speaker, to be representing the constituency of Cumberland. In doing so, I must fill the 
shoes of Mr.. Norman MacAuley, who retired at the end of the last session of the legislature. Mr.. MacAuley 
was a dedicated, hard-working member of the legislature. He knew the North well. Like me, he grew up in 
northern Saskatchewan and he lived in the North for most of his life. He always kept in touch with the 
people. He listened to the people and he learned from them. In that way, he could let government and the 
legislature know what the people needed and wanted. It is my intention, Mr. Speaker, to be that kind of 
MLA. 
 
I intend to bring to you, Mr. Speaker, and to this legislature and to the members of government, ideas, 
recommendations and resolutions that come from the people themselves. The majority of the people who 
live in the organized centres and on the land outside of these communities are, like myself, either 
non-registered Indians, Metis or treaty Indians. Their roots in the area are deep and go back many 
generations. They are people who have supported themselves and their families over the years through the 
traditional occupations of hunting, fishing and trapping. They have lived on the land and have depended 
upon the land and the lakes for their food, clothing and shelter. 
 
In more recent years, Mr. Speaker, people have turned to the new industries of the North to add to their 
incomes. Mining, forestry and tourism, in particular, have assumed a new importance in the lives of our 
people. Today people throughout the North are combining work in resource industries with work in 
traditional occupations to make a livelihood. These kinds of changes do not come easily, Mr. Speaker. The 
people have struggled to adapt and benefit from such changes. The provincial  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
257 

government had to assume its responsibility to northern people in working with them to achieve their 
aspirations for social, political and economic development. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. YEW: — Northern people also operate their own institutions and self-help societies, ranging from the 
local day care centres, local housing groups, recreation associations, alcohol rehab centres, to local 
co-operative enterprises. Examples are: the Northern Contractors' Association, the federated fishermen's 
association, the trapper's association, the Association of Northern Forestry Contractors, etc. I could name 
many more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These achievements were made when the government and the people worked together and understood each 
other. I am afraid that such a spirit of co-operation does not exist any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on June 18, I wrote a letter to the Hon. George McLeod, Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, 
and I quote the following: 
 

Dear Mr.. McLeod: 
 

I am writing to you, as an elected representative of northern people to express amazement and 
disappointment with your recent statement concerning the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. If 
the press has quoted you correctly ("DNS was just a socialist experiment which used northern people 
as guinea pigs"), you have shown an incredible ignorance of the North and you have insulted its 
people. This type of comment also indicates that you come to this important portfolio with a number 
of preconceived, negative opinions about the people of the North. As northern people, we hear 
enough of those shallow statements from other sectors of society without having to hear it from a 
person in a position of power, particularly a person who is supposed to be responsible for the health 
and welfare of all people living in northern Saskatchewan. 

 
If you want to attack the previous government for its activities in the North, don't do it on the backs 
of northern people. You should certainly know better than to suggest that they are nothing more than 
submissive guinea pigs. 

 
DNS was not created to perform some "socialist experiment." It was the former government's 
recognition that the complex economic, social and political problems in the North required a new 
approach. In part, northern people asked for government intervention which would allow us to 
participate in the development of our resources. 

 
There have been many success stories and many gains for northern people through DNS: surface 
lease agreements with developers which make sure  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
258 

that the benefits of resources and other developments go first to northern people, freight and 
transportation subsidies to fishermen, training and support programs for northern contractors, 
preferential treatment for northern contractors, the establishment of local government with per capita 
and revenue-sharing support, community infrastructures (housing, water and sewer, community halls, 
recreation arenas, etc.), communications and transportation. These gains mean much to northern 
people; however to the private sector they often seem like government meddling. As Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan, he should understand that the interests of the large, private companies are 
not always the interests of northern people. In the future, I trust that you will give northern people the 
respect and dignity that they deserve. Sincerely, MLA for Cumberland. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. YEW: — I hope that hon. members opposite will remember my advice and treat northern people and 
native people with the respect that they deserve. Mr. Speaker, the government must be a partner with 
northern people toward achieving their goals. I will have much to say about this at later dates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to mention the communities of Sandy Bay and Pelican Narrows, both located in my 
constituency. The people of Sandy Bay and Pelican Narrows, for instance, have been facing challenges since 
the 1920s, when the Hudson's Bay Mining and Smelting Company began underground operations in the 
Creighton-Flin Flon area. That story was not a particularly happy one for the local people. Very few people 
of Indian ancestry have ever been employed in the mines, and the company has made practically no effort to 
improve opportunities for the local people. The people of Sandy Bay did get some work at the Island Falls 
hydro-electric plant, which was built to serve the mine, but that disappeared when the plant was automated 
in the late '60s. 
 
The struggle of the people of Sandy Bay and Pelican Narrows has been long and difficult, Mr. Speaker. 
Today they still face immense obstacles in attempting to establish a firm economic base for their 
communities. 
 
There are many more communities in the constituency, each of which is special and different — for instance, 
Mr. Speaker, the community of Cumberland House. This is the oldest community in Saskatchewan, and it is 
truly an historic settlement. The people of this community are rightfully proud of what they have achieved 
over the years. The trappers, the fishermen, forest operators and outfitters of Cumberland House are known 
as being among the best in the North. Cumberland House is one of the best sporting and hunting areas in the 
province, managed and operated largely by local people. Progress has been made, but much remains to be 
done. But Cumberland House, too, has needs and problems that still need to be dealt with, and it will be 
important this government do so. 
 
I can't talk about each of the communities that I represent, Mr. Speaker. That would take too long, but I do 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the social and economic conditions of these communities have improved a 
great deal over the last 10 years. Until the early 1970s, Mr. Speaker, the North and its people and its 
communities were largely ignored and forgotten and were isolated from the rest of the province. The North 
was largely bypassed in terms of industrial and other types of economic development. 
 
Even the three mines operating in the North near Uranium City, Wollaston Lake and  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
259 

Creighton provided little in terms of jobs and other benefits to northern people. Traditional occupations 
involving wood harvesting, fishing, trapping, and hunting had reached a stage where it was very difficult for 
anyone to make a living from such work. 
 
Health and other social services were very poor. The infant mortality rate was well over twice that of the rest 
of the province. Fifty per cent of the people put in hospitals were under 15 years of age. Many diseases and 
sicknesses hit northern people much more often than people in the South. 
 
Unemployment, alcoholism, and violence were very common. These things happened, Mr. Speaker, because 
of the poverty, the lack of services, and the lack of development in the North. People in northern 
Saskatchewan were isolated. Education was underfunded and facilities were poor. The majority of the people 
lived in substandard housing. Social and health care services were very limited. Few communities had water 
and sewer and local government was practically non-existent. 
 
The change that has taken place over the last 10 years has been astounding, Mr. Speaker. Things have 
improved greatly in the North. That improvement started, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP came to power in 
1971. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. YEW: — That government, under the leadership of Allan Blakeney, decided that the North must no 
longer be left out and ignored and isolated. A comprehensive northern development strategy was adopted by 
the government. As part of this, the decision was made to establish a single agency in government 
responsible for co-ordinating and delivering government services in the North. This agency, the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan, has now bee in existence for 10 years. The changes that have taken place in the 
North during this time have been remarkable. Dependency on welfare is breaking down as new forms of 
development take place, and as traditional occupations are strengthened. Public services have improved 
immensely. Let me just mention a few examples of how this is true. 
 
During the five years prior to 1972 about 85 new homes were built in the North. Since 1972, in comparison, 
about 1,800 new housing units were built. Prior to 1972 sewer and water services didn't exist in northern 
Saskatchewan. Today, most major communities have modern water and sewer systems. 
 
Prior to 1972 schools in northern Saskatchewan were a disgrace. Today, there is hardly a community that has 
not had a school built or renovated over the past 10 years. Funds for the operation of schools have increased 
fivefold over the last 10 years. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker, and talk about the improvements in health services, in programs for children and 
the elderly, in adult education and vocational training, and many other areas. But really, Mr. Speaker, I 
simply want to make the point that much good has happened over the last 10 years, and that DNS has 
worked with northern people to bring this type of change to fruition. 
 
As time has passed, the DNS has placed greater and greater emphasis on development. True development, 
Mr. Speaker, only takes place when people do things for themselves, in co-operation with government and 
others, rather than depending on other to do things for them. If this is to happen, the government must listen 
to people and help people to achieve their own goals. In its early days, Mr. Speaker, DNS had to do a 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
260 

 lot of things itself so that the North could catch up in basic services. But in recent years it has been placing 
more and more emphasis on helping northern people do things for themselves. 
 
There is much that northern people want to do and must do if they are to have similar benefits and similar 
living standards to those enjoyed by people living in the South. There is much that needs to be done yet in 
terms of political development, economic development and the provision of services. Northern people 
cannot do these things alone. They will continue to need the help and co-operation of government. 
 
I find today, Mr. Speaker, that northern people are worried. They are worried that they will not get that help 
and co-operation from this new government. The new minister, for instance, announced that DNS 
(Department of Northern Saskatchewan) is to be dismantled. And he made this announcement without 
talking to the people of northern Saskatchewan. There was no consultation or public participation. People 
want to know what this means, Mr. Speaker. Does it mean that decisions about the North will now be made 
without consulting the people of northern Saskatchewan? Does this new minister intend to behave like the 
Deputy Premier, who says that this government can do whatever it wants and that it doesn't need to tell 
anyone its reasons? 
 
The people want to know whether this means that decisions which affect the lives of Northerners will now 
be made by civil servants in Regina, just like in the days before DNS. If it means that, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of the North will not accept it. The people of the North are past the point of letting governments tell 
them what will be done. Under the previous government they became used to being consulted and involved 
and they will expect the same thing from this government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, I want to ask this government to give this legislature a promise that it will 
consult the people and listen to the people of northern Saskatchewan before it goes any further. 
 
Let me also tell the members of the legislature some of the things that northern people will tell them. They 
will tell them that they want a new northern municipalities act to give northern people greater powers of 
self-government. They want to have the revenue-sharing and equalization grants to local government which 
were promised to them by the former administration. These things are needed so that northern people can 
really go the next step in getting greater control over their own lives, their own futures and their own 
destinies. 
 
Northern people will also tell this new government, if it will listen, that true development in the North has 
only started. Much remains to be done and the government must co-operate and help. People want 
employment and access to jobs. Yes, definitely, they want economic development and jobs. That means that 
government must continue to work to create jobs in the North through its departments, its crown 
corporations and its programs. Northern developers must continue to provide special job and business 
opportunities for Northerners and government must continue to insist that this is done. 
 
Training and education are also important. DNS has started some excellent training programs. People want 
those continued and expanded, not dismantled. People want to know whether the new La Ronge training 
centre will be started immediately, as  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
261 

promised by the former government, or whether it, too, has been dismantled before it has even begun. 
 
The La Ronge Hospital is very important. It is a service which is direly needed by the people of La Ronge 
and the surrounding communities, communities at Southend, Brabant, Stanley Mission, Pinehouse, and I 
could go on to list another half-dozen communities. That hospital is very important to the people of the area, 
and the community. It, too, must be started. It must be started not only for the services, but also because of 
the high unemployment which exists presently. It is an important essential service which is required by the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Northern people will tell the government that they will not accept having the North turned over to private 
developers who don't care about northern people. They want government and crown corporations to continue 
to play an important role so that Northerners can be included as full and equal partners in decision making. 
Most northern people tell the government that they have many questions about dismantling DNS. Northern 
people do not want responsibilities and decisions taken out of the North. They are afraid that will happen if 
DNS is taken apart. They still believe that Northerners should have a standard of living equal to that of 
people in the South. In order to get that, many improved programs and services are still needed. People are 
worried that if DNS is dismantled, improvements in education, housing, water and sewer, electricity, 
communication and economic development programs, and the like will come to an end. 
 
During the life of DNS, northern people have seen northern spending go from $2.9 million to well over $100 
million. The people want to know what will happen to this money now. Will it be used to help the 
corporations, the rich and the powerful? Must Northerners suffer to pay for the expensive promises of this 
new government? 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, Northerners are worried. They are worried about their future under this new 
administration, and judging by the actions of this government to date, they have reason to be worried. Let me 
say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the government has a heavy responsibility and obligation to the people in 
northern Saskatchewan. Northern people don't want any new directions which lead them deeper into poverty, 
unemployment and underdevelopment. That is where this government will take them if it doesn't stop to 
listen to the people, and involve the people in its decisions. 
 
The Speech from the Throne offers nothing to Northerners. This government has failed to consult 
Northerners about the decisions it is making. I cannot accept that, Mr. Speaker, and for that reason, I cannot 
support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, and fellow members of the Legislative Assembly, I am very proud 
and honoured to rise on this historic occasion — historic not only for me but for all the great people of my 
constituency, and all the fine people of this province. They now see an exciting future for this province. 
 
The sun was beginning to set on Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but the dawn of a new era is breaking over 
Saskatchewan, and that sun that broke through on April 26, 1982, is growing stronger and stronger every 
day. There is a new enthusiasm, an air of excitement, and an anticipation of greatness among the people of 
the Weyburn constituency. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
262 

It is indeed a weighty responsibility that these fine people have entrusted to me. I have a deep sense of moral 
obligation as I go about the discharge of my duties. During the recent campaign, I met and worked with 
many fine people who I would like to acknowledge and thank at this time for their hospitality, their interest, 
their many kindnesses, and for electing me to this legislature. 
 
I would also like to congratulate all newly elected members and all re-elected members to this, the 20th 
legislature of the province of Saskatchewan. Special congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, on your election as 
Speaker of the House, and to my colleagues for Melfort and Saskatoon Riversdale for jobs well-done as 
mover and seconder of the throne speech debate. 
 
At this time as well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay tribute to the former MLA for the Weyburn 
constituency, Mr.. Auburn Pepper. Over the last 18 years that he represented that riding, he came to know 
well its needs and desires. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, allow me to familiarize you and members present with my constituency. It is a 
microcosm of what this province is all about. It is part city and part country. The city of Weyburn, 10,000 
strong; the country is made up of many viable farm communities centred by busy towns and villages like 
Stoughton, Fillmore, Creelman, to mention but a few. There are big businesses and little businesses, and all 
sizes in between, manufacturing everything from pipe to wire, and supplying the full range of goods and 
services that any community could need or want. 
 
It has substantial employment in government offices and in private offices. It has many, many productive 
grain and livestock farms. Add to all of this, the diversity offered by an oil patch, and you can see, Mr. 
Speaker, that my constituency is indeed a microcosm of this province. 
 
But most of all, we have people and families. We have it all but, unfortunately, many of the people in my 
constituency have been hurting over the past several months and years, as they have endured a cold-hearted 
NDP administration. They are hurting because of inflation, hurting because of high interest rates, and hurting 
because of burdensome taxes. The list goes on and on. But, Mr. Speaker, what really hurt them most was that 
the former (with the emphasis on former) NDP government wasn't even listening to their problems. It was 
unresponsive. It didn't care. For those reasons, Mr. Speaker, we are in, and they are out. 
 
We listened. We are tackling inflation by eliminating taxes like the 20 per cent sliding gas tax and 
addressing high interest rates faced by home-owners and farmers. We know that, above all, people want 
responsive government. We know people want the legislature to get back to basics, to legislate and regulate 
— not to be some kind of corporate head office. People want a government where the trust of spending is in 
traditional areas, like health and education, with much less emphasis on those big business ventures fraught 
with risks best left to those with risk capital. This is welcome new, Mr. Speaker, to my constituents, since 
hospitals and nursing homes are very much on their minds. The former government got itself tied up in so 
many ventures that people just shook their heads and said, "And what did our government buy this month?" 
There is no doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that one must have a delicate balance between private and 
public investment. It's like a pendulum: too far this way is unsatisfactory and, similarly, too far the other way 
is equally unsatisfactory. There has  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
263 

to be that sensible middle ground, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I'd like to offer a bit more history of the Weyburn constituency (political history, that is), Mr. Speaker. My 
seat also was represented by a former premier of this province, the Hon. Tommy Douglas, and I was glad 
when the member for Shaunavon acknowledged him today. In fact, for some 17 years he represented 
Weyburn provincially, and as he visited farms and farm homes there was a story he often told which came to 
be known as the cream separator story. He would share it often with his constituents. In it he drew a 
comparison between the cream separator and the capitalist economic system. He likened the farmer with his 
pail of whole milk to the primary producer, and the farmer's daughter or son or wife, or whoever turned the 
cream separator handle, to the worker. For their input of labour in the case of the worker, or product in the 
case of the farmer, they got to take turns at the skimpy skim milk spout. And the owner of the machine — 
according to Mr.. Douglas, the corporate elite — sat at a stool in front of the separator with the cream spout 
in his mouth getting all that thick, rich cream for himself. Now, Mr.. Douglas reckoned, as a democratic 
socialist, that what was needed was for the worker and the primary producer to get their hands on the 
regulator of the machine so that everyone got homogenized milk — a little cream for everyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that in Saskatchewan over the past few years, the chubby little fellow sitting on 
the stool with the cream spout in his mouth was the former NDP government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. HEPWORTH: — It was not the capitalists of the corporate elite. It was the NDP planners of state 
capitalism. We all recognize the limitations of democratic socialism, but a course of state capitalism in this 
province has been absolutely devastating. Former Premier Douglas must have been very saddened to see the 
principles of socialism he pioneered, as evidenced by this story, thrown out the window by the NDP 
administration over the past few years. Mr. Speaker, the NDPers are in opposition today, and are so few in 
opposition today because they weren't even good socialists. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. HEPWORTH: — They sucked up all the revenue — that is to say all the cream they could get into 
their fat little tummies — and rather than redistribute some of this to the people, they went on buying more 
and more cream separators, uranium mines, potash mines, and, worst of all, farmland. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR.. HEPWORTH: — Rather than set away some of this resource revenue for a rainy day, a real heritage 
fund, it was continually being siphoned off, or should I say pumped, into these big government business 
ventures — the very things pioneers like the Hon. T. C. Douglas despised. They became the biggest business 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the worst is yet to come. That rainy day came upon Saskatchewan, its people and its families, and they 
are hurting. It's called a recession. And the absolutely embarrassing and shocking fact, as I've pointed out, is 
that the former NDP administration hadn't even realized people were hurting. It hadn't bothered to listen to 
what the people had been trying to tell it. We had become a forgotten people. Fortunately, the Conservatives, 
under the able leadership of now-Premier Grant Devine, had been listening, and that's  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
264 

why the gas tax is gone, and that's why home-owners and young farmers are getting a break on interest rates. 
 
Some members in opposition have suggest that our mortgage assistance program is only for the rich, that it 
doesn't help the little guy. Well, I think it is abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that this helps many, many 
families, and I would suggest that probably more than 100,000 will have been helped by the time this 
program rolls around to June 1985. To suggest that it does not help people living in more modest housing is 
poor arithmetic. The plan helps those with mortgages from zero to $50,000, however small that mortgage 
may be — real help for real families in my constituency, not just those in houses, but those in trailer homes 
and duplexes. 
 
This is a very human program. We are a compassionate government. Recall, members of the opposition, that 
the Douglas campaign slogan in 1944 was "humanity first." You would do well to take note of that fact. We 
put people first, with real help for real families, Mr. Speaker, And these families are looking to us to provide 
continued guidance and direction in the future. 
 
We accept the fact that we have inherited a situation that leaves, in many areas, a great deal to be desired. 
This will not dampen our enthusiasm. We will set our goals and we will hustle after them and we will be 
number one. There will be shadows, but you only get shadows when the sun is shining. 
 
Personally, I will do my absolute best to see that all constituents are served well. Mr. Speaker, I end my part 
in this debate simply saying that in Saskatchewan, at least, the rain has stopped, the sun is shining. I support 
the motion. Thank you. 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am delighted to take part in this debate yet again, and I know 
that my colleagues will want to associate themselves with me in my comments on the amendment. The 
amendment before you deals with issues of jobs and summer employment. It deals with issues which are 
very close to the minds of people in Saskatchewan today. 
 
When we look back on the last couple of weeks, couple of months, we cannot help but look back with some 
measure of dismay. Certainly our economy is in difficulty. This was recognized in the Speech from the 
Throne itself. It is recognized as well in the amendment. This is not something that came up in the last four 
weeks or six weeks — far from it. It came up, I would say, a year ago when it became clear that the 
agreement between the Government of Alberta and the Government of Canada on the national energy 
program was not going to encourage substantial development in the oil industry in western Canada. At the 
time interest rates rose, and while many people felt they might fall, they did not fall. The combined effect of 
the high interest rates and the failure of the national energy policy to revive the oil industry, following the 
disastrous budget of November, 1980, have meant that there were difficulties arising in western Canada. 
 
The budget of the previous government in March attempted to address those, because we felt there would be 
a good number of problems arising as a result of the combined effect of the national energy program and the 
tight money policies being pursued by the Trudeau government, and being endorsed, so far as tight money 
policies were concerned, by the previous Progressive Conservative government headed by the Rt. Hon. Mr.. 
Clark with his minister of finance, Mr.. Crosbie. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
265 

It was our judgment that those policies were wrong-headed. It was our judgment that we in Canada should 
attempt to separate ourselves from the interest rate policy being pursued by the Government of the United 
States. It is admittedly not easy for the Government of Canada to separate itself from the interest policies of 
the Government of the United States, but as those policies continued to call for high interest rates and those 
high interest rates continued to have a disastrous effect on the businesses, farmers and home-owners of 
western Canada and other areas of Canada, we felt that the Government of Canada ought to take the plunge 
and attempt to separate itself from the fiscal and monetary policies, notably the monetary policies, of the 
United States. 
 
Other governments have done that, admittedly under very different circumstances. Interest rates in Japan 
may be 6 or 7 per cent; interest rates in some parts of Europe are very significantly lower than our North 
American interest rates. I think that the time may well have arrived (and it is our view that it has arrived) 
when the Government of Canada should attempt to separate itself from the interest rates set by the federal 
reserve board of the United States. Be that as it may, there is no way that a provincial government can define 
an interest rate policy for a province separate and apart from the interest rate policy of the Government of 
Canada. 
 
We therefore, as the previous provincial government, attempted to do what was available to us to do, and 
that was to mount very, very substantial capital programs in power generation, in housing, and in a good 
number of other areas. This we estimated would create some 4,000 jobs. That is a very, very significant 
figure. 
 
We proposed those policies because we believed that there were going to be substantial difficulties in a good 
number of areas of the Saskatchewan economy. We were not sure what would happen in the agricultural 
economy, but there were already clouds on the horizon with respect to agriculture, particularly with respect 
to the grain economy. The livestock economy was in its usual state of uncertainty and, as a matter of fact, it 
has not experienced as many difficulties this spring as it has some other springs. 
 
But with respect to the grain economy, one must be an optimist to believe that grain prices are going to 
increase; one must be an optimist to believe that farm net income will increase this year. It may well be that 
farm gross income will increase, but as for farm net income, one has to be an optimist to believe that that 
will be the case. I think we are all aware of the situation which has arisen already this spring (compared with 
last spring) with respect to the very substantial drop in wheat board payments. My recollection of the figures 
is that the wheat board payments last year exceeded $700 million in Saskatchewan, and this year they will be 
less than $300 million. We, therefore, had the situation where it appeared that action would need to be taken 
in order to stimulate the Saskatchewan economy. I have mentioned the farm economy. It was already 
beginning to be clear that in potash there were going to be difficulties, and as the winter wore on, it began to 
be clear that the oil industry was not going to revive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the format of the budget made clear that our government proposed to take action to 
provide jobs, to provide the summer jobs, and to provide the other economic activity referred to in the 
amendment. I particularly want to touch upon a couple of aspects of the amendment and to touch upon 
aspects of allowing people to keep jobs who have jobs. A look at the amendment will indicate that that was 
one of the points made in the amendment. Now, some of the people who had jobs but are not able to keep 
jobs are people at Ipsco. They have been laid off. They have been laid off in part because the government 
opposite has not taken steps to encourage construction  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
266 

projects which our government had hoped to see go forward. Reference has been made in the question period 
to the natural gas program. Indeed, a good number of references were made to the natural gas program, to the 
program proposed by the former government, and to the program at least proposed in words by the current 
government. 
 
One of the reasons for proceeding with the natural gas program was to provide employment, so that people 
who now have jobs could keep their jobs — people in the construction industry who had jobs, and who were 
looking forward to having jobs this summer, people at Ipsco who had jobs manufacturing pipe for the oil 
industry, but for whom there was some evidence that there would not be jobs this summer unless some pipe 
was manufactured for the natural gas distribution system. Accordingly, we recommended and we urged that 
there be a program to provide for a natural gas delivery to a good number of smaller communities in 
Saskatchewan. We would hope that program would go forward. We are sorry that the throne speech did not 
set out what we think it should have set out, that the government was going to proceed with some of these 
programs so that people who now have jobs would be able to continue to have jobs — jobs in pipe laying, 
jobs in manufacturing pipe. 
 
The same I would say with respect to house construction. The house construction industry was in a 
reasonable state, but only a reasonable state last year. We were fearful that house construction would decline 
if interest rates did not decline, and interest rates, I regret to say, have not declined. No one, I think, could be 
sure that interest rates would decline. Accordingly, no one could be sure that there would be a robust house 
construction program this summer unless action was taken by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
Accordingly, proposals were put forward to build a good number of houses under a good number of 
categories. Perhaps I should say a good number of housing units, since some of them were single family 
dwellings and some of them were multiple housing units. 
 
So far as I am aware, Mr. Speaker, most of those programs are not going forward. And because they are not 
going forward, people who had jobs do not now have jobs. We regret very much that the Speech from the 
Throne does not deal with this issue of housing. So that people who now have jobs in the housing industry 
could continue to have them. I instance, for example, the program to provide mortgage assistance for people 
with low incomes, guaranteeing them a 16 per cent rate, admittedly a rather high rate, but for a period of 10 
years, and guaranteeing them, further, that the payment of that mortgage rate would not consume more than 
30 per cent of their disposable income. We believed that that program would have tapped an entirely new 
housing market, one which would not only have provided housing for this stratum of society which will not 
qualify for any conventional mortgages, but would also have provided a significant number of jobs. A 
thousand houses is not small housing program and I think all of us know that housing construction, 
particularly, has a very substantial multiplier effect. There is always a good number of things that any person 
moving into a new house finds that he needs. He needs furniture and he needs to build a fence and he needs 
to seed his lawn and all the other things that some of us who have moved into new houses know all too well. 
It may well indeed cause the new home-owner to lose his weekends, but it also causes him to lose his small 
change and some of his large change to his local merchant and the local merchant very much appreciates the 
economic activity generated by house construction and house occupancy. 
 
Here is a program aimed to tap an entirely new stratum., a program which was referred to in the last budget 
but not referred to the in Speech from the Throne, and not referred  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
267 

to in any legislation or any discussion of what new housing programs will be offered by the government 
opposite. There was no suggestion that their programs will tap this new stratum, and because of that, Mr. 
Speaker, a lot of people who now have jobs are not going to have jobs. And a lot of people who would like 
to have jobs are not going to have jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of that a good number of students who always pick up jobs in the casual construction 
industry, particularly house construction, will not have jobs. Students quite often do not pick up jobs in the 
regular construction industry, which is carefully unionized, and they are always at the bottom of the seniority 
ladder, but when it comes to house construction, where much of the construction is carried out by small 
contractors, subcontractors and the like, all manner of people are working, including students and people 
working at night. It is a place where people who are not part of the regular workforce traditionally find 
employment during the summer. I should say where the regular workforce and the regular construction 
workforce traditionally find jobs during the summer. 
 
There will not be those jobs this summer because the government opposite has not mentioned in the Speech 
from the Throne programs such as that. 
 
I instance also the proposal in the previous budget to build rental accommodation. Rental accommodation is 
needed. One needs only to look at the vacancy rates in Regina and Saskatoon to know that a program of 
providing rental accommodation is needed. 
 
I do not know whether the budget that will come down next Monday will confirm the proposals in the 
previous federal budget, but it will be known to members of this House that the previous federal budget cut 
off an incentive program which led to the construction of a good number of multiple housing units all across 
Canada. We're all familiar in a general way with that program, the so-called multiple unit residential building 
tax concession, the MURBs. Now, MURBs were struck out of the tax concession by Mr.. MacEachen's last 
budget and we must, I think, assume at this state of the game, and certainly it ought to have been assumed by 
the persons who drew up the Speech from the Throne, that MURBs will continue to be struck out, that the 
MURB tax break will not be available and, accordingly, the number of multiple units built for rental will 
decrease, and decrease substantially. 
 
In the face of that, in the face of a potential substantial decrease in multiple unit construction this year or 
next (there's some residual going on this year, because of projects started in November) it was the belief that 
the Government of Saskatchewan out to be active in this area. The Speech from the Throne makes no 
mention of that. For these purposes, I will say that the Government of Saskatchewan should be active in that 
area, not for the sake of generating the housing units (although that obviously is desirable), but so that people 
who have jobs would keep them. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What is your point of order? 
 
MR.. KATZMAN: — Could the member relate it to the amendment please? 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — The amendment reads as follows and I will try to read it slowly for the 
member from Rosthern: 
 

but regrets that Your Honour's advisers, while recognizing that this is a  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
268 

time of severe economic strain for Saskatchewan, have failed to propose any adequate measures to: 
 

1. Help people who have jobs to keep jobs; 
 

2. Help students to get summer jobs; 
 

3. Help those with the lowest incomes to deal with the severe hardship of rising prices. 
 

Now, I was attempting to say, Mr. Speaker, that there were clearly going to be fewer jobs in the construction 
of multiple unit housing this year, because the MURB program was shut off in Ottawa, as would be known 
by the people who drew up this Speech from the Throne. I was attempting to say that, under those 
circumstances, the Government Saskatchewan had an obligation to move in to encourage the construction of 
multiple unit residential buildings so that people who have jobs can keep them and so that there would be 
summer employment. 
 
I am surprised, indeed shocked, to think that members opposite are not aware of the employment potential of 
residential construction. Every proposal . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We are, of course, delighted to hear 
that they have plans. I know that the students will be delighted to hear that they have plans, but I think that 
the students who want summer jobs would be even more delighted to think that they had a job. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — You can't eat plans and you can't wear plans. These people want jobs. They 
don't want something promised who knows, someday, maybe; they want something mounted this summer. 
And that is not going to happen, or it's going to happen very belatedly, because of the fact that the Speech 
from the Throne does not propose to go ahead with plans which are already under way to provide just those 
jobs. 
 
There are a good number of other projects which were referred to in the previous budget, which could 
provide jobs and which are not going to provide jobs, because those plans are not going forward. We heard 
the Minister of Highways, a few days ago in question period, indicate that his government had let highway 
contracts on the order of approximately $5 million. I do not have before me how many contracts had been let 
by the previous government, but it would not be a large number and out of a highway capital program of 
$100 million a letting of contracts between early May and late June of $5 million is hardly going to lead to a 
rush of highway construction this summer. In fact my bet would be that they will not use their entire capital 
budget this summer. I could be wrong on that, but I would be surprised. My bet is that a good number of 
projects, which would have gone ahead this summer if the framers of the Speech from Throne had had in 
mind helping people who have jobs to keep them, will not go forward, and the result will be not only be no 
highways but also no jobs for the people in the constructions industry, and no jobs for students this summer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the third part of this amendment, which I want to deal with for a moment before I come 
back to a couple of other areas where employment is not being provided, deals with help for those with the 
lowest incomes to deal with the severe hardship of rising prices. 
 
I don't want to repeat what I said earlier in this debate, but even a cursory look at the  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
269 

people who are suffering most in this society right now will identify them as people at the lowest end of the 
income scale — senior citizens, and particularly senior citizens who are renting, who are alone in the sense 
that they are not living with a spouse and who are renting accommodation. All the figures will show that. 
Those are the ones who are in the toughest shape, the senior singles who are renting. There is no doubt that 
they are in tough shape. And generally pensioners. And I would also have to say injured workmen and other 
people — veterans and others who are living on small pensions. 
 
There is no question whatever that this group of people is suffering most in this society. Indeed, we don't 
need to be in any way clairvoyant to know that in times of rapid inflation the people who suffer most are the 
people who have incomes which are fixed, fixed because they have no bargaining power and are not able to 
raise their incomes. They are not unionized, or they don't have any control over the price at which they sell 
their goods, or labour, or they are people who are living on pensions or other fixed payments (old age 
pensions or payments from the workers' compensation board, or the like). These surely are the people with 
the lowest incomes; these surely are the people who are suffering the most severe hardships because of rising 
prices. 
 
I ask members opposite what this throne speech holds for those people in our society. What does it hold? 
Clearly, unless they happen to have a mortgage on a home (this is not the ordinary situation for most of these 
people) . . . I am well aware of the condition of many people in this general category because I have a 
constituency which is peopled by a large number of senior citizens, the great bulk of whom do not have 
mortgages on their homes, who have very modest homes and who drive a very small number of miles. 
Indeed, most of them ride the bus. These people in my constituency of Elphinstone will get no benefit from 
the mortgage interest assistance program referred to in the Speech from the Throne. They will get very, very 
scant benefit from The Fuel Petroleum Products Act revisions proposed in the Speech from the Throne. And 
they are the people who most deserve it, no question about it. 
 
In my constituency, there are also some more well-to-do people, particularly younger people who have good 
jobs, who have bought older homes and fixed them up, and who have taken out mortgages, and where one of 
them works, indeed, two of them work, and they frequently have two cars. I know because they're in my 
riding. It has become fashionable in recent years in Regina for younger people not to buy a three-bedroom 
bungalow in the suburbs. Some of them do, indeed, but some of them are buying older homes in the older 
areas and they're fixing them up. 
 
These people, sure, they're under a little financial pressure, but nothing like the financial pressure of the old 
couple who live next door to them in a home which isn't fixed up, who frequently do not own a car and, if 
they do, don't drive it very far. These are the people who are really under the gun and these are the people 
who are not assisted by the proposals put out and identified in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — These are the people with the lowest incomes, the people who are suffering 
the severest hardship, and the people whose concerns are not addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we're getting a great number of contributions in the debate on this amendment and I know that 
we will . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As the member for Turtleford has indicated from behind me, I am 
appreciating the help. I take it, it is he . . .  



 
June 24, 1982 

 
270 

(inaudible interjection) . . . I am not equipped with a periscope or a rear-view mirror. 
 
Let me, then, return to other things which I think should have been in the Speech from the Throne to help 
people to get jobs or to help students get summer jobs. Certainly, with respect to summer employment, it has 
been customary in this province, when it appeared that there were going to be difficulties for student 
employment, for the governments to mount specific programs. Many members opposite may remember some 
of them: the so-called YES program, the youth employment services program operated by the Department of 
Culture and Youth a few years ago, and the so-called SWIG program, the Students Working in Government 
program. 
 
The youth employment service program was one whereby the province offered assistance to recreational 
boards and municipal councils and others to employ students who might otherwise find difficulty in finding 
employment, in doing jobs which needed to be done and in expanding and enhancing the recreational 
opportunities all across this province. And many of the persons who were supervising swimming pools or 
playgrounds were young people who in the past were employed as a result of summer employment programs 
mounted by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
But do we find anything of that kind in this throne speech? We do not. There is simply no reference to any 
assistance to help students supervise children swimming at swimming pools. There is an oblique reference to 
swimming pools. Indeed there is, because there is a clear indication that there is going to be assistance for 
people who have mortgages on homes, worth $150,000, with a swimming pool. They're going to get 
assistance under this throne speech. Certainly, there is no suggestion that there will be any assistance in 
enabling the recreational board at Wakaw or any other community to hire a student as they have so often in 
the summer. Not any of that is in the Speech from the Throne. None of it is there. 
 
We are also very, very concerned that there's no indication in the Speech from the Throne that some of the 
construction projects mounted by some of the crown corporations are going forward. We were, of course, 
delighted to hear that the Nipawin dam project will be going forward. We have, however, heard no 
indication that some of the programs proposed by Sask Tel are going forward. One would be delighted, I 
know, if the minister in charge would indicate whether or not all of the rural buried cable programs, which 
had been going forward steadily each summer, will be going forward. Certainly, we are in virtually year 
seven of the program of consolidating rural telephone companies into Sask Tel. It would certainly be 
regretted if those programs were not going forward, if those were put on hold as so many other programs 
have been put on hold. 
 
I was at a function last evening where there were references to whether or not particular capital programs in 
the health field were going forward. My colleague, the member for Cumberland, mentioned particularly two 
projects that are of interest to his constituency. One of them is in the health field. We have the La Ronge 
Hospital which has apparently fallen between some cracks because it has not emerged. It has not emerged as 
a construction project for the current government, and more particularly, it has not emerged as a method of 
providing jobs to people in northern Saskatchewan who desperately need jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite are having difficulty figuring out how a construction project, which would 
provide jobs for people who are now working on construction  



 
June 24, 1982 

 

 
271 

projects in northern Saskatchewan but who will need a new project very shortly, could be related to people 
who have jobs being able to keep them. It is, I think, very, very difficult, Mr. Speaker, if I have so little 
persuasive power that I am unable to convince them that to work on a hospital will provide someone with a 
job. I would have thought that was reasonably self-evident, but I will go more slowly. I will go more slowly 
when I talk about the training facility at La Ronge because that one involves jobs now and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget, which I have already referred to and which was brought down in this House in 
March, referred to training facilities at Prince Albert and La Ronge. The Prince Albert one was identified a 
year before and is well under way, so far as planning and site location and the rest is concerned. My concern 
is for La Ronge on this occasion. My concern is the fact that we have had no indication from the Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan or others that that project is going forward. I would be delighted if the Minister for 
Northern Saskatchewan, when he participates in this debate on the amendment, will confirm that the training 
facility at La Ronge is going forward. I would be delighted if the Minister of Continuing Education, when he 
enters this debate on the amendment, will confirm that the technical institute at Prince Albert is going 
forward, because each of these will help, and help materially, people keep the jobs they now have, if they are 
in construction. Each of them would help, and help materially, students get summer jobs. So we are rather 
clearly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I am having difficulty getting the interjections from the member for 
Meadow Lake. Mr. Speaker, I am consulting with the House Leader here. I am asked to give way so that an 
hon. member can introduce some students, and with your leave, Mr. Speaker, I will. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR.. KOSKIE: — I would like to take the opportunity to thank the House for leave. We have here with us a 
group of students from Leroy School. They are from grades 2 and 3 and number 35. They are attended by 
their teachers, Kathy Arnst, Janice Krieger and the principal, Bernard Wiesgerber. I understand that the 
students came in earlier today, that they were at the RCMP barracks and saw the parade, and that they have 
had a very enjoyable time. We have had an opportunity to have a picture taken, which I will send to them. I 
ask the House to join with me in wishing them a very safe trip back to Leroy. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
HON. MR.. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I would ask that we move out of 
special order temporarily. We can jump back into it at 7 o'clock and the Leader of the Opposition will not 
lose his position in the speaking order by doing this. The reason I ask that we move out is to go to private 
bills so that the Leader of the Opposition and the member for Saskatoon University can get private bills in 
the mill, so that they can get to the committee and be dealt with as expeditiously as possible. 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the North Saskatchewan Bible Society, 
Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society 

 
MR.. FOLK: — I move that Bill No. 01, An Act to Amend An Act to incorporate the North Saskatchewan 
Bible Society, Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society, be now read a second time and referred to the 
selecting standing committee on private bills. 
 



 
June 24, 1982 

 
272 

Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to the select standing committee on private bills. 
 

Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the South Saskatchewan Bible Society, 
Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society 

 
MR.. FOLK: — I move that Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the South Saskatchewan 
Bible Society, Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society be now read a second time and referred to the 
standing committee on private members' bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to the select standing committee on private bills. 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Canadian Theological College 
 
HON. MR.. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 03 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate 
Canadian Theological College be now read a second time and referred to the standing committee on private 
members' bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to the select standing committee on private bills. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


