






















































Hansard: June 29, 1982


387 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 29, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
NOTICE OF MOTION 

 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday, July 5 move first reading of a 
bill to amend The Power Corporation Act. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Wage Control for Provincial Civil Servants 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, it will be known to all hon. members that there was a federal 
budget last night. It will also be known that, in the federal budget, there was a proposal for the control of 
wages for federal civil servants and a proposal that the province join with the federal government in 
controlling the wages of provincial civil servants. The question I ask is directed to the Deputy Premier, in the 
absence of the Premier. Is it the policy of this government to control the wages of provincial civil servants in 
the manner suggested by Mr. MacEachen? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I think any government would be ill-advised to take counsel 
from the federal government on economic matters, based on its record of the past seven months, when the 
deficit has gone from $10 billion to almost $20 billion. I don't think that this government will be taking 
counsel from Pierre Trudeau or Mr. MacEachen or, for that matter, from the Leader of the Opposition, 
whose colleagues in Ottawa were responsible for putting those people in power. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the Deputy Premier then give us an 
assurance that there will be no wage controls on the salaries of the provincial public servants while other 
incomes, such as professional incomes and returns from interest and dividends in this province, are 
uncontrolled? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I don't see how control of the public sector wages will 
significantly help the situation in Ottawa when, by their own admission last night, they said they would save 
about $250 million in the first year. That pales in significance relative to the $20 billion deficit that they're 
ringing up. As it relates to assurances, I will give no such assurance. Our position, relative to that, will be 
articulated by our Premier in Ottawa. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have one final question along this line. The Deputy Premier 
will know that part of the rationale used by Mr. MacEachen last night for imposing controls on the wages of 
civil servants was that they enjoyed a certain security of tenure not enjoyed by people in the private sector. 
Then he applied his rules 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

388 
 

to the CNR, which must have been viewed with some wry disdain by employees of the CNR who have just 
been laid off. I don't think they are impressed with security of tenure. My question is this: will the Deputy 
Premier give us an assurance that employees of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan will not be subject 
to any wage controls while employees of the private sector potash companies in this province are not? Will 
he give us the similar assurance that employees of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation will not be subject 
to wage controls while the employees of Calgary Power or Northwestern Utilities, as it once was known, in 
Alberta, are not subject to wage control? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, our position relative to wage controls is quite simply that 
we have yet to be convinced that they are either fair or necessary. But I remind the Leader of the Opposition 
that this government is leading the country in measures to control inflation and interest rates. We have 
brought in a 13.25 per cent mortgage interest subsidy program. We have frozen utility rates for one year. We 
have brought in a public utilities review commission — legislation to control utility rates. 
 
All right, as it relates to the public sector wage controls, first, we have yet to be convinced that they are 
either fair or necessary. Second, we lead the nation as it relates to controlling those things which affect wage 
earners. Third, our position will be articulated by the Premier in Ottawa. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Budget Deficits 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I have a new question, Mr. Speaker. We were delighted to hear the Premier, 
the Deputy Premier, not Premier yet, deal with the issue of the budget deficit at Ottawa and indicate that any 
government that runs a budget deficit of that magnitude is clearly irresponsible. That was the import of what 
he said. Indeed, it is the belief on this side of the House, that any course of budget deficits is irresponsible at 
times of high interest rates such as this. The question I direct to the Deputy Premier is this: will he give an 
assurance that his government will not embark upon a policy of budget deficits of the kind which has us into 
difficulties in Ottawa? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I can give the House the assurance that we will do by any 
measure a hell of a lot better job than the members opposite did when they were over here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — By crunching the numbers of that party, while they were in government, we 
found that the projected deficit this year would have been in the neighbourhood of $400 million following 
your programs and your budget. I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we will be targeting for a much lower 
deficit than that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I ask a question of the Deputy Premier. In view of the fact that 
the government which preceded his government had 10 successive budgetary surpluses . . .(inaudible 
interjections) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: Order, order. Would you give the gentleman the opportunity to ask his question? 
 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
389 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, in view of the fact that the government which preceded the one 
opposite had 10 successive budgetary surpluses, certified by the provincial auditor, whose views I accept 
over those of the member for Thunder Creek, will the Deputy Premier give us an assurance that the 
government of which he is a member will have at least two successive budgetary surpluses? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I will give the assurance, Mr. Speaker, that we will in fact provide good and 
responsible government. I would hope to say that after our 20, 24, or 28 years or whatever it is in here, we 
will have far more than two. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal Grant to Home Buyers 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the minister responsible for Sask Housing, the 
Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services, and the Premier, a question to the Deputy Premier. Given the 
announcement by the federal Minister of Finance last night of a $3,000 cash grant to the purchasers of new 
houses and to first-time buyers of existing houses, what steps is the Government of Saskatchewan proposing 
to assure that Saskatchewan home buyers are eligible for this grant? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I'll simply answer the question by saying that we are 
looking into the administrative problems of dovetailing the two — our 13.25 per cent program with their 
$3,000 program. Beyond that I'll have to take notice of the question and have the Minister of Finance or the 
minister responsible for Sask Housing respond to you. 
 
You will know, of course, that the Premier, the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs, and the Minister of 
Finance are in Ottawa at the first ministers' conference. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — A supplementary. The federal government announcement says that it's 
intended that home-owners should be able to benefit from both the federal plan and the programs offered by 
provincial governments, and that maximum stimulus will thus be provided. Will the Deputy Premier, in his 
efforts to look into the program, give us assurance that the government opposite will consider amending 
section 4, subsection 1(a) of the bill to establish a mortgage interest reduction plan, which outlines the 
amount of interest reimbursement . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! It is not possible in question period to be moving amendments on bills 
that will be before this House, and I would ask you to refrain from that practice. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, my statement was not to move an amendment. My question was 
would the government consider amending the clause of the bill which refers to the amount of 
reimbursements payable on the subsidy, which says, "less any amounts received (by the person eligible) from 
other government sources with respect to his mortgage"? Will you consider amending that to guarantee that 
potential Saskatchewan home buyers will not be faced with a disincentive by taking advantage of the federal 
grant? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, the normal procedure in this House is to deal 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

390 
 

with legislation during second reading debates in committee of the whole. According to my calendar, and 
subject to the agreement of the House Leader opposite, we will be dealing with that particular legislation 
tomorrow at 10:30 a.m. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — What steps is the government prepared to take to require that all mortgage 
lending institutions in the province include both the federal grant and the Saskatchewan Mortgage Interest 
Reduction Plan subsidy in determining eligibility benefits under the Saskatchewan plan? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, we are looking into the administrative problems 
that may have surfaced as a result of the federal budget last night. I will take notice of the question. The 
Minister of Finance or the minister responsible for Sask Housing, in all likelihood, will have an answer for 
you in due course. 
 

Controls on Senior Citizens' Incomes 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the Minister of Social Services. Last 
night the federal Minister of Finance announced that increases in incomes of about 69,000 senior citizens in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and a large number more in Canada, would be frozen for the next two years at 
6 per cent this year and 5 per cent next year. 
 
I am wondering if the minister will assure this House that she, or representatives of the government, will be 
lobbying the federal government to remove this group of people from that most illogical and ridiculous 
freeze which is facing these people, who at the present time earn $233 per month for singles and $466 per 
month for a couple, so that they will get the increases that they are eligible for. 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I assure the member for Shaunavon that, yes, we will be lobbying for 
the best interest of Saskatchewan senior citizens. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In light of the very simple answer that we will be 
working in the best interest of seniors, I would like to know whether or not the government will be asking 
that the freeze be removed from those seniors to whom it has been applied as a result of last night’s budget, 
and whether or not the government will lobby to see that the freeze is removed from the 69,000 seniors. 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, we are and will be looking at the program for senior citizens. We 
will also, in light of the budget that came down last night, look at what the implications are for our senior 
citizens. If it is going to hurt, certainly we will be looking at lobbying and, from that, if we don't get 
anywhere with the federal government, we will take some initiative on our own. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I don't think it will take very much studying to 
realize that a 5 per cent increase for people who are at $466 per month is going to hurt. What I would like to 
know is whether or not, in light of the fact that this freeze is now on, the minister will assure the seniors of 
the province that the government will go ahead with the shelter allowance, which was proposed by the 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
391 

previous government, to see that the rent and power bills and telephone bills, which make up a large 
component of the expenses seniors have, will be taken into consideration. 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the member that the utility bills are frozen for at 
least a year. That affects seniors. I would also remind him that the school rebate has gone up over and above 
the level proposed by the NDP. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The question is whether or not the minister 
would assure the seniors of the province that the shelter allowance which was proposed by the previous 
government would be implemented. Just be straightforward; will the shelter allowance be implemented or 
not? 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, at this time I am not going to assure the senior citizens of that. At 
this point in time, because the administrative cost of that program was $0.75 million, I will be asking the 
department to pinpoint the target group of senior citizens who are having the most financial difficulties, in 
light of the budget last night. 
 
According to the Leader-Post of a couple of weeks ago — and one can assume what you read in there is true 
and right — 12,000 seniors, Mr. Speaker, in this province live near the poverty line. It also went on to tell us 
that many of them are single and are women. I want to remind this Assembly that that didn't happen 
overnight. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — And I also want to ask the member opposite: where were you during the past 11 
years? Miraculously, you appeared at election time with a program that would pump $750,000 into 
administration and a greater bureaucracy. No, to answer your question, we are not going to assure the seniors 
of that particular program at this point in time. We are going to be looking at alternatives that will give the 
maximum benefit to the people who need it most, and that will not be for administration. 
 

Rural Capital Fund Program 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Rural Affairs. Mr. Speaker, I 
understand that the Minister of Rural Affairs has informed the R.M.s that his government is not going to go 
ahead with, or is going to eliminate, the rural capital fund program. I would like to ask the minister if he has 
any intention or any plan to introduce a new program to replace the rural capital fund? 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome the first question in the House. This desk has not 
been addressed for some three and a half years. With regard to the program that you bring to my attention, 
the R.M.s throughout Saskatchewan were notified in January of this proposed program. The political 
implications were indicated to treasury board that it would have a great impact in rural Saskatchewan. We 
cut the program because it never was introduced in the House; it was used as a political ploy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister did not answer whether he intended to 
introduce a further program or not. I would have to say that the program 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

392 
 

that was introduced was not a political program; it was one that would enable the R.M.s to go ahead with 
some of the capital expenditures with which they couldn't go ahead on their present finances. It was 
something that would assist the R.M.s. I would like to ask the minister again: does he intend to bring in a 
program that would help these R.M.s go ahead with what they had planned and what they had budgeted for? 
The R.M.s had included in their budgets the funding that would have been coming from the rural capital 
fund. 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to advise the hon. member that we did increase the 
revenue sharing by 11.5 per cent this year. As proposed in your budget, the rural capital assistance program, 
as I indicated, was a political ploy. We will be looking at programs down the road that are not political ploys, 
but are programs to help R.M.s. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I understand the minister to be saying that he does not 
intend to assist these R.M.s at this point. He is saying that his government . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a supplementary? You're not allowed a preamble. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — My supplementary, Mr. Speaker, is whether or not the minister intends to bring in the 
program, because the R.M.s included that expenditure, and made commitments with that funding in mind, 
when they put their budgets together this spring. Will the minister provide funding to cover that expenditure 
or is he saying to the R.M.s that they should be going to the taxpayer and increasing the mill rate to pay for 
that expenditure? 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated before, the R.M.s were notified of this proposed 
program; it had to be passed by legislation in this House. It never did hit the floor of the House, and any 
R.M.s that are in trouble because they budgeted with a program that was never passed, that's their own 
responsibility. 
 

Rural Community Development Program 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Rural Affairs. I noted in the 
material used by the Progressive Conservative Party that they would create a rural community development 
program. I wonder if the minister would outline, even in a general way, the outlines of a rural community 
development program because, of course, it may replace the program which he has just indicated that he has 
axed. 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Leader of the Opposition, we have done more 
for the people of Saskatchewan in a measly two months that you did in the 11 years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: — And as for rural development, we've had two months to look at it. You had 11 
years and did nothing. We will certainly be doing something in the four years of our term. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The question I asked, and 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
393 

perhaps I hadn't made it clear, was: what was the general nature of the rural community development 
program promised by the Progressive Conservative Party not two months ago, but three months ago, and 
talked about even prior to that? I wonder if the member would indicate just the general outline of the rural 
community development program. 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Leader of the Opposition's question, we are 
looking at all programs that we promised during the campaign. In the short two months that we have been in 
power, we have done a great deal more, as I indicated, than they did in the previous 11 years. 
 

Compensation to Dismissed Public Servants 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Deputy Premier. A week ago yesterday 
he indicated in this House, in response to a question from me concerning the discharge of public servants, 
that: 
 

Any twinge of conscience that I may have had, if ever, would have been largely alleviated by the 
compensation package that has been offered for any of the former public servants who have been 
dismissed. 

 
My reference is to the words "has been offered" and I wonder if the Deputy Premier can assure us that the 
public servants who were separated by means of a series of orders in council early in the life of his 
government have been offered compensation packages? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, "has been offered" was perhaps a poor choice of words. In the 
excitement of the moment, I perhaps wasn't choosing my words carefully. In fact, they are about to be 
offered. The order was to go to cabinet tomorrow. Unfortunately, with our Minister of Intergovernmental 
Affairs, our Minister of Finance, and our Premier in Ottawa, and the fact that subject to our little agreement 
we are sitting tomorrow morning on a Friday routine, we won't be able to deal with it tomorrow, but we will 
be dealing with it at the earliest opportunity. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 18 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of 
The Public Utilities Review Commission Act 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — On behalf of the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill 
respecting the consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The Public Utilities Review 
Commission Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — On behalf of the hon. member, I move first reading of a bill to amend The 
Wildlife Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 20 — An Act respecting Elections in Urban Municipalities and School Divisions and 
repealing The Urban Municipal Elections Act 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

394 
 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move first reading of a bill respecting 
elections in urban municipalities and school divisions and repealing The Urban Municipal Elections Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting of the House. 
 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — On behalf of the hon. member I move first reading of a bill to amend The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting of the House. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Special Committee to Consider Regulations 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, with leave of the Assembly, I move, 
seconded by the Minister of Health: 
 

That members Koskie, Bacon, Baker, Gerich, Sauder, Schmidt, Sutor, Thompson and Young be 
constituted a special committee to consider every regulation filed with the Clerk of the Legislative 
Assembly pursuant to the provisions of The Regulations Act, with a view to determining whether the 
special attention of the Assembly should be drawn to any of the said regulations on any of the 
following grounds: 

 
(a) That it imposes a charge on the public revenues or prescribes a payment to be made to any public 
authority not specifically provided for by statute; 

 
(b) That it is excluded from challenge in the courts; 

 
(c) That it makes unusual or unexpected use of powers conferred by statute; 

 
(d) That it purports to have retrospective effect where the parent statute confers no express authority 
so to provide; 

 
(e) That it has been insufficiently promulgated; 

 
(f) That it is not clear in meaning; 

 
and if they so determine, to report to that effect. 

 
That the committee have the assistance of legal counsel in reviewing the said regulations, and that it 
be given the power to sit after prorogation of the Assembly, and that it be required, prior to reporting, 
that the special attention of the Assembly be drawn to any regulation to inform the government 
department or authority concerned of its intention to so report; and 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
395 

That the committee be empowered to invite any regulation-making authority to submit a 
memorandum explaining any regulation which may be under consideration by the committee, or to 
invite any regulation-making authority to appear before the committee as a witness for the purpose of 
explaining any such regulation; and 

 
That the by-laws of professional associations and amendments thereto, as tabled, be referred to the 
committee and that the committee be empowered to review those by-laws and amendments to 
determine whether or not they are in any way prejudicial to the public interest. 

 
I so move, seconded by the Minister of Health. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Morning Sitting 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the House, I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Health: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3 this Assembly shall on Wednesday, June 30, 1982, meet at 10 a.m. until 
1 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Proper Procedure for being Recognized by Speaker 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Under orders of the day, I would like to make one comment to assist the movement of 
business through the House. Many of the members have been rising and starting to speak without addressing 
the Chair. Sometimes you rise and, when you don't address the Chair, you're not very visible because there 
are many people moving around in the Chamber. You look just like someone else walking by. So, when you 
stand, would you please address the Chair and wait to be recognized before continuing to speak so that your 
words are recorded in Hansard. In many cases, you'll find the first sentence or two of many of the speeches 
are not in Hansard. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Representation to First Minister's Conference on the Economy 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I rise under rule 16 to move a motion, notice of which was given 
on Friday last. The motion is in the terms set out in the blues, and is in the following terms: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes we are in a time of severe economic strain for Canada and for 
Saskatchewan and urges the Saskatchewan delegation to the first ministers' conference to be held in 
Ottawa June 30 to: 

 
(1) present detailed proposals for reducing the record interest rates, 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

396 
 

(2) urge the federal government and other jurisdictions represented at the conference to launch 
immediately significant job-creating and badly needed public works projects such as rail line and 
port upgrading and the construction of education, health, and energy facilities; 

 
(3) reject any proposals for wage controls which affect low- and middle-income earners, and 

 
(4) reject any federal proposal which call for increased transportation costs to farmers for moving 
their grain. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I will be moving that motion at the end of my remarks, seconded by my colleague, the member 
for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
The motion is under four heads which I will touch on in order. 
 
The first concerns interest rates. Last night's federal budget did nothing to ease the current high interest rates. 
It called for a reduction in inflation, and then interest rates would come down. That seems to us to put the 
cart before the horse. We call for the Government of Canada to act to bring interest rates down, and then 
inflation will come down. I don't need to tell this House how great a part high interest rates play in keeping 
prices high. In pursuit of this approach, this resolution calls upon the Government of Saskatchewan to 
present proposals to tomorrow's first ministers' conference on the economy to lower interest rates. 
 
I commend to the government the policies advanced by the governments of Alberta, Saskatchewan, 
Manitoba and other provinces at last February's conference on the economy. I ask the government to outline 
briefly in this debate its approach to interest rates and what it will say at tomorrow's conference. We of this 
party believe that the federal government's high and rising budget deficit, and the huge jump in its need for 
borrowed funds — from $6 billion to $17 billion — will likely cause interest rates to rise. We ask the 
government opposite to assure this House that this province will not embark upon a policy of regular budget 
deficits, and so repeat the manifest folly of the Trudeau government and some other governments in Canada 
— folly that we are all now paying for with sky-high interest rates, unemployment, and a record number of 
bankruptcies. 
 
With respect to the second aspect, projects to create jobs, the federal budget made some moves to launch 
projects to create jobs, particularly in housing but our party believes that much more should have been done 
to stimulate solid projects, projects like rail line upgrading and port improvements. I commend to hon. 
members opposite the port improvements of Prince Rupert, and the active part which the Government of 
Alberta has played. I am not suggesting that our government should play that part. I simply want to 
commend the Government of Alberta which has a great interest in that port. I wish to recommend energy 
projects such as our oil upgrader and other projects in the health area, the school area. Such a policy will 
provide jobs today and solid assets tomorrow. We call upon the provincial government to adopt similar 
projects. I compliment them for proceeding with the Nipawin project and call upon them to proceed with 
highway and road construction and other projects. I call upon the government to propose to the first 
ministers' conference measures to stimulate the economy and create jobs by undertaking solid and needed 
capital projects, including housing. We need to proceed with projects which will provide jobs, and the best 
way to 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
397 

do that is to build things which will be useful and which will pay for themselves. 
 
I turn now to the third item: wage controls. The federal budget imposes wage controls on federal public 
servants and asks provincial governments to impose controls on provincial civil servants. 
 
Controls can only work is they are fair and seen to be fair. If wages are to be controlled, so must the incomes 
of those who are not paid by wages. If wages are to be controlled, so much prices be controlled. To say to the 
janitor at the courthouse, "Your income is controlled but not the lawyers who practice in the courthouse"; to 
say to the hospital orderly, "Zap, you are controlled but not the doctors"; to say that SPC is controlled but not 
Calgary Power; to say that Sask Tel is controlled but not Bell Telephone; to say that SGI is to be controlled 
but not The Co-operators or Pioneer Life, is clearly unfair and indefensible. The Prime Minister will 
undoubtedly be asking the premiers to implement similar wage controls at the provincial level. I call upon 
the Saskatchewan government to state clearly today that it will reject such a request. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — In his budget, Mr. MacEachen speaks of solidarity and sharing, of how all 
Canadians must help this country move from the 12 per cent world of recession to the 6 per cent world of 
recovery. But who is being asked to pay for this trek to recovery? Who has been told to show the spirit of 
solidarity and sharing? Wage earners whose incomes have lost ground to the rate of inflation for the last four 
years in a row. Half a million federal government employees will pay $800 million over the next two years 
to pay for this trek. Old age pensioners, who have already seen their fixed incomes ravaged by inflation, will 
contribute $105 million over the next two years through limitations on the increase in their old age pensions. 
Retired federal public servants will contribute $100 million. Native people will contribute $85 million, 
because the Trudeau government has shelved the native economic development programs. Canadian families 
will contribute $155 million through limits on indexation of family allowances. These are the people who are 
supposed to pay for the Trudeau government's trek to recovery. 
 
Where do Canada's lawyers line up for this display of solidarity and sharing? What about the doctors and the 
chartered accountants and the other professional people? Where does the line form for bank presidents? I 
heard nothing of that in Mr. MacEachen's budget. The Trudeau government wants to make this trek to 
recovery riding piggy-back on Canada's wage earners and senior citizens and the poor and the needy. It won't 
work because the plan is obviously inequitable and will be seen to be inequitable. 
 
This federal budget provides the Devine government with its first big test. The job of governments is to 
make tough decisions. Will the government opposite jump into bed with Mr. Trudeau and say "me too" on 
controls or will it reject the plan as inequitable? That surely is the question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I call upon the government in this debate to state clearly and unconditionally, 
with no strings attached, that it will reject the Trudeau plan and ask other provincial governments to reject it 
as well. 
 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

398 
 

The final portion of this resolution, Mr. Speaker, deals with grain transportation costs. Grain farmers are, 
once more, caught in the classic cost-price squeeze. Mr. MacEachen talks about getting out of the world of 
12 per cent price increases into the world of 6 per cent price increases. Many farmers, for openers, would 
like to get into the world of 12 per cent price increases from a higher world that they suffer from. They 
would be overjoyed to get into the 6 per cent world. They would welcome 6 per cent increases in farm fuel, 6 
per cent increases in farm machinery and fertilizer. If my reading of Professor Gilson's report is right, then 
the costs of transporting grain are going to increase much, much more than the 6 per cent and 5 per cent 
referred to by Finance Minister MacEachen. Without repeating the arguments in yesterday's debate, I call 
upon the government opposite to oppose unequivocally the introduction of the cost increases mention in the 
Gilson report. I further call upon it to state that unequivocal opposition here in the House today. Certainly 
that can't hurt anybody's negotiating position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope I have made clear the views of our group. I ask the government to respond and tell the 
people of Saskatchewan where they stand on these vital issues, arising in part from last night's federal 
budget. I read the motion earlier, I now move the motion, seconded by my colleague, the member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GLAUSER: — I welcome the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to remind the members opposite in the 
opposition that it was they who voted with the Liberals to replace the government under Joe Clark. You had 
an election. If that government had been allowed to implement the energy program that it had arranged, I 
suggest that Canada and Saskatchewan would not be experiencing the severe economic strain that now 
prevails. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, the federal budget of November last now resembles a distressed pregnancy more 
than a genuine birth. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, it has been aborted and has now been replaced with 
another embryo that is to be the subject of the first ministers' conference. 
 
In November 1981, following the presentation of his budget, Finance Minister Allan MacEachen conceded, 
more or less, that it was a mistake not to have consulted and discussed policy options in advance with the 
business sector and other experts outside the government. 
 
What has happened, Mr. Speaker? A new budget has been presented. Not only did the minister surprise his 
own parliamentary secretary, he surprised the entire country. Mr. Speaker, after the fact, once again, a first 
ministers' meeting has been called, the purpose of which, I suppose, it to hold wake for the aborted and a 
celebration for the embryo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it will not be a celebration from the viewpoint of the delegation representing the government, 
on behalf of this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan. This government has, by its actions since taking 
office, given evidence to the people of Saskatchewan, and this is recognized across this country, of playing a 
leading role in holding the line on increases in the cost of living. 
 
The removal of the gas tax, post-haste, and the mortgage interest reduction plan, Mr. Speaker, that is up for 
consideration in this Assembly, are indicative of this 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
399 

government's determination to help the people cope with high interest rates. 
 
In 1980-81, interest rates began to climb, and people were renewing mortgages at a higher rate, increasing 
their monthly payments substantially. At that time, a financial institution made a submission to the NDP 
government to initiate a plan similar to the mortgage interest adjustment plan that is about to come into 
effect. That same financial institution has now come out in support of our program to the extent that it is 
prepared to allow the subsidy to form some portion to be taken into income in calculating debt serviceability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us examine the contrast to the legislation placed in the statutes by the NDP. The NDP wrote 
The Home-owners' Protection Act. Did that act lower interest rates? Did it build houses? Indeed, it did not. 
 
Perhaps the $3,000 that was in the budget last night for the first-time home-owners will be able to be 
dovetailed into this program. That is something that we will have to look at very carefully. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to the farm ownership program providing loans at 
reasonable rates. Here again, it is taking the lead in another area, agriculture, that is so important to this 
province. Next after education, which was allotted the least in the NDP budget of March at 13 per cent, came 
agriculture at 16 per cent — the second lowest. Mr. Speaker, does that proportion of the provincial budget 
indicate to this Assembly that the former government showed the great concern for farmers and agriculture 
indicated in the fourth item of the motion? 
 
Last Friday, Mr. Speaker, during a lengthy dissertation by the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, he 
spoke of Freezie. I do not know if he was talking about a person, a place, or an animal. However, Mr. 
Speaker, in the same breath, he referred to projects, namely, the Nipawin dam, about which he was pleased 
to be informed that construction was to proceed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe every taxpayer in the province of Saskatchewan, including those whose jobs with the 
contract were held up at that time, will not be displeased knowing that the delay produced savings of $10 
million. You do not have to be an economist to understand what that saving means to every man, woman, 
and child in this province. Mr. Speaker, if the delay in renegotiating the contract was a freeze, and if this is 
the message the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake was endeavouring to convey, then this government 
has a duty, and indeed an obligation, to the cities of this province to scrutinize very closely all contracts and 
programs entered into by the former government. The people of this province have worked for and deserve a 
better deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been repeatedly lectured by the Prime Minister on the subject of lowering 
expectations. On the other hand, the federal government used taxpayers' money with reckless abandon to the 
extent that we are probably looking at a $20 million-plus deficit for the 1982 fiscal year. I suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that if there is not the creation of a foreign investment climate in this country and, indeed, more 
incentive for local investors in the private sector, the aforementioned deficit could become even greater. 
 
While this government recognizes the need for expansion and creation of public institutions, the private 
sector must be revitalized to generate the jobs and income to perpetuate the flow of funds to the public sector 
in order to carry out programs at all 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

400 
 

levels of government. Mr. Speaker, I am most confident in the abilities of the delegation that will be 
representing this government at the first ministers' conference to present our case. I cannot support the 
motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak on this motion that is before us and to 
offer some solutions that I have to reduce the high interest rates that we are faced with in Canada today and 
also that we are facing in Saskatchewan. I want to dwell, Mr. Speaker, on four parts of the economy in 
Saskatchewan that I feel are quite important — mining, tourism, forestry, and fisheries. I want to particularly 
zero in on job creation. I feel that job creation is vitally important if we are to reduce interest rates that we 
are now facing in Saskatchewan and the stagnating economy that we are now faced with. 
 
First of all, I want to urge the provincial government to continue to encourage the development of our 
mining resources in northern Saskatchewan and also in southern Saskatchewan. I want to particularly point 
out the development of uranium and potash in the South. Massive layoffs, Mr. Speaker, in the potash 
industry and the high unemployment rate that this has caused are contributors to the high interest rates that 
we are now facing, and we have to solve these problems. We can't have high unemployment and low interest 
rates. This just doesn't work. 
 
I think that another item I would like to touch on right now, in the short while I have to speak, is the forest 
industry — particularly the forest industry in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we were to develop the forest industry the way it should be developed, in the way I feel it 
should be developed in northern Saskatchewan, that would create many jobs and thus lower the interest rates 
that we are now faced with. I proposed to the department prior to our defeat at the polls, and I am proposing 
to the new Minister of Northern Saskatchewan that he take a serious look at the forest industry in northern 
Saskatchewan and the jobs that will come out of that. 
 
I speak particularly of saw timber and fence posts for farmers. We have literally millions of fence posts in 
northern Saskatchewan that could be produced to create jobs to lower the interest rates. I feel that if we were 
to develop that industry — peel the posts in northern Saskatchewan, treat them and offer them for sale to the 
farmers in the rest of the province — that would not only create jobs in northern Saskatchewan but would 
alleviate a problem that farmers have in southern Saskatchewan, hauling fence posts and paying a high price 
in Manitoba and other such places. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to zero in on the fisheries of this province and I want to explain a little bit about how I 
see the fisheries being developed to create jobs. 
 
We are now controlled by the freshwater fish marketing corporation. It handles and sells all our fish. We 
produce in the province between 7 million and 10 million pounds of commercial fish. Of that 7 million 
pounds last year, less than 100,000 pounds of that commodity were sold to the consumers of Saskatchewan. 
The 7 million to 10 million pounds varies from year to year, but the fishermen in this province throw into the 
bush for the bears and the pelicans and the seagulls, and onto the ice for the ravens in the winter and for the 
coyotes, I would say, equally as much. There are 10 million pounds or 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
401 

maybe 15 million pounds literally thrown away and destroyed — fish that could be used. The consumers of 
this province would dearly love to have that fish product we are actually throwing away. 
 
I ask the Government of Saskatchewan, particularly the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, to take a serious 
look at developing that fishery in this province, to maybe get away from the freshwater fish marketing 
corporation and take that resource that we have in northern Saskatchewan and develop it for the people of 
Saskatchewan. I want to explain what the impact would be, Mr. Speaker, the jobs that would come out of 
this, if we were to develop the fisheries that we have. When we sell 7 million pounds of commercial fish, it 
all goes directly to Winnipeg and is dispersed out of the country. Less than 100,000 pounds of that comes 
back to the consumers of this province. Let's use a figure of 10 million pounds that the commercial 
fishermen are throwing into the bush. 
 
If we were to develop that resource, that 10 million pounds consists of mullets that can be ground up and 
sold as fish cakes. It consists of marias, a ling cod which is a beautiful fish and should be sold in the markets, 
and we are literally throwing it into the bush and out on the ice. There is not one community in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where the unemployment rate is not terribly high — up as high as 95 per cent 
this morning in a community like Ile-a-la-Crosse. There are lots of fishermen there, and thousands and 
thousands of lakes with millions of pounds of commercial fish that are being thrown away. And I ask the 
government to take a serious look at getting away from the freshwater and fish marketing corporation and 
setting up local co-operatives which can go out and sell this fish to the consumers of this province. 
 
Maybe the hon. member for Wilkie doesn't believe in co-operatives, but I tell him that co-operatives, handled 
properly, are a benefit, and they do create jobs and most certainly would be lowering interest rates. I ask him 
to think about that, and to think about all the fish that we are wasting and throwing away in this province, 
and I think that he wouldn't smirk at that. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that I offer a proposal that is a serious one. I think that the consumers of this province 
would most certainly welcome that type of product, and I'm sure if it were handled properly, and a selling job 
was done, that all these fresh fish products could be in the supermarkets and small grocery stores throughout 
this province. All it needs is a little initiative and some money behind it and it would create very many jobs 
and, Mr. Speaker, I feel that it is a very important proposal. With that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you and I will be 
supporting this motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. EMBURY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The motion before us was put to us by the Leader of the 
Opposition, who I know is only trying to be helpful in assisting the government in its negotiations with the 
government in Ottawa, and I must thank him for his assistance. I think, though, that we all saw, and the 
nation saw, the last attempt by the last premier of the province to deal with the Prime Minister in Ottawa at 
the summit in February. It could be, I think, politely said that he was unsuccessful. I think the Deputy 
Premier has said that we will not rely on Mr. Trudeau to run our affairs and I think that that would go for the 
Leader of the Opposition as well. We will be the masters of our own house. We will put our house into order 
and, as much as he is trying to be helpful, I think that we will be able to do what we set out to do when we 
got elected without his assistance. 
 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

402 
 

I think, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that the Prime Minister has set out his proposals last night for the recovery 
of the economy. I think those proposals that he has set out obviously are inadequate and will fall short of 
their objectives. Before we even get to those objectives and those programs that he set out, the first thing that 
was announced by Mr. MacEachen last night was a $20 billion deficit. On the other hand, he went on to say 
that he's going to instill confidence in investors in Canada. I suspect, by following his past policies, that if 
this deficit continues to grow, investment and confidence will not return to Canada. His proposals were 
allegedly aimed at: (a) inflation, (b) encouraging investment and confidence, (c) helping the unemployment 
situation in Canada. 
 
Specifically, Mr. MacEachen, last night, in regard to inflation, proposed wage controls, indexing of income 
taxes to 6 per cent and 5 per cent, indexing of family allowances, indexing of old age security, and restraints 
on price increases regulated by the federal government. The motion before us requests that the province of 
Saskatchewan, when it goes to Ottawa, present detailed proposals for reducing the record interest rates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the federal government would do well to follow this government's lead. We have 
already eliminated the gas tax which resulted in a zero per cent increase in the CPI (consumer price index) 
for the month of May. I think we need a definite program. Action, instead of proposals, on the part of the 
federal government might result in some positive turnarounds in our economy. This government has already 
put a freeze on utility rates for the rest of the year. We are introducing a mortgage reduction plan at 13.25 per 
cent. I submit, Mr. Speaker, that these three programs alone have done much more to reduce the inflationary 
pressures the country is facing than any other programs introduced by any other government in Canada to 
date. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the federal government was trying to encourage investment confidence in Canada. In 
order to do that, it came up with some proposals. They were not programs as such, but proposals that were to 
be studied and implemented or not implemented, depending on whether it thought they'd work or not, later 
this year. The first proposal was for a new type of term deposit or some type of deposit that would give the 
owner a return tax free up to the rate of inflation. The same goes for the capital gains on the new share plan 
for purchasing shares in Canadian corporations. The problem with these types of proposals is that although 
the recommendations of the committees set up to study them are supposed to come back by September 30, it 
in no way means that any type of program would be put into place this year, and none probably will be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these types of proposals, while they could be interesting and they could perhaps help in the 
long run, do not help the problem today, neither in the country, nor in Saskatchewan. The regulations of the 
Foreign Investment Review Act have been modified, but again there is that attitude, on behalf of the federal 
government, that business is not welcome in Canada and that we are not looking for foreign investment. 
Along with our $20 billion deficit, that kind of investment will be difficult to attract in any case. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, again, if you look at our government's programs to date, and that is in the last two 
months — the reduction of rates in mortgages, the utility freezes, and the tax reduction — we have literally 
told the world that we are open for business, and business will react to that. We will find more business 
investment in Saskatchewan 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
403 

than in the rest of Canada in the next number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the federal government did not do for Saskatchewan was change in any way at all the 
national energy program, which has a great effect on our energy industry in Saskatchewan. And at the same 
time, Mr. Speaker, while not part of the budget, the Gilson report was tabled yesterday. So, in effect, the two 
basic components of our provincial economy, agriculture and energy, were either ignored or were hurt 
yesterday. And I don't think that's good enough. 
 
I am confident, however, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier, in Ottawa, will quite adequately present our views 
on the budget of last night, and he will defend our rights and will try to get what is required for this 
provincial economy from Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to the motion before us. I move, seconded by the member 
for Melville, that the motion be amended by deleting all the words after "Saskatchewan" where it appears in 
the second line, and substituting: 
 

And that this Assembly condemns the federal government for its failure in its budget of June 28 to 
recognize the productive side of the economic equation relative to Saskatchewan in that it failed to 
deal with, among other things, agriculture or energy. 

 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I understand that the debate continues on the motion and the 
amendment concurrently . . .(inaudible interjection) . . .Thank you. I'm pleased that the member for Regina 
Lakeview has gone to great lengths to point out the statements by the Deputy Premier that the Government 
of Saskatchewan will not rely on Ottawa, and that the Government of Saskatchewan will, in the words of the 
member for Regina Lakeview, "put our own House in order." Having said that, he then went on to ask 
Ottawa to put the house in order, and I find that a rather interesting approach to putting our own house in 
order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to address a particular part of the motion and a particular situation with regard to putting 
our own house in order. And that is the matter of job creation and badly needed public works projects — 
job-creating projects particularly. 
 
I want, in looking at the house that needs to be put in order, to share with this Assembly some of the most 
recent statistics with regard to the order in which we now find our house in Saskatchewan with regard to job 
creation, more particularly, what we find in Prince Albert. A year ago, in May 1981 unemployment in the 
Prince Albert region stood at 5.9 per cent. By May 31, 1982, that had risen two full percentage points. That's 
an increase of 25.5 per cent or over 1,000 additional people unemployed in the Prince Albert region alone. In 
La Ronge, a little farther north, the figures had increased from 11 per cent to 14 per cent. In Saskatchewan as 
a whole the increase in the number of people unemployed was 67 per cent. And so I think it is fitting that the 
member for Lakeview should suggest that the Government of Saskatchewan put its own house in order and 
that he should go to such lengths to point out that it is the intention and the style of operation of this 
government to set an example. 
 
They have an opportunity in the Prince Albert region to set an example. I quote a headline from the Prince 
Albert Herald, Wednesday, June 23, which reads, "Series of Planned Layoffs has Pulp Mill Employees 
Uneasy." The employees there are concerned that in September 80 per cent of the 400 employees of that pulp 
mill will be laid off. That will have a negative impact, not only on those employees and their efforts to make 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

404 
 

their car payments and their house payments, but on the Prince Albert business community, and there will be 
fewer dollars downtown. We have a quotation from the Prince Albert Herald of Saturday, June 26. A senior 
official of this government, recently appointed as deputy minister of tourism and renewable resources at a 
salary of $76,000 a year, says, and I quote: 
 

"Planning for the future in the forest industry must be done now," Bill Klassen, deputy minister of 
the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources, told delegates to the annual meeting of the 
Saskatchewan Forestry Association" . . .in forestry we must deal with long-term cycles and planning 
must take into consideration the long-term effects." 

 
Klassen told the delegates that time can be well spent now during the current slump to make plans 
for when the situation improves. 

 
In the June 9 Prince Albert Herald, Mayor Dick Spencer is quoted as saying that he and city commissioner, 
Bob Linner: 
 

will be meeting with several provincial government ministers, likely in Regina, near the end of June 
to discuss issues of importance to Prince Albert. 

 
And he outlines among those issues the need to commence construction of the 6th Avenue East bridge and 
the construction of another pulp mill and newsprint facility at Prince Albert. He points out that the raw 
materials in the area justify construction of a pulp and paper facility which would be worth as much as $250 
million. And Spencer said he is confident the project will be undertaken. He also points out that it is of no 
major concern to the city of Prince Albert or the people of Prince Albert whether the project is a public 
investment or whether it is private sector investment or whether it is a joint venture. But he concludes by 
saying that the resources are obviously there and therefore it must be done. He goes on to say that he intends 
to press for this for Prince Albert. 
 
The MLA-elect for the constituency of Prince Albert has said publicly that a high priority of his is the 
building of an aspen pulp mill and paper facility at Prince Albert. The Conservative candidate in the 
constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake promised such a project. But the response of the government 
opposite, when asked, was given by the Minister of Industry and Commerce, who said that the Prince Albert 
projects are off. 
 
Is that the kind of example in the job creation area that the government intends to set, Mr. Speaker? I think 
that everyone recognizes that a $250 million construction project would do a great deal to reduce those 
unacceptably high unemployment figures that I outlined, and it would do a great deal to stimulate the local 
economy and a great deal to assure long-term job creation and long-term economic benefits. It would also 
establish Prince Albert as a natural centre of the forestry industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
We hear from the government's own sources that they are planning to announce a job creation strategy. 
When? In the fall of 1982. It may be understandable, Mr. Speaker, that they would wish to spend 
considerable time to make decisions on their strategy. We see press reports that they intend to establish a 
special committee chaired by the Premier to develop an industrial strategy. When? We are not told. 
 
But those unemployment figures are there now. They are there now, and they are 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
405 

getting worse. Federated Co-ops in Saskatoon yesterday announced a layoff. The pulp mill in Prince Albert 
has announced that there may be another shut-down and layoff in December. These kinds of layoffs, Mr. 
Speaker, are totally unprecedented. That pulp mill has never in its history been shut down with workers laid 
off or out of work for more than a weekend. And now, we're told that there may be one month, two month, 
or perhaps longer shut-downs. 
 
It's a rule of thumb in the forestry industry, Mr. Speaker, as the deputy minister of tourism and renewable 
resources has pointed out, that during a time of slump capital investments are made in anticipation of the 
upturn in that industry, positioning the companies, whether private sector or public sector companies, to be 
able to take advantage of the upturn in that part of the economy and in the markets. That kind of decision can 
be made now. The pieces are all in place to enable that kind of decision to be made very quickly. 
 
I think that is another area that the member for Regina Lakeview would endorse, if he's being consistent, as 
an opportunity for the Government of Saskatchewan to set an example and to take the position that they will 
not rely on Ottawa, that they will not rely on asking the federal government to take action, but that they will, 
in his words, "put our own house in order." This is an opportunity to do just that. Jobs are needed now and 
it's not necessary to wait while the job creation strategy is being planned for the fall, when the construction 
season will be nearly ended. It's not necessary to wait while the industrial strategy is being planned. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. It is my duty to inform the member that his time has elapsed. 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, I consider it my duty to rise on private members' day on a motion brought 
in by the opposition to ask for the wisdom of a backbencher in advising Ottawa what is to be done. I intend 
to display to them the wisdom of the government's backbenchers and the entire government. 
 
The first point they raised was that they asked the delegates to Ottawa to present detailed proposals for 
reducing the record interest rates. Well, first of all, the simple fact that they asked us to tell Ottawa what to 
do confirms my opinion of the difference between the three major political parties in this country. 
 
First of all we have the Progressive Conservative Party, which has always known what to do and has always 
been prepared to act. Unfortunately, at times the people of Canada have not been interested in listening to the 
truths we have told them. That's one difference. We know what is going on; we know what makes the world 
tick. For the learned gamblers opposite, who encourage us to create jobs for students, I have good news. 
These are statistics from the Canada Employment Centres in Saskatchewan, June 28, 1982, yesterday. Are 
you listening? The statistics show that in 1981, one year ago, there were 3,407 jobs created for students. 
Yesterday, one year later, after we have had a change in government, there are 3,566 jobs, an increase of 165. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — That's 5 per cent more students hired this year. In Canada during the last seven months, 
the rate of unemployment has gone up from 8 per cent to 10 per cent yet we have been able to encourage 
employers to hire 5 per cent more students. Now there must be a reason for this. We all know what the 
reason is. The reason is the 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

406 
 

change in government in this province and the change in attitude. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — We don't wear yellow buttons that say, "Hire a student." We act and 165 students are 
hired. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — But I was indicating the difference between the Progressive Conservative Party and the 
other parties. We have in Ottawa the Ottawa Liberal Party. I have always given them the benefit of the doubt 
and said that they know what has to be done. It's just that they don't have the nerve to do it. 
 
And then we have the NDP in Ottawa. I have no doubt that they don't know at all what is to be done. 
Unfortunately, I think I was too generous to the Liberals in Ottawa because after hearing the budget I think 
they are in the same position as the NDP. They, too, don't know what has to be done. So maybe that explains 
why politically they are married, live in the same house in Ottawa, sleep in the same bed and we have to put 
up with their budgetary offspring. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Now for years I have told the NDP what makes the world tick. It's fitting that the 
remains of that party should be here, asking our opinion and consulting with our government on what does 
make the world tick. 
 
They refer to interest. Dealing again with interest, let me say we have already acted. They know about the 
13.25 per cent mortgages. As a matter of fact we set an example for Ottawa and in their budget they went a 
small way toward alleviating the problem, but certainly nothing comparable to our actions. 
 
We will be introducing 8 per cent farm purchase loans. If that isn't of benefit to farmers, then nothing is. We 
have initiated the utilities freeze. We have campaigned on small business loans. During the course of our 
term in office, the people of Saskatchewan will see the continued action on our part. 
 
But the problem here now lies with the federal government and, firstly, with the Bank of Canada. The Bank 
of Canada has to do two things. It has to promote lower interest rates, and it has to stop defending the dollar. 
But it is too late. The dollar has already fallen and interest rates have gone up, and we have lost the 
advantage of that remedy. Instead, the federal government runs a deficit of $20 billion. We have to send a 
message to Trudeau and MacEachen that this money spent by the government, to the tune of $20 billion, will 
never be seen again. They have to allow the business people of this country to use those type of funds to 
build up this country — a lasting improvement. So if the members opposite want us to send a message to 
Ottawa, the message is: let the small business people — the people of Canada — build this country, rather 
than have the government squander our money. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — With respect to jobs, we have heard about the Nipawin project, where we saved $10 
million and are proceeding to create jobs — a combination that was 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
407 

rarely seen in the former government. But what do the opposition members want us to do ? They want us to 
tell Ottawa to spend more money on capital projects. Do they realize that this would increase the deficit and 
enlarge the problem? Ottawa is already spending too much. The cure for what ails this country cannot be 
found in a few minutes or a few months. It is going to take years of hard work to bring us back. 
 
With respect to wages, I agree with the learned members opposite that we should reject wage controls for 
low- and middle-income earners, especially those who don't have the protection of unions. I say to those 
wage earners that they have been reasonable in their demands and, therefore, they haven't been able to keep 
up with inflation. I say to the unionized workers that they have their capable representatives, and that they 
can bargain with our government in the usual manner. 
 
So, we are not in a position to take lessons from Ottawa. We will govern Saskatchewan sensibly. We believe 
that the people of Saskatchewan are reasonable, have always been reasonable and, given a proper example, 
they will remain reasonable in their demands. But, certainly, there is no proper example from Ottawa, where 
federal spending is still up 17 per cent. 
 
The fourth point of their motion is with respect to the crowrate increases. We spoke at length on that 
yesterday. But what is more important is what is not in the budget. Therefore, I speak in favour of the 
amendment. 
 
Agriculture is short-changed again. There is no suggestion of a reduction in diesel fuel. There is band-aid 
help for farmers who are in trouble. I can tell you, and I can tell the government in Ottawa, that all farmers 
are in trouble. They haven't had an increase in years. 
 
With respect to energy, the national energy program continues to haunt us. There is no suggestion that any 
consideration is to be given to heavy oil. The Alaska pipeline, which would help Ipsco, is still gone, and we 
were sold down the river by the people in Ottawa, sold down the river to the Americans, and they were 
forewarned. For these reasons, I must speak in favour of the amendment. It is truly necessary to send a 
message to the people in Ottawa, and the message that they are going to get from this member is that we 
were fighting inflation before their budget and we will continue to fight inflation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few words in closing this debate. I appreciated 
the contributions of the member for Melville and the member for Regina Lakeview. I want to comment on a 
couple of their remarks. With respect to the member for Regina Lakeview, he made the very valid point that 
the government opposite is master of its own house. This is undoubtedly accurate. The authority is yours, 
and the responsibility is yours. I predict that in short weeks you will be less willing to assume that 
responsibility, and will be saying that indeed some of the problems are generated in Ottawa. But you will 
then know, as I say now, that the responsibility is yours. 
 
The member for Regina Lakeview said that the Premier would ably present our views. And I am sure he 
would ably present the views of this legislature if anyone knew what the views of this legislature were. But 
no member of the treasury benches laid down any policies of your government with respect to interest rates 
— none whatever. No steps were offered by your government, as by our government which preceded you, or 
as by 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

408 
 

Premier Lougheed, or as by Premier Davis, proposing methods of reducing record interest rates. Those were 
proposed by Conservative premiers in Canada, but your government has no proposals — no proposals to 
equal those of Premier Lougheed, no proposals to equal those of Premier Buchanan. You are silent, silent as 
to what you think should be done to reduce interest rates in Canada. I think this legislature should know what 
the policies of your government are with respect to the reduction of interest rates in Canada. 
 
I think this legislature should know where you stand on controls. But where do you stand on controls? We 
have heard nothing from any member of the treasury benches as to where that government stands on 
controls. Not in this debate, because no member of the treasury benches has stood in his or her place and 
spoken. Members opposite, and particularly the cabinet, feels there is no obligation to share with this 
legislature the views that are going to be put forward, ably or not, by the Premier and by the Minister of 
Finance. I think this legislature ought to have a right to know what the Government of Saskatchewan is 
saying to the Prime Minister of Canada with respect to the most vital economic issues which are facing the 
people of Canada today. But there is perfect silence, perfect silence from the cabinet opposite. I think that's 
not good enough. 
 
I hear the member for Melville saying that he doesn't think that the federal government should engage in any 
capital works. He doesn't think that they should spend any money upgrading rail lines. That's certainly not 
our view — that's yours. He doesn't think that the federal government should spend any money upgrading 
ports. That's your view, but it's not ours. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — He doesn't agree. He believes for some reason unknown to me that spending 
by the CNR will add to the federal deficit. That, of course, is false. He ought to know it's false, but he tries to 
lead this House into believing that spending by the CNR is going to add to this $19 billion or $20 billion 
deficit. Not true. It will create jobs just as surely as doing work on Prince Rupert would create jobs and 
stimulate the economy. The member for Melville says no. We say yes. We say yes and we are sorry that 
members like the member for Moosomin are saying no to rail line upgrading. 
 
I was amused by the little interjection of the member for Melville who said, "Look we have hired more 
students through Canada Manpower this year than last." Anybody who is familiar with those figures at all 
would know what when we have a good year Canada Employment places practically no students. They all 
find jobs for themselves. The number of students which Canada Employment places is a pretty good measure 
of how tough it is to find jobs. The true test is not how many students are placed but many are not placed. I 
predict that when the unemployment figures come down a few days hence, on July 7 or 8, we will find that 
unemployment in Saskatchewan is higher this July than last because you people have done nothing to 
provide employment for students. Mr. Speaker, we do not know where members opposite stand. We do not 
know where they stand on what the Government of Canada should do to reduce interest rates. We do not 
know where they stand on what should be done to provide employment by work-creating projects. We do not 
know where they stand on wage controls. They are ducking this one. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. I must inform the hon. member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
409 

Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the North Saskatchewan Bible Society, 
Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society. 

 
Clause 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the South Saskatchewan Bible Society, 
Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society. 

 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Canadian Theological College 
 
Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. DIRKS: — I beg leave to introduce two guests who have a significant interest in the bill which has just 
been passed. I'd like to introduce to the members of the Assembly the president of the Canadian Theological 
College, Mr. Rexford Boda, and the director of student development, Mr. Ray Matheson, who are here in the 
Speaker's gallery with us today. Would you welcome them, please? 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 01 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the North Saskatchewan Bible Society, 
Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society 

 
MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 01, An Act to incorporate the North Saskatchewan Bible 
Society, Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society, be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 02 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate the South Saskatchewan Bible Society, 
Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society 

 
MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 02, An Act to incorporate the South Saskatchewan Bible 
Society, Auxiliary to the Canadian Bible Society, be now read a 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

410 
 

third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 03 — An Act to amend An Act to incorporate Canadian Theological College 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 03, An Act to incorporate Canadian 
Theological College, be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 

 
Resolution Numbers 6 and 8 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I wish to draw to the attention of all hon. members that resolutions 6 and 8, 
standing on the order paper, appear to be the same subject matters as Bills 1 and 3, respectively. I refer all 
hon. members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, page 119, which states in 
paragraph 340(1): 
 

The rule of anticipation, a rule which forbids discussion of a matter standing on the Order Paper 
from being forestalled, is dependent upon the same principle as that which forbids the same question 
from being raised twice within the same session. 

 
Further, in paragraph 341(1) and (2): 
 

(1) In determining whether a discussion is out of order on the grounds of anticipation, the Speaker 
must have regard to the probability of the matter anticipated being brought before the House within a 
reasonable time. 

 
(2) In applying the anticipation rule, preference is given to the discussions which lead to the most 
effective results, which has established a descending scale of values for discussions, such as Bills 
which have priority over Motions, which in turn have priority over Amendments. 

 
I also refer members to the rulings of the Chair dated March 20, 1979, Journals of the Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan, page 75, and March 22, 1977, Journals of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, page 
159. 
 
I, therefore, rule resolutions 6 and 8 out of order on the grounds of anticipation. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act by eliminating the Mortgage Interest Tax 
Credit as a consequence of the establishment of the Mortgage Interest Reduction Program. 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, just a few remarks on second reading for Bill No. 2. The 
objective of this government, Mr. Speaker, is to provide very real and substantial 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
411 

assistance to the Saskatchewan families who are forced to pay unacceptably high mortgage interest rates. The 
objective will be achieved with the passage of Bill No. 1, which enacts the mortgage interest reduction plan. 
Without question, Mr. Speaker, this program will provide Saskatchewan home-owners with the best 
protection against high mortgage interest rates in this entire country. Bill No. 2, which will amend The 
Income Tax Act to eliminate the mortgage interest tax credit, is a natural consequence that flows from our 
plan to provide real mortgage interest assistance to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP didn't want to help the home-owners facing high mortgage interest. The NDP simply 
wanted to pretend it was providing assistance. The mortgage interest tax credit provided a maximum of $250 
in assistance, and the average benefit to Saskatchewan home-owners was barely in excess of the $100 
minimum payment. Mr. Speaker, the program was simply a sham that allowed the NDP to pretend it was 
protecting people from high interest rates. They preached to us that this was the only such program in 
Canada. It is no wonder most governments would have been embarrassed to admit to having such a program. 
 
The members opposite should remember, I might add, that their mortgage interest tax credit was not a 
refundable tax credit. It was only available to people who owed Saskatchewan income taxes. Anyone in 
low-income ranges who paid mortgage interest that did not have a tax liability received no benefits from the 
program. So, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 2 will eliminate the mortgage interest tax credit. In fact, it is simply 
being replaced by a real and substantive interest reduction plan that will provide benefits, and not simply 
rhetoric, to Saskatchewan home-owners. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I move second reading of Bill No. 2. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier, the Minister of Agriculture, has gone to 
great pains to assure the Assembly that this is a simple matter of replacement, and that all good things will 
happen as a result of Bill No. 1. I am interested as to his reasons for not calling Bill No. 1 prior to calling 
Bill No. 2; however, let that be as it may. 
 
I want to point out that this program that is of no consequence in the view of the Minister of Agriculture had 
$9 million budgeted for the 1982-83 fiscal year, and that is likely one of the sources of financing the 
mortgage interest reduction plan called for in Bill No. 1. It isn't altogether clear, and the government 
opposite certainly hasn't supplied the House with any facts, as to who pays with regard to the removal of the 
mortgage interest tax credit. How many people, Mr. Speaker, who will not be eligible for benefits from the 
mortgage interest reduction plan will lose under Bill No. 2 their mortgage interest tax credit? How many of 
those who also lose their mortgage interest tax credit have been denied an increase in the property 
improvement grant by the Minister of Urban Affairs, as this government seeks to find some ways to pay for 
part of its promises under Bill No. 2? How many of those who have their mortgage interest tax credit 
removed will also not be getting, because it's too much trouble for the Minister of Social Services to 
administer, their senior citizens shelter allowance? How many of those people will there be, Mr. Speaker? 
 
How many of the people who will not receive any benefits from what was billed during the election and after 
the election as a universal program that everybody was eligible 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

412 
 

for, but that is no longer universal, will lose under Bill No. 2 their mortgage interest tax credit while they are 
losing an increase in the property improvement grant? How many of those people under Bill No. 2, Mr. 
Speaker, will be asked to finance the proposals that the House will deal with when the Minister of 
Agriculture has determined that the press gallery is sufficiently full for his performance? How many of those 
people will be losing benefits that they would otherwise have had? How many of those will finance a 
program that has no income ceiling, and that is not based on level of need? 
 
I think that members on this side of the House will have a great deal to say in second reading of Bill No. 2, 
as they will in second reading of Bill No. 1. I want to give my colleagues the opportunity to participate in 
this second reading debate, therefore I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for the Imposition of Taxes on and the Collection of Taxes from 
Certain Purchasers of Certain Fuels and for the repeal of The Fuel Petroleum Products Act. 

 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It gives me great pleasure to rise today, and move second reading of this very 
important bill, Bill No. 3, An Act to provide for the Imposition of Taxes on and the Collection of Taxes from 
Certain Purchasers of Certain Fuels and for the repeal of The Fuel Petroleum Products Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel that this bill is important because it marks the fulfilment of the first of many 
commitments that we, as a party, made during the election — commitments which we plan to keep. People 
were concerned about the high fuel prices for operating their motor vehicles, and this government responded 
by announcing the elimination of the provincial tax on fuel, effective midnight, May 8, 1982, the very same 
day that we took office. I might add, Mr. Speaker, that with the elimination of the gas tax, this represents the 
single largest tax cut this province has ever experienced. 
 
The bill which is before us today will formalize this first official act of Premier Grant Devine and his 
government. On the average, we estimate that the elimination of fuel taxes will initially save each passenger 
car owner between $200 and $300 per year. And, you know, if the 20 per cent tax on gasoline had not been 
removed it would have reached 60 cents per gallon by 1986, and the average vehicle operator in the province 
would have had to pay more than $500 in taxes per year. 
 
But the bill does much more, Mr. Speaker, than just remove the tax on motor fuel. It eliminates the transfer 
of 20 per cent of the net revenue from road taxes to subsidize the automobile accident insurance fund. The 
former government planned to transfer $23 million in this fiscal year alone to hide the true cost of the 
insurance scheme. Mr. Speaker, this will not happen under our government. 
 
Motor fuel will not be taxed to provide a source of revenue to cover automobile accident insurance losses. 
The bill also removes the inequities and financial burdens created by fuel taxes. When Alberta removed their 
fuel tax in 1978, Saskatchewan dealers located near the western part of our province were placed in a 
difficult competitive position. Although the members opposite did introduce a program to rebate a portion of 
this tax, it was insufficient to prevent these dealers from having to reduce their profit margin, or go out of 
business. 
 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
413 

For example, Mr. Speaker, in my home constituency of Maple Creek, a community that is less than 30 miles 
from Alberta, dealers received a rebate of 25 per cent of this tax. This meant that before the tax was 
removed, they had to pay 4.8 cents per litre more for their gasoline than their Alberta counterparts, and this 
truly put them at a distinct disadvantage. And even though the budget for this program was $2.23 million for 
this fiscal year, it did not solve the problems faced by these dealers. 
 
With the elimination of the tax in Saskatchewan, however, the competitive disadvantage has disappeared and 
the gasoline competition assistance program can be cancelled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have discontinued or will be discontinuing the costly program of colouring fuel. There is no 
longer a need to dye fuel that is not taxable as was formerly required for enforcement purposes. This means 
that farmers and bulk fuel agencies will not have to maintain separate storage tanks for purple fuel and the 
government will save about $328,000 per year in dye costs alone. This Bill also eliminates the need for 
approximately 2,500 retail dealers to annually obtain licences to sell fuel petroleum products. In addition, it 
removes the administrative burden placed on approximately 800 interprovincial transportation firms, many 
of which are based in Saskatchewan, of having to complete monthly tax returns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill not only removes the tax on fuel consumed in licensed vehicles, it also eliminates the 
tax formerly imposed on purchasers of fuel used for off-road purposes. For example, there is no longer a tax 
on fuel consumed in motorboats and private or local aircraft. Similarly, the tax is abolished on fuel used for 
industrial, commercial, construction, manufacturing, mining and processing activities. The tax remains, 
however, on locomotive fuels used by railway companies and aviation fuel consumed by commercial 
airlines. These companies are based outside of Saskatchewan and, hence, they will continue to pay taxes for 
the right to carry on business in this province. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, I feel that the action taken by this government truly benefits all the citizens of this 
province while ensuring that multinational railway and airline companies do not have a free ride. 
 
I think that the effects of the removal of this particular tax are already being felt in the province. If we look at 
the consumer price index for May, Mr. Speaker, we see that, and I'm quoting from Saskatchewan Statistics: 
 

In Saskatoon, the decline in gasoline prices resulting from the removal of the provincial gasoline tax 
offset the impact of increases in food prices, air fares, reading expenses and shelter costs. 

 
In Regina, the impact of higher food prices, increased shelter charges and higher air fares was 
virtually offset by a sharp decline in gasoline prices, reflecting the removal of the provincial gasoline 
tax. 

 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that it is safe to say that we on this side of the House did recognize the need to take off 
this very costly tax and felt that by removing it, each person in the province would benefit from it. The 
saving to R.M.s, for instance, with the removal of the tax, is very significant. School units will have their 
bussing costs lowered substantially as a result of the removal of this tax. And the list goes on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

414 
 

Therefore, it gives me great pleasure to move second reading of this bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. member, I would like to say that each year 
The Statute Law Amendment Act is presented to this legislature as a means to correct errors of a 
non-controversial nature in the Statute Law which have become apparent since the passage of the acts 
affected. Recently, with the preparation of the loose-leaf statutes, errors have become more readily 
identifiable, and in an effort to keep the loose-leaf statutes as accurate as possible the legislative counsel and 
law clerk has prepared this bill for consideration at this session. Most of the amendments proposed by this 
bill are of a totally non-controversial nature involving consequential amendments as a result of changes to 
other legislation, correction of internal references, correction of spelling and editing error or minor drafting 
errors. 
 
Particular sections of interest in the bill are: 
 
1. Clause 5 of the bill, amending The Certified General Accounts Act, changes all reference in the act from 
"student members," to "registered students" at the request of that association. 
 
2. The change to The Housing and Special-Care Homes Act in clause 24 of this bill clarifies the intent of that 
act that certain protective provincial legislation be suspended only in relation to loans under the federal 
National Housing Act for special-care homes rather than for all national housing loans. 
 
3. The amendments proposed in clause 17 and 50 are designed to eliminate duplication since the provisions 
are contained in other provisions of this same or another act. 
 
4. Since both The Denturists Act and The Ophthalmic Dispensers Act give the Lieutenant-Governor in 
Council the power to set certain dates by regulation, and those dates have already been set, the amendments 
contained in clauses 11 and 43 incorporate the dates that have been set into the legislation rather than having 
it remain in the regulations. 
 
5. The repeal of section 3 of The Jury Consequential Amendment Act in clause 26 of the bill will ensure that 
a provision of the new Medical Profession Act is not repealed when The Jury Act, 1981 is proclaimed. 
 
6. The amendment contained in clause 69 amending The Vehicles Act is designed to rectify an incorrect 
section reference in the section dealing with the provincial offence of driving while disqualified. In coming 
into force, this amendment is deemed to be retroactive to the date The Vehicles Act amendments were made 
to deal with the problem created by the disallowance by the supreme court of the Criminal Code offence of 
driving while disqualified in the Boggs decision. 
 
As I have already mentioned, Mr. Speaker, amendments contained in this bill are non-controversial and 
merely clarify the intent and purpose of the provincial legislation. 
 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
415 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Statute Law Amendment Act, 1982. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — My colleague, the member for Quill Lakes, is reviewing this, and he is unable 
to be with us at this time. So that he might have an opportunity to speak to it or let is pass as he sees fit, I beg 
leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. member, this bill is the same as the bill 
introduced and given first reading in the last session of this legislature. Following the proclamation of The 
Provincial Court Act in 1978, the provision of court services to outlying areas of the province has greatly 
improved. At present there are 42 judges of the court plus the chief judge in this province, pursuant to The 
Provincial Court Act. The chief judge has substantial administrative responsibilities for the court which are 
enumerated in section 11. 
 
With the increase in the number of judges of the provincial court, the administrative workload of the chief 
judge has increased substantially. In order to relieve some of the administrative burden on the chief judge, 
and to provide a quicker response to problems in areas of the province away from the city of Regina, this bill 
proposes that the position of associate chief judge be created, and that the associate chief judge perform such 
duties as assigned to him by the chief judge of the court. 
 
Although this act speaks of one or more associate chief judges it is anticipated that in the near future only 
one associate chief judge would be appointed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I, or one of my colleagues, would like to address a few words to 
this bill at a later time and, accordingly, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8 — An Act to amend The Regulations Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. member, the majority of this bill is 
identical to a bill which was introduced and died on the order paper at the dissolution of the last session of 
this legislature. 
 
For some time government departments have been engaged in a review of regulations in an effort to 
consolidate and update regulations and delete obsolete and outmoded provisions. The end result is the 
revised regulations of Saskatchewan. These regulations are now published as part 2 of the Saskatchewan 
Gazette. Although this procedure is proceeding well, providing a simple, concise and easily accessible record 
of regulations, it is a mammoth undertaking. It will take a considerable amount of time to complete the 
project. 
 
The amendments contained in this bill have been recommended by the office of the 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

416 
 

legislative counsel and law clerk to accommodate the revised regulation process. Sections 3 and 4 of the bill 
establish a numbering and citation system for the revised regulations similar to the one used for the revised 
statutes. 
 
Subsection 5(1) of the bill makes provisions for repealing a large number of old regulations that no longer 
have any effect with one order in council, rather than having one order in council for each regulation which 
is to be replaced. 
 
Subsection 5(2) will allow for corrections of errors in regulations in one order as is now similarly done with 
The Statute Law Amendment Act. 
 
The repeal of subsection 20(2) is necessary to ensure that the version of the regulations contained in the 
Saskatchewan Gazette is the only official version. 
 
Section 7 of the bill makes the amendment retroactive to November 25, 1980, which is the date upon which 
the first revised regulations were enacted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Regulations Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — This bill is a very short and simple one. It merely repeals subsection 78(2) of 
The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. That's the subsection which sets the maximum 
number of legislative secretaries that may be appointed at six. It's quite a simple bill. I would point out to the 
members opposite that this government has a significantly smaller cabinet than that of the former 
administration. We also have a great number of highly skilled and extremely competent members sitting in 
the backbenches. They could make a very significant contribution to cabinet ministers, in the roles of 
legislative secretaries to cabinet ministers, at a significantly lower cost to the public purse. I, therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, move second reading of this bill. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a good deal to say on this one so I beg leave to adjourn 
the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Education Act 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move second reading of Bill No. 10, An Act to 
amend The Education Act, and particularly section 18. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1981, the previous administration of this province brought about a major change in the 
method by which the election of members of school division boards would be conducted in Saskatoon and in 
Regina. Legislation was introduced and passed which had the effect of eliminating the system of electing 
board members at large, and replacing it with a ward system for school elections, in our two largest systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have assessed the objections and the acclaimed merits of the ward 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
417 

system, as submitted by the de Vlieger report, and also the subsequent oral and written presentations made to 
me. One thing for sure, there is a diversity of opinion about the implementation of the ward system as a 
method of electing members to the board of education in the city systems. 
 
Those who oppose the ward system contend that the ward system can only lead to parochialism and partisan 
politics. They indicate that there is a real danger that board members would place too much emphasis on 
what is good for their own particular ward rather than what is in the best interests of the total city system. 
The result, they feel, would be pitting ward against ward, increased friction and extreme difficulty in 
priorizing the needs of the system. The overall effect would be that the dynamics of decision making would 
be made more difficult. 
 
In addition, those who oppose the ward system contend that there would be problems arising from 
establishing the boundaries for wards that are coterminous with municipal wards. There would, for example, 
be unequal distribution of schools and students in wards. Some school communities would be divided by 
coterminous boundaries. In one case, one school community would be divided among three wards. Perhaps 
the best example of some of the boundary problems that were presented was through the separate, or 
Catholic, school systems. In the case of Saskatoon, they have requested a coincidence of the ward boundaries 
with the parish boundaries so that they can more efficiently fulfil their religious mandates. 
 
The previous minister concurred with deviating from the original plan to accommodate this request. That 
would have required an amendment this session — an amendment before the act was actually implemented. 
So it would appear that there were very obvious problems, regarding boundaries, with the ward system. 
 
They (those who opposed the ward system) also point out that the present at-large system does allow for 
communication with representation to the total school system. They claim that the focal point of a school 
system is on all students within our system, that the most natural way to communicate or to make 
representation about programs and other factors which affect students is by a direct line to the teachers, a 
direct line to the principals, or, if need be, to the central office staff, all of whom serve the board of 
education. Each board has the mechanism to provide representation to them. 
 
It has also been stated by those who oppose the ward system that the general public did not call for the ward 
system for electing board members, that there was no real dissatisfaction with the at-large system. They point 
to the fact that the Regina and Saskatoon boards of education have functioned very well indeed. They 
administer systems, that is, Saskatoon and Regina, in which the performance, rapport and morale have been 
outstanding. They have given leadership in innovative initiatives for other systems. In fact these systems, 
Regina and Saskatoon, have served as models to other areas of Canada and, as a matter of fact, to other 
countries. 
 
So many of the public say, "Why change? What is the purpose for change? Why argue with success?" Mr. 
Speaker, I have listened to, read and weighed the opinions for and against the ward system. I have noted, for 
instance, that in the de Vlieger report 67.2 per cent of the briefs either opposed the ward system or were 
neutral, that boards of education are negative to the implementation of the ward system, particularly those 
boards that are directly affected by the legislation of last April. 
 
It also is evident that the public was not truly represented in the discussion to 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

418 
 

implement the ward system. So, because of the obvious diverse opinions, it is evident that the public would 
require greater input before a decision could be made to implement the ward system. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, after assessing all the present circumstances relating to this issue and finding no 
compelling reason to make changes to a system that has functioned well, our government has decided 
judiciously to rescind the legislation relative to implementing the ward system for the electing of boards of 
education in the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. Thus, I am introducing legislation to restore the at-large 
system that has served these cities well for decades, and I take pleasure in moving second reading of this bill. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend The Teachers' Superannuation Act 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 11, an Act to 
amend The Teachers' Superannuation Act. On April 2, 1982, a provincial collective bargaining agreement 
was concluded by the boards of education, the Government of Saskatchewan and the teachers of the 
province. One item that was bargained at the provincial level was superannuation for teachers. The signed 
agreement includes a provision that necessitates amendments to The Teachers' Superannuation Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whenever changes are agreed upon by the parties to the provincial collective bargaining 
agreement, the government trustee committee further agrees that the Government of Saskatchewan will 
proceed expeditiously to place before the Legislative Assembly such amendments to the superannuation act 
and to make such amendments to the regulations under the said act as are necessary to implement the 
provisions of the agreed-upon changes. Mr. Speaker, the amendments being proposed serve several 
purposes: first, to clarify existing legislation; second, to serve to reflect the intent of earlier negotiated 
conditions; third, to specify certain administrative procedures of the teachers' superannuation commission; 
and, fourth, to allow for the implementation of the additional benefit which was included in the agreement 
signed on April 2, 1982. That additional benefit is the early retirement option, which is the "30 contributory 
years and out" clause. That is, an early retirement is made possible for teachers who have 30 years of 
contributions in the teachers' superannuation fund, irrespective of age. 
 
The increased costs, due to the increased number of teachers now eligible for superannuation, has resulted in 
an increase of teacher contributions. The amendment being proposed to section 15 will provide for an 
increase of 0.15 per cent in the contribution rate being paid by teachers. That is, the rate has increased from 
7.5 per cent to 7.65 per cent of the full annual salary. An additional equivalent amount will be contributed by 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, further to the early retirement option, I now refer to the amendment proposed to section 28, 
which proposes to add clause (d) to subsection 28(2). This clause allows for the early retirement option, and 
also includes a reduction factor that applies whenever the superannuated teacher is less than 55 years of age. 
In brief, if the 



 
June 29, 1982 

 

 
419 

teacher has less than 35 years of service and is less than 55 years of age, the amount of the superannuation 
allowance is subject to a reduction factor of 0.33 per cent for each month that a teacher is less than 55 years 
of age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I shall refer to the remaining amendments very briefly. Section 12.1 removes an error in the 
numbering sequence. Sections 14, 18, 22, 24, 29, 35 and 70 allow for the administration of the plan in 
accordance with procedures that have been adapted by the teachers' superannuation commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments improve upon one of the best superannuation plans in Canada. It is 
therefore, with pleasure, that I move the second reading of this bill. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of detailed provisions in the act. We, on this 
side of the House, agree with the principles contained in the act. We therefore will support it on second 
reading, and raise some of the more detailed issues in committee, and I therefore indicate our support for the 
bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Teachers' Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 12, An Act to 
amend The Teachers' Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act. 
 
Briefly, may I provide some background information about the teacher's group insurance? It is administered 
by the teachers' superannuation commission. The policy covers term life insurance and accidental death and 
dismemberment. The policy provides insurance for teachers and for other full-time designated employees 
such as secretary treasurers. The premium is paid for equally by the Minister of Finance and the teacher who 
is employed by the board. The Minister of Finance makes no contribution to the payment of premiums for 
other designated employees. 
 
On April 2, 1982, the provincial agreement was signed by the participants, that is, the boards of education, 
the Government of Saskatchewan, and the teachers of the province. One of the items of the agreement 
pertained to group insurance. A number of superannuated teachers will be affected by the agreement after 
August 31, 1982. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it is necessary that The Teachers' Life Insurance Act be amended 
at this sitting of the legislature so that the provisions of the agreement can be implemented. 
 
The major amendment provides authority for teachers who superannuate in 1981-82 to maintain life and 
accidental death and dismemberment insurance beyond August 31, 1982, by paying for the entire premium. 
They many continue to have insurance coverage by paying the full annual premiums until they reach the age 
of 65. This amendment is accommodated by the addition of subsection (4) to section 5 of the act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other amendment refers to the designated employees of school divisions who will become 
eligible to participate in the accidental death and dismemberment portion of the coverage. This group 
includes persons such as secretary treasurers. This group had previously been participants in the original life 



 
June 29, 1982 
 

420 
 

insurance plan, but had not been included when additional coverage was added to the plan. The Minister of 
Finance does not make any payment on behalf of this group of employees. This amendment is 
accommodated in section 5(1) of the act. Mr. Speaker, the insurance company which is the present carrier of 
this life insurance and accidental death and dismemberment plan has agreed that the above amendments can 
be made to the plan, with no alterations to the existing premiums as a result of their inclusion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I now move second reading of this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we stand in support of the principle of this bill. We note that the 
additional coverage, other than for active teachers, is going to be coverage which will not be paid for by the 
crown directly. We note that, in effect, school administrators and retired teachers are getting the benefit of 
the group. While that may add an infinitesimal amount to the amounts charged, because they may or may not 
be as good a risk, the amount is indeed small. We would think that this is sound in principle. There are 
matters we would like to raise in committee. Subject to that qualification, we will be supporting the bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:42 p.m. 
 


