






















































Hansard: December 01, 1982


1191 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 1, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, It’s with a great deal of pleasure that I introduce, to you and 
through you, some special guests that we have on the floor of the Assembly. The special guests are the 
Saskatchewan Voice of the Handicapped, who are joining us today for the question period. They have 
been making special request to cabinet ministers and to myself, particularly with respect to accessibility 
to public buildings built from now on in the province of Saskatchewan, and certainly for modifications 
to buildings that presently exist, as well as several other requests. So I would just ask everyone to join 
me and please welcome them here. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to join the Premier in welcoming our 
guest. The Voice of the Handicapped has done yeoman service in advancing the interests of handicapped 
people and in bringing their problems to government. They are no strangers to this Assembly. They have 
been here before and we welcome them today and hope they enjoy the proceedings. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to introduce a 
special guest from my constituency, Miss Rodeo Canada, who is here with us today from Eastend, 
Saskatchewan. She won in a competition, a very tough competition, at Edmonton a few weeks ago. I’m 
sure that all members will join with me in wishing the very best to Miss Kathy Cornelsen in the year 
that’s coming up — a very busy one. I am sure that she will do a great job of representing the 
Shaunavon constituency, Eastend, and the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. JOHNSON: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I rise today to introduce to you 
and this Legislative Assembly . . . I started off having the speech prepared, Mr. Speaker, because we 
have some visiting queens that represent the Hereford Association of Canada. They are at Agribition, 
and they are unable to attend because they are busy with the show down there, but I will tell you that we 
have queens visiting with us from Ontario, from Alberta, and also from Manitoba. But the special 
occasion for me is that we have the four zones of Saskatchewan being represented here today. They are 
in the Speaker’s gallery. From the northeast zone we have Miss Banko. Would you stand up please? 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. JOHNSON: — Mr. Speaker, It’s a long list. Stay standing up, will you please, and I will ask you 
to 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1192 

hold your applause. From the northwest part of the province, Miss Skelton. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. JOHNSON: —From the southwest part of the province, Miss Frerotte. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. JOHNSON: — And also from the southeast part of the province Dawn Johnson. Would you stand 
up? 
 
To shorten things up, Mr. Speaker, we have Shirley McKenzie, who is the house mother who is looking 
after the girls, and three judges. The judges are from all over the province — Vera Sutter, Roy Dunlop 
and Roger Kaeding. 
 
These girls will be participating through today and tomorrow and one of these pretty young gals will be 
named Hereford Queen tomorrow evening down at the Saskatchewan Hotel. I ask you to help me 
welcome them to this Assembly 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, as legislative secretary to the Minister of Industry and Commerce, and on 
his behalf today, I would like to welcome a group of 28 grade 8 students from the Dr. A.E. Perry school 
here in Regina. They are accompanied by Mr. Bill Dietrich, Miss Jean Flett, Miss Linell, and parents 
Mrs. Fyfe and Mrs. Ball. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Minimum Wage 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Labor. Yesterday, I 
asked the Deputy Premier a question and the question was as follows: 
 

My question to the Deputy Premier is has the Minister of Labor or the cabinet received from the 
minimum wage board respecting an increase in the minimum wage effective January 1, 1983? 

 
The Deputy Premier’s answer was no. 
 
Would you advise the House whether you have received a recommendation from the minimum wage 
board with respect to an increase in the minimum wage effective January 1, 1983? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, In answer to the hon. member, I have received the summary 
of the briefs from the minimum wage board with a recommendation, and we will be adding our 
recommendation to it and presenting it to cabinet with the next week to 10 days. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1193 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Minister of Labor could 
advise when he anticipates that the government will be in position to make a decision with respect to an 
increase in the minimum wage, and what effective date he anticipates? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t add any specifics at this time. It’s going to be a 
recommendation to go to our cabinet. Our cabinet colleagues will have to make the decision as to the 
acceptance or rejection of the recommendation of any changes that we may make. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, one final short supplementary. Can the minister advise 
whether or not there will be an increase in the minimum wage effective January, 1983? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The answer to your question is no. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, I will rephrase the supplementary since I do not know whether the 
“no” was to the effect of whether he could advise me or whether there was going to be an increase. Will 
the minister state whether or not there will be an increase in the minimum wage effective January 1, 
1983? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The answer is no, Mr. Speaker, because there is a scheduling time that has 
to take place to implement the minimum wage. January 1 is probably out of the question right now. 
 

Office of the Rentalsman 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of 
Consumer Affairs. Yesterday, he advise this House (and I quote from Hansard), referring to the staff at 
the office of the rentalsman in Saskatoon: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I repeat that these people were hired in temporary positions by the public service 
commission, and the criteria was followed as to hiring practices. 

 
The question I ask the minister is: does he say today that those people were hired by the public service 
commission? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBURG: — Mr. Speaker, I was prepared to acknowledge that I was error yesterday 
when I made the statement. In regard to the Leader of the Opposition’s question yesterday regarding 
filling of the temporary positions in the office of the rentalsman in Saskatoon and I wish to clarify the 
point. 
 
The public service commission committee reviewed the department’s request to free up five 
non-permanent positions, and to approve the department’s filling of these positions. The department 
filled these positions after reviewing submitted applications, and if the Leader of the Opposition would 
like, I will table the letters that we received from the public service commission freeing up those 
positions. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of Consumer Affairs missed the thrust 
of my question. 
 
I was not raising the question of whether or not temporary positions should be filled. I 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1194 

was raising the question of who filled them and how. 
 
I ask again: is it accurate (a) that they were filled by the Department of Consumers Affairs — the 
selection of the personal was by the Department of Consumer Affairs, (b) by the Department of 
Consumer Affairs in Saskatoon, and (c) that two people who were so selected were chosen from those 
people who had immediately prior thereto been employed by the Progressive Conservative party in 
Saskatoon? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBURG: — Mr. Speaker, the department did fill those positions after reviewing the 
submitted applications, as I indicated to the Leader of the Opposition. As far as the hiring of those 
people was concerned, I was not involved in the hiring of the people in my departments, nor will I be, 
and as far as them having any connection with the PC Party, we don’t put that in our criteria for hiring as 
the previous administration so well did. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a question for the minister. Were the choices made by Mrs. 
Cherneskey, who has recently been put in charge of that office by the minister? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBURG: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to dialogue with Mrs. Cherneskey, but I 
expect it was between the rentalsman, Mr. MacGillivray, and Mrs. Cherneskey as to who filled those 
positions and possibly the deputy minister of consumer and commercial affairs. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, one further question. In filing the positions (and I have 
noted that people without any prior experience in the public service have been selected), would the 
minister advise whether people who are members of the public service on layoff were given the 
opportunity to compete for those positions, or were selections made on some other basis? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBURG: — Mr. Speaker, the positions were freed up by the public service 
commission and we followed normal hiring procedures for temporary personnel. The applications were 
reviewed and the people were selected for the positions according to their qualifications. I also have the 
qualifications criteria here, if the Leader of the Opposition would like to see those. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, one final supplementary. With respect to those 
qualifications, the minister has already indicated that having previously been employed by the public 
service of Saskatchewan and being on layoff did not qualify you. Would he elucidate a little more fully 
what qualifications the two people had who came from the Progressive Conservative office that the 
people who were on layoff . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I will rephrase the question 
because of the intervention of members opposite. 
 
It is clear that the people who were selected were successful and my question to the minister is this: in 
what did their success consist — successful service with the Government of Saskatchewan over a good 
number of years or successful service to the Progressive Conservative Party in the recent election? 
 
HON. MR. SANDBURG: — Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious they were the most competent people for the 
job. I had nothing to do with the criteria they needed for hiring them. I’ll just add that this government 
does not discriminate as to how people vote or what their 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1195 

previous occupation was. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

PCS Layoffs 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the minister responsible for the 
potash corporation. In less than 19 days, you’ve indicated that about 1,200 PCS employees will be laid 
off for a minimum of six weeks. Back in October, Mr. Speaker, you indicated, and I quote from the 
Leader-Post of October 22. It states: 
 

McLaren stressed that the government is doing everything possible to ensure layoffs don’t occur. He 
said there’s a chance the crown corporations may be able to sell more than 200,000 tonnes of potash 
to Malaysia. This would put the employees back to work. 

 
I would like to ask the minister if he cold bring us up to date on the status of the Malaysian sale and 
indicate whether there have been any additional sales made and whether or not the December 19 
projected layoffs will in fact be averted, or at least reduced. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, the layoffs announced for December 19 were necessary to be 
called because of the notice required to employees. The inventory figures, thanks to the administration 
across the way . . . When you didn’t slow down the production a year ago and we ended up with 1.1 
million tonnes of potash in our storage bins this spring, we were not able to get the reduction required. 
All we’re doing now is letting the people know ahead of time, which they weren’t told a year ago, that 
the possibility exists. 
 
Potash sales are poor around the world. In the offshore we are ahead of last year at the same period. The 
United States market is a problem, and we are doing things there to try to improve it. As far as the 
Malaysian deal is concerned, it’s a barter deal. We will sell to the broker if it comes about, but he has to 
go and buy shoes, rubber — I don’t know what —from the Malaysians, to bring it across here. We have 
no part to play in the timing and getting it consolidated. We understand that the negotiations are still on. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Are you in fact saying then, Mr. Minister, that the 
workers of the potash corporation should give up hope, that your government has given up hope, that 
you have in fact taken no meaningful action in order to sell potash? Is that the position of the minister in 
charge? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we are working very, very hard at selling potash, and I am 
pleased to announce today that we sold 150,000 tonnes to India yesterday . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — . . . plus another 50,000 option to India as soon as this one is delivered, plus 
another 100,000 to China today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1196 

MR. KOSKIE: — As a supplemental, I would like to ask the minister whether the sales that he is 
announcing were in fact negotiated previously by the potash corporation international or whether in fact 
they have been negotiated through the arm of Canpotex. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, the negotiations took place through Canpotex. They were 
signed yesterday in India and in China. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to ask the minister: what is the position that he is taking in his government 
with respect to the continuation of the potash corporation international sales company? I ask you to 
indicate: what is the position that your government ahs taken in so far as the previous government had 
established potash corporation international? It was a corporation in order to market and sell potash on 
behalf of the public sector. I ask you, what is the status of potash corporation international? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we are dismantling PCS International. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — One final supplemental. I would like to ask the minister what direction he has given 
to Canpotex in order to encourage sales. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated to the member opposite that we’ve sold 
more potash though Canpotex up to this date in time than you did last year. 
 

Cardiac Unit at Plains Health Centre 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. AS the minister will be 
aware, a Dr. Busse, a cardiac surgeon at the Plains Health Centre has informed the media as well as the 
public of Saskatchewan that due to the fact of underfunding by the Department of Health the number of 
surgeries carried out per week is four when in fact the facility could handle 10. There is now a waiting 
list of over four months. Can the minister tell me whether or not he intends now to increase funding to 
this unit at the Plains Health Centre? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I’m aware of Dr. Busse’s comments on the radio and in 
the paper. I’d like to inform this House that the number of open-heart procedures performed in 
Saskatchewan this year is at 10, an increase from six of last year — I think rather a significant increase 
— 10, a total of 10 a week. 
 
Now I want to also indicate at this time, Mr. Speaker, that I’m not sure if the waiting list as quoted by 
Dr. Busse is absolutely accurate. I want to say that it was brought to the attention of this government 
since our election that there were some funds needed in this regard. We have put forth $153,000 for 
diagnostic tests — simply put, they can go in and look and see if the procedures are necessary. I think 
that is a real commitment to the health care. That’s not putting people through operations that are not 
necessary and that’s helping alleviate the situation. 
 
Furthermore, we will be addressing this situation as one of our priorities and one of the many ways that 
we’ll be looking at improving health care in Saskatchewan during the 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1197 

next budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister has informed this Assembly 
that he is doubting the words of the doctors when he says that an individual from Shaunavon or Swift 
Current doesn't need or needs open-heart surgery. That could be his opinion, but I can tell you that the 
people who are waiting for four months are very interested in knowing whether or not you are gong to 
have funding available to this unit in the near future. Can you give us an indication today of whether or 
not funding with be forthcoming, before the end of the year, for this unit? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not doubting the word of the doctor. I think waiting lists, as 
we know, are a fluid thing. What may be a waiting list today, one week from today could be different, as 
you know, because there are 10 operations going on each week in the province. As far as our 
commitment and our dollars to health, if you had listened to my budget reply you would see that we put 
in $26 million more this year than you did last year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — So I don’t think there is any doubt that this government is not committed to 
improving health care services in the province of Saskatchewan. I will reiterate my response of just a 
few minutes ago that we will be addressing the whole topic of funding for open-heart surgery. We will 
be using the dollars where we figure they will best service the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
That will be announced in the budget for ‘83-84. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I have here an article from the 
Leader-Post, November 26, which headlines, “Man Dies Waiting for Surgery,” from Canada Press in 
Edmonton. What I’d like to know from the minister is, in light of the fact that he is telling us here today 
that there is no funding available for this unit at the Plains Health Centre, whether or not this is what he 
calls making Saskatchewan number one, and whether this kind of headline will be what we’re seeing by 
the end of the year or early next year. I want to inform the minister that we’re going to hold him 
personally responsible if in fact . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. You’re in the stage of supplementary question. Supplementaries are 
not allowed to have a long preamble. You still have not asked a question. I would ask you to get directly 
to the point. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I had asked a question. I had asked if this is how the minister 
had intended to make Saskatchewan number one. I will reiterate that question. I expect a reply. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I have a reply, my friend. That is: if you will sit here and observe and watch 
the motions of this Department of health over this year, next year, and the next four years, and the next 
20 years, you will see. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1198 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — We will very soon become number one in Saskatchewan in health. It won’t 
take us 20 years; it will be done in the very near future. I want to just ask you . . . I guess I can’t ask you 
a question . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I don’t think he could answer anyway. I want a little 
clarification here. 
 
I heard the Leader of the Opposition getup during the budget debate and complain about a deficit. If I’m 
hearing you correctly, you’re saying to me: enlarge that deficit now. Which way do you fellows want it? 
 

Legislation to Amend The Workers’ Compensation Act 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Minister of Labor. Is it the 
intention of the Minister of Labor to introduce and pass legislation amending The Workers’ 
Compensation Act before Christmas? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we are planning some legislation concerning the interim 
report of the workers’ compensation board. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Next question. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, I will ask the same one again because I didn’t get the answer. Is it the 
intention of the minister to introduce and pass this legislation before Christmas? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I can’t answer that, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know how long it will take to put a 
bill through the House. It is our intention to introduce it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you. I gather it is the minister’s intention to introduce the legislation 
before Christmas. Is that accurate? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — That’s accurate. 
 

Regina Union Station 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. On Monday, we had the 
minister denying any cabinet involvement in the decision to reconsider the multimodal station, only to 
admit, later in the same day, that he was misinformed. On Tuesday, we had the minister denying any 
commitment by the Government of Saskatchewan to the project, only to admit, later in the same 
question period, that he was uninformed. What he vehemently denied at 2:10 p.m. he admitted he didn’t 
know at 2:20 p.m. 
 
The question, and it’s based on the assumption that the minister has finally taken enough interest in his 
department to inform himself about this matter, is: are you know prepared to admit that letters of intent 
were in fact signed with Via Rail, Transport Canada and DREE, and that a formula was agreed upon for 
sharing the cost of the building? Will the minister admit the facts that everyone else has know? They 
have been public knowledge for months. 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the question a couple of things should be pointed 
out. First of all, a couple of misstatements or incorrections got into Hansard yesterday, from the hon. 
member for Regina Centre and his prompter 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1199 

behind the rail. I indicate that there has been no halt to renovations, as he indicated in his question, since 
none have ever started at the centre. I would like to straighten that out. 
 
I should indicate that no formal agreement or specific contractual obligations were ever arrived at. There 
were, in fact, letters of intent sent in the form of a Telex. I would read point number 12 from the one 
from the previous administration which reads: 
 

The agreement as reflected by the principles set out herein shall be subject to final confirmation by 
both the province of Saskatchewan and Via Rail Canada Incorporated. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to this time no final confirmation has taken place. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — But, surely, Mr. Minister, that confirmation was not intended to give the 
parties the opportunity to reconsider the entire project. Surely the confirmation was merely intended to 
give the province and the federal government the opportunity to . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a supplementary? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Surely the minister will admit that that was not an invitation to the province 
or to the federal government to reconsider the entire project. 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, simply put in response, the agreement in principle was to allow 
the parties to continue negotiations. AS I’m sure the minister knows, it was not a formal agreement, and 
that is the statement I made earlier. I stand by it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Another supplementary. Surely, Mr. Minister, an exchange of letters of 
intent and agreement as to the cost and the formula is in fact, and can fairly be termed, a commitment to 
the project. 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, in response I will quote from a letter received on July 19 sent to 
the Department of Urban Affairs. It is sent from the legal firm of Graf, Zarzeczny, Linka and Lepage, 
which I believe the administration opposite is familiar with. The specific line reads: 
 

The agreement in principle set out the fundamental elements of the project, including acquisition of 
the project lands and the project’s development including construction, operation and management. 
This agreement in principle was subject to final confirmation by both the province of Saskatchewan 
and VIA Rail. 

 
Further, it said: 
 

At present drafts of the agreement for sale have been prepared. However, there has been no 
finalization in terms. 

 
Further again: 
 

Such present agreements as exist I consider merely to be agreements in principle, and subject to the 
express reservation that written contractual 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1200 

agreements satisfactory to all parties be prepared and executed. To date this has not been achieved. 
 

And it’s signed: Mr. Zarzeczny. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 47 — An Act respecting Building and Accessibility Standards and the Inspection of 
Buildings 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I move first reading of a bill respecting building and accessibility standards 
and the inspection of buildings. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 48 — An Act to amend The Liquor Act 
 
HON. MR. SANDBURG: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Liquor Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the committee of finance. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to enter into this debate. Before the Minister of 
Agriculture leaves the Chamber, I would like (he’s just going to the back) to compliment him on 
bringing forth a brand new idea in legislation in the farm purchase plan which will help the citizens of 
Saskatchewan more than the former land bank ever did. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, this morning in public accounts we learned one of the ways the 
former government was able to play their little game of balanced budgets. This morning we learned that 
there ware insufficient funds in just two of the pension plans that we found out. We found out the 
amounts; we’ve know that they were a little shy. That was only a little shy, we were told. Today we 
found out that the teachers’ fund is over $1.5 billion shy, just $1.5 billion shy. 
 
It is interesting to note that the former government never put the actuary reports on the table for all of us 
to see how much they were short. It is interesting to note that the funds were spent. Now, let’s talk about 
really where we are sort. Let’s go to the public service and the government employees’ pension plan. It’s 
only short just a little as you always used to say. The little, we are informed, is probably $3.5 billion. 
Just a 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1201 

little, you guys seemed to indicate. You know that’s $5 billion. You complain about $200 million 
deficit. We are short $5 billion, gentlemen. 
 
We knew that there was $300,000 in one, and $100,00 there. That’s not bad. But what happened to the 
money in the public service pension fund? Why are we short the money today? Because that government 
and the former Liberal government spent it. They took right into general revenue — government 
revenue; they didn’t put it aside for the pension plans and match it with their share for the employees. 
No, they wouldn’t do that. They put it into general revenue and spent it like the drunken sailor 
government they were. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I was going to talk a bit about that former government, and seeing as I’m 
involved in the Department of Agriculture I’ll talk about that former minister of agriculture, Mac, better 
known as Big Mac or Mr. MacMurchy, or the hon. member for . . . well, right now he still hasn’t figured 
out he lost the election. He’s still running all over this province trying to play minister of agriculture. 
Now I have a confidential document here of a meeting at Tommy Douglas House — so that you all 
understand where it is — Tommy Douglas House. The meeting was held on June 21, 1982 at 2 p.m. 
Now I had the document at 2 p.m. so your security still isn’t any good, guys. 
 
But what’s it all about? I must relate that, of course, Mr. Speaker, to another document that my good 
friend from Humboldt, the member, went and picked up for me on Saturday at a meeting held in 
Humboldt with that same former minister of agriculture doing his thing, Big Mac, as they referred to the 
hon. member. And he’s talking about a Family Farm Foundation of Canada founding convention. 
What’s in this confidential document that they called in the former member for Lakeview, who used to 
be in the department? What’s in it that the minister of agriculture . . . It’s all about to make sure we get 
re-elected in four years. We have to do something, so what are we gong to do? We are going to start a 
foundation so that we can run around and make our speeches, you know, to make sure of re-election in 
four years and assure readiness to resume office. Policies and people will need to be informed on the 
basis to form the officers for our next term of government. 
 
Gentlemen, you’re never going to see a term of government for a long, long, long time. You know, 
that’s your letter I’m reading. What is the Family Farm Foundation of Western Canada? I assume that 
they’re going to be . . . I’ve got to make sure my Minister of Agriculture knows to make sure that he’s 
not giving them any funds, because I know that friends of the NDP from Manitoba will be funding them. 
We just know that, so no funds for that group from this government. No funds. They’ll be asking for 
funds because, you know, they say in the document: we need $100,000 for the executive to run around. 
That’s page four of the confidential document. 
 
It’s here, and you know something? Those figures show up in this document as well. You know, it’s 
quite unbelievable . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Oh, the member for Quill Lakes was a little bit insulted. Well, member for Quill Lakes, it’s unfortunate 
that you can’t accept that people in Saskatchewan are smarter than to be caught by your fun and little 
games that you and your Mr. former member are trying to play. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1202 

It’s interesting to know who are the directors of this new corporation. Ed Tchorzewski. Have you ever 
heard of him? Gordon MacMurchy, Jr. Have you ever heard of him? There are some other names I 
should read to you that you might be interested in. Let’s see. Don Faris. Have you ever heard of him? 
Marj Benson? Have you ever heard of her? Come on, what have we got going here? All these people are 
organizing something they call the Family Farm Foundation of Canada. Why don’t you have the 
intestinal fortitude to stand up and say, ‘We’re starting another wing of the NDP”? You don’t have the 
guts to do it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — No, you’re going to run around and use a different name because you can’t stand 
up and say, “Hey, I’m the former minister of agriculture and I think those Conservatives are right or 
those Conservatives are wrong.” No, you’ve got to run around and skulk in the backwoods where you 
love to do it. God, what a bunch! You’re not fit to go back in government for at least another 100 years 
and that will be too soon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — You know, it’s unfortunate that I was only allowed a short amount of time today 
or I’d speak about other things. But, you know, it is the height of contempt for the political system to 
play games and charades like you’re attempting, to have that former minister say, “Oh, they’ll probably 
blame us,” and yet in his confidential document he says, “We must keep the door open and we must 
convert these people so they will be our front line troops in the next election.” No he doesn’t say 
anything in the confidential document about protecting the family farm. He talks about protecting the 
NDP. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that’s the height, the total height . . . And then this 
morning we get this great news on how you’ve been able to balance a budget. We’re only $5 billion in 
hock, $5 billion. You never told us that. You told us a little, a little. But $5 billion is just that little? It’s 
unfortunate. You know the government treasury is going to have to put up up to $800 million in one 
year to cover that deficit in certain years for pensions for people. It’s unbelievable! Give them the 
speech about honesty in politics. Why waste my breath? They don’t understand it. 
 
You know, we’ have a government that’s new, fresh and has ideas: removed the gas tax; brought in a 
farm ownership bill so that people can own their land have pride in the ownership, so that their toil and 
their sweat brings them something, not just the government more state control. I’m proud to be involved 
with a government that has thought, not how much it’s going to get — and it’s hit national — but how 
much it’s gong to help the people of the province. That’s what’s important. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — You know, I read Dale Eisler today. Sometimes his sources aren’t good. You 
know, it’s interesting to note that one comment he seems to indicate is: we have a government now that 
listens to its membership, the members in caucus, and the family farm purchase shows that. That’s 
what’s important. We’ve got a government that listens to people and the members listen to the people 
out 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1203 

in the ridings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have other things I would like to talk about, but I know the session will be lengthy and 
we will have time during the estimates to go into all those little misgivings the former government did, 
and the way that we will correct them and make it easier on the people of Saskatchewan down the road. 
Therefore I am proud to say that I am pleased to support the motions of the Minister of Finance to a 
good budget that was realistic and for the betterment of the people. Thank you. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to speak on the effect this budget will have for the 
people in northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Northerners are watching this new government. They’re 
watching for this new wave of prosperity promised by the free enterprise, capitalist government. They 
are watching to see what this government is doing to pull the North out of recession. They are watching 
to see what the intentions of this new government are toward the people of northern Saskatchewan and a 
development for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And what we have seen so far, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t look too good. Employment is very high in the 
North. The recession has hit us very hard. Traditional economic development has generally meant 
exploitation of Northerners with the prosperity going to others and not to us. 
 
Things were beginning to change, Mr. Speaker. We were beginning to have development on our terms. 
We were beginning to have full participation by Northerners in that development. We were beginning to 
build a future for ourselves. 
 
And what do we have now? What do we see this government doing? It’s put an end to the fur marketing 
corporation. It’s put a freeze on construction. It’s put a hold on the new hospital for La Ronge, the 
nursing care facility. And you stood by as the people of Uranium City watched their community 
disappear and they lost all their hopes. You went ahead and dismantled DNS without consultation and 
involvement of Northerners. You eliminated the northern economic development foundation and 
imposed a three-month moratorium on economic development. Mr. Speaker, we see this government 
doing all kinds of things in northern Saskatchewan and none of it is good. 
 
Last Wednesday we heard the Minister of Finance outline the mid-course correction for the budget and 
for the province. He spoke of help to the oil industries. He spoke of help to the insurance companies in 
debates. But not once, Mr. Speaker not once did I hear him speak of the people in northern 
Saskatchewan and I think that says something about this government attitude towards Northerners 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very disappointed with this budget. It does not speak of any programs for northern 
residents. In fact, Mr. Speaker this budget outlines some severe cutbacks in services for the North. I 
know the members opposite would claim that that here have been no cutbacks. They say that the 
different services of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan will be handled by departments here in 
southern Saskatchewan. But what guarantees can they give? What guarantees can they give that northern 
residents will receive their fair share of services? If this budget is any indication of how Northerners are 
to be treated by this government, then we’re in for some pretty touch times. Let me give you some 
examples, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government has reduced grants to individuals, to communities, to third-party 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1204 

organizations for economic development, by 26 per cent from $2.3 million to $1.7 million. They say 
they are a government that wants to encourage individual initiatives. They say they want to see 
economic development in this province, but they reduce their support for local people who want to 
develop their own businesses. Northerners face some special problems when they are trying to get 
businesses going. They have to deal with major transportation problems, isolation, the lack of 
management and support services, the lack of financial institutions and communications. And now we 
have a complete lack of government support and encouragement. This government is showing 
Northerners that they don’t care. 
 
Where is the northern economic development foundation, and where are the northern-run enterprises 
that would already be in place had that foundation gone ahead? It is strange to me that a government 
which says they believe in development and in small business would destroy a valuable idea like the 
northern economic development foundation. Or don’t they think Northerners can handle their own 
development? Do they only believe in business incentives for their corporate friends? 
 
This budget also reduces grants to schools and community colleges in the North, Mr. Speaker. The grant 
to northern community colleges was reduced by 50 per cent. We need these facilities. We need to 
provide the opportunities for more education to every Northerner. We’ve seen what can be 
accomplished when programs are worked out that fit the needs and the aspirations of northern people, 
and NORTEP is one example of that. The northern teachers’ training program is a really good example. 
And I could name a fairly long list of others. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, this budget shows us that education for Northerners is not really important to 
this government. The list goes on, Mr. Speaker. There are cuts in community programs like day care, 
services to the elderly, community recreation, etc. I know that the Minister of Finance will say that these 
services will be provided by departments in the South — by southern line departments. But this is 
simply not true, as the facts in the budget show. Mr. Speaker, we all know that northern residents live a 
long way from Regina, and in the past, prior to 1971 and 1972, government departments and agencies in 
the South have always been insensitive to the needs and diverse conditions of northern Saskatchewan 
and its people. 
 
What kind of commitment is this government going to make to ensure that adequate services will be 
provided to northern residents? During the election campaign the Conservatives promised to cut the 
gasoline tax, and they say that to cut taxes but not cut services will run deficits. Well, they are running a 
deficit — $220 million in their first budget. And they have also cut services for northern residents. But it 
came as no surprise to us that when the gasoline tax was lifted, the funds available for road building and 
transportation dried up, particularly in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Everybody is talking about the bad state of the roads. All over the province road maintenance and 
improvements have been halted. Northern Saskatchewan is particularly hard hit by the freeze on 
highway construction. Long distances are the rule in northern Saskatchewan. Road improvements are 
vital to northern development. New b ridges, better services and improved maintenance mean so much 
to northern residents. Communities like Cumberland House, Sandy Bay, Pelican Narrows, Wollaston 
Lake, Montreal Lake, Southend and Reindeer Lake are just a few examples of the isolation that we have 
facing northern residents. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1205 

In addition to transportation needs, road building is an important source of work for many local people. 
At first people thought it was a good idea to save a couple of bucks on a tank of gas. But they quickly 
found out that rocks through the windshield or tires mashed over potholes were more expensive in the 
long run. People in the North know that transportation costs money but they also know how vital it is to 
improve northern roads. For Northerners, it’s just one more example of how the PC government sells 
them short. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one area where the Tories have increased their budget, but that is in the area of the 
social assistance program. This government would rather have Northerners on welfare than take 
measures to encourage northern employment. It’s a disgrace, Mr. Speaker, not giving people a chance to 
participate in the economy of their own lives in the communities in northern Saskatchewan. It is a 
disgrace treating the residents of the North as second-class citizens. If this government is truly serious 
about a new industrial strategy, if it really believes is the brighter future for Saskatchewan. It is a 
disgrace treating the residents of the North as second-class citizen. If this government is truly serious 
about a new industrial strategy, if it really believes in a brighter future for Saskatchewan, if it has 
anything to offer beyond the rhetoric of free enterprise, then now is the time to put itself to work in 
earnest to build a future for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The need for development is there. The potential is there. The challenge is there and I challenge them to 
make good of their claims to put an end to destruction and delay and to get to work in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, let me summarize the major issues raised for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan by this budget. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, we have been repeatedly told by the minister and others that the Devine government 
is interested in consultation before making any major policy changes. And yet they have so far refused 
any or all for of meaningful consultation with Northerners, with FSI, with AMNSIS, with local 
governments, with La Ronge hospital, with the Saskatchewan Trappers Association, the Northern 
Contractors Association, etc. 
 
Secondly, there has been no mention by the Minister of Finance, or the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan, of programs to support he traditional economic activities of Northerners Saskatchewan, 
of programs to support the traditional economic activities — trappers, the fishermen, commercial 
fishermen, etc. 
 
Thirdly, while the Minister of Finance speaks of a midcourse correction, we have seen just what he has 
in mind — a correction in favor of the Tory corporate friends in the banks, the insurance companies, the 
real estate companies and the multinational oil companies. All these corrections, Mr. Speaker, for their 
corporate friends, but severe cutbacks in social and economic development programs for the North. 
 
Fourth, Mr. Speaker, a long, long list of real budgetary cuts, cuts that have not been picked up 
elsewhere: cutbacks of more than $730,000 for social programs; complete elimination northern revenue 
sharing for local governments — more than $900,000; cutbacks of more than $530,000 in education and 
training programs for northern people; and cutbacks of more than $15 million in northern transportation 
capital projects. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, there is the hypocrisy of this budget speech. The Minister of Finance may speak 
piously about economic prosperity requiring a co-operative effort. As far as northern people are 
concerned this hypocrisy and this pious platitude has become all too evident with this budget; a 
co-operative effort between the Tory 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1206 

government and its big corporate friends, but an all-out attack by the government against the residents 
and the interests of northern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I will therefore be opposing the motion put by 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, it is an honor and a privilege to be able to participate in this 
debate on our government’s budget, both as the elected member for my home riding of Maple Creek, 
and as the minister responsible for government services, and revenue, supply and services. 
 
I feel, Mr. Speaker, that as an effective opposition we repeatedly requested assistance for our citizens of 
this province. The bottom line, I feel, was that we as an opposition really cared, and I can say with great 
confidence that as a government we will continue to care for those who have found it extremely tough to 
make ends meet in these difficult times. I think this was ably demonstrated by my colleague the Hon. 
Minister of Finance in his first budget the other evening. 
 
We as a government care about the families who live and work in this province. Our government is 
committed to putting emphasis on the people of this province — their needs, their hopes, and their 
dreams — while recognizing their talents and helping them to realize their own objectives. 
 
Our Open for Business conference was only the first step in demonstrating our want to build and to 
stimulate growth in our province’s economy. Our conference created a healthy and spirited atmosphere 
of co-operation between the public and private sector. Only with this kind of co-operation which our 
government is promoting can we generate the type of economic activity we need to create jobs. Over 
650 top business and government executives from across the land visited Regina to hear about the 
dawning of a new economic era in our province. They left, Mr. Speaker, feeling very excited about our 
province where opportunity knocks. They realized that they too can benefit by establishing in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In asking these executives to locate or expand their operations in Saskatchewan, we simply told them 
that their initiatives would help create jobs, new jobs for our young people, it would help create taxes to 
maintain our government operations, and provide new opportunities for our local service industries and 
stores. All this, we feel can be done without the need for personal taxation increases, but nonetheless 
expanding services to people at the same time. Our government’s commitment to them is that they will 
be come familiarized with the ground rules, and those rules will not be changed in midstream as they 
were under the previous administration. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is one of the most heavily regulated provinces in the whole 
country. Ontario is 6,651 printed pages of regulations as compared to Saskatchewan 8,000 printed pages 
of regulation. From 1900 to 1960, Saskatchewan either led or tied for the lead in enacting the greatest 
number of regulatory statues in four of the six decades. Fifty-three per cent of Saskatchewan’s 
regulatory statues were enacted under the previous government. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that that’s 
indicative of their mistrust in the people that want to come here and try to help our province grow. 
 
And our province has lagged far behind most other government in not attempting to 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1207 

examine the many inefficiencies and hidden costs of regulation on the provincial economy. Unfair 
regulation means reduced profits, leads to foregone tax and royalty revenues to the government, and 
means ultimately, Mr. Speaker, increased prices to consumers. 
 
Unfair regulation as enacted by the previous administration also increases the risk and uncertainty about 
the province’s investment climate and can, for that matter, inhibit competitive free market forces. And 
this was stated over and over again at our Open for Business conference. 
 
Through this industrial and business expansion, we as a government will help provide real help by 
creating jobs, a healthy provincial tax base, and new opportunities for the people of this province. This, 
Mr. Speaker, is our philosophy, and we feel very, very confident that it can also become a reality. 
 
On May 8, 1982, our government provided real help to Saskatchewan residents by eliminating the tax on 
fuel. As you know, Mr. Speaker, that was the very same day that we took office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I feel, Mr. Speaker, that that was our first step in proving to the electorate 
that we were serious about keeping our promises, that we simply were not promising pie-in-the-sky 
tidbits to the citizens of this province just to get them to vote for us. And you know, Mr. Speaker, they 
believed us, and with the introduction of the farm purchase program, we have literally fulfilled our 
major election commitments. I don’t even call them promises. I call them commitments. 
 
We will continue to be serious about governing this province. People like the constituents of my riding, 
Maple Creek, who were sick and tired of not being listened to, who were worn out by a government who 
had lost touch with the public, know that they can come to us and we’ll listen. 
 
Our government has estimated that each passenger car owner will save approximately $200 to $300 a 
year on fuel charges. The elimination of the fuel tax will also benefit cities, towns, villages, rural 
municipalities, school units, and countless other commercial ventures. A cross-country survey of gas 
prices in September showed Quebec at the high end of the scale at 50.5 cents per litre and Saskatchewan 
next to the bottom of the scale at 36.7 cents per litre. Attractive gasoline prices at the pumps should even 
attract more tourists than ever to our beautiful province, and I’m sure the Minister of Tourism will have 
something to say about that. 
 
Oil companies and trucking firms will also benefit, because the savings in transportation cost will be 
passed on to the consumer in the form of lower prices for consumer goods. Under the former regime, we 
could only hang our heads in shame that our gasoline prices were about the highest in the country. We 
felt differently. We feel that Saskatchewan is one of the richest producing provinces in Canada, and that 
there was no reason for our gas prices to have been so high. But it seems like the former government 
took little pity on the little guy and used the gasoline road tax as a means of feeding the ravenous 
appetites of the crown corporations. 
 
Over the years, Mr. Speaker, we as a party have been listening to the people of 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1208 

Saskatchewan and we have heard their concern over the high cost of fuel. As a government, we 
responded by immediately eliminating the provincial tax. In no way does this discourage the 
conservation of our non-renewable resources, as charged by the people opposite. We feel that the people 
of Saskatchewan are energy conscious, and despite the savings, we believe that that trend of purchasing 
fuel-efficient vehicles will continue. 
 
Another commitment, Mr. Speaker, was the introduction of the mortgage interest reduction plan in June 
1982. It is a plan which will ensure that people are able to cope with high interest rates and, at the same 
time, protect their homes. I am very pleased to report, Mr. Speaker, that this program has helped 
financially squeezed home-owners in Saskatchewan with real help in tough economic times. To date, in 
less than six months, as of November 17, a total of 30,036 home-owners are presently receiving monthly 
benefits. As I responded in question period the other day, Mr. Speaker, my department has been flooded 
with applications since the introduction of the plan on July 1. I feel that all of these applications have 
been dealt with efficiently, in an organized fashion, by a very small competent staff of about 20 people. I 
think it is a credit to their dedication as civil servants — the hours and hours that they have put in 
wanting to see this plan move very, very smoothly. 
 
Of the 38,000 Saskatchewan home-owners who were initially eligible to receive benefits under the 
province’s MIRP, beginning July 1, I am sure that my hon. colleagues across the way will agree that we 
have pretty well reached our mark. I am sure that they will also agree that the program has proven to be 
extremely popular with the general public. Our government has received dozens of letters and calls 
offering thanks and congratulations. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, whereas the NDP program would have 
only covered roll-overs and no one buying a new home would qualify for assistance in any 
circumstance, our government’s plan has in fact protected our home-owners from high interest rates and 
has encouraged first-time home buyers. 
 
In July and August of this year, the Royal Bank reported that twice as many mortgages have been issued 
in Saskatchewan as compared with the same number last year. The significant decline in interest rates 
ahs resulted in a reduction in the estimated cost of MIRP. However, home-owners receive benefits based 
on their existing mortgage interest rates and not the current interest rates. Therefore, although current 
interest rates may only be at about 13 per cent, most home-owners are receiving benefits based on 
interest rates significantly above the current rates. 
 
I might say, Mr. Speaker, that the target group we were going after has been covered; 52 per cent of the 
30,000 or more people receiving benefits to date are trying to keep up payments on mortgages with 
interest levels in excess of 18 per cent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The group that we specifically targeted is being helped. 
 
I think also it is safe to say, Mr. Speaker, that the MIRP plan to assist new and existing home-owners 
has proven that we are a government which listens. We are a government which cares. Other provinces 
have introduced mortgage interest reduction schemes similar to ours, and even the federal government 
ahs congratulated our government on it is initiative. 
 
MIRP has generated some new home construction in the province. In comparison with 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1209 

other provinces, our housing starts are high, particularly in the rental housing are. Equally as important, 
the plan is generating housing sales. Prior to the introduction of the plan, the dollar volume of sales was 
down 43.4 per cent for 1982 over 1981, and the number of sales were down 38.7 per cent. Since the 
introduction of MIRP, the dollar value of sales has increased by 18.2 per cent over the same period in 
1981, and the number of new sales has increased by 29.2 per cent. So I think another objective the plan, 
to help stimulate a lagging industry, was also met. 
 
I very much doubt, Mr. Speaker, whether the former NDP government could have been able to report 
close to these figures had they be re-elected and introduced their home program. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Never. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Never is right. 
 
As my colleague announced in his budget address last Wednesday evening, we are committed, on our 
part, by our government to establish a comprehensive tax environment for business, and to protect the 
income of individuals. Our government has committed itself to tax reductions where practical and the 
review of taxation levels will continue. Our government has also committed itself to further reductions 
in sales tax and other taxes. As the Minister of Finance indicated the other night, these reductions will be 
targeted as we can afford them and where they will generate the most jobs and the most economic 
activity. We think, Mr. Speaker, that that is a very sensible approach to take. 
 
Additionally, I would agree with the Minister of Finance that a small increase in taxes levied on 
insurance companies can be justified in Saskatchewan. A 1 per cent increase in the insurance premium 
tax rate on gross premiums is not very hard to bear. This will yield approximately $4 million in revenue 
for ‘83-84, and this will help us keep our promise to ensure high quality education and health care. 
 
I would like to stress, however, Mr. Speaker, that this higher rates will not apply to insurance premiums 
for sickness, accident or life insurance. This higher rate will not be in effect until the first of the year, 
and as of that date, insurance companies will be exempt from Saskatchewan corporation capital tax. 
 
An additional $1.1 million in revenue will be yielded through an increase in the tax on cigarettes and 
tobacco, and I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that even smokers don’t mind paying the extra cost. 
 
Last Friday I took the opportunity to announce a new direction for the Department of Government 
Services, a direction which will ensure that the space needs of government are delivered in a manner 
which will eliminate the need for large capital expenditures, and thus reduce the drain on the treasury for 
the provision of space. In the past, the former government has made major one-time investments in 
buildings such as the Sturdy Stone Centre in Saskatoon which was started in 1975 and cost in excess of 
$20 million, and the T.C. Douglas Building, which again was started in 1975 and cost in excess of $30 
million. 
 
These funds, Mr. Speaker, in excess of $50 million, were one-time expenditures, and thus were an 
immediate drain on the treasury, and I would say probably at the expense of other programs such as 
health, social services and education. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1210 

This government will, where practical, involve the private sector in the delivery of a building through a 
method known as lease-purchase. This alternative method has been used by other governments since the 
middle of the 1960s to meet their needs for space of various kinds, and this government ahs decided to 
use all the options available in seeking accommodation. Thus we shall be able to ensure that the 
experiences gained in other jurisdictions are used to the best advantage by this government. We fell that 
the former administration should have looked at the various options available in trying to deliver space 
for government, but we, I feel, are not as paranoid as they were. 
 
Subsequent to a cabinet review of every capital project proposed by government, the Department of 
Government Services will conduct an analysis of the project using this method of delivery as a test of its 
feasibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to explain at this point a lease-purchase arrangement. Lease-purchase is 
primarily a long-term form of capital financing of a government building. Annual else payments 
represent the financing costs and the purchase price of facility. At the end of the lease term, ownership 
of the building reverts to the lessee, in this case the Government of Saskatchewan. Lease-purchase 
involve the private sector in government construction projects, brining to bear the entrepreneurial and 
cost-control skills of the private sector professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, lease-purchase may well be the most cost-effective means of constructing government 
facilities, and the concept is widely used by other provinces and the federal government. It has proven to 
be a viable alternative to government expending all funds required over a relatively short period of times 
on the construction phase of the project. 
 
One of the basic advantages of lease-purchase is that initially, government will only incur expenditures 
for the hiring of design consultants and for the purchase of the land. The remainder of the expenditures 
would be spread over the length of the lease term. 
 
This means, Mr. Speaker, that funds normally allocated for the payment of expenses associated with 
construction contracts over a short period of time can be used for other government programs. The 
beneficial aspects, both to the private sector and the government, include the elimination in the 
immediate cash flow requirements of government. Once a lease-purchase price has been negotiated, the 
government is not at risk for construction overruns. The cost of the purchase is fixed and not subject to 
market evaluations or appreciation. This eliminates for the government any aspect of uncertainty from 
the building process. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, by reducing government capital outlay, this could result in 
more projects being undertaken in any one year. This obviously has tremendous private sector impact, 
since more work may be available to this sector using this model than if the government had to finance 
the total project within a period of one or two or three years. 
 
Moreover, the opportunity would exist to exercise the option to purchase the facility at the 
predetermined time if investment dollars were available, thus reducing the cost of the lease-purchase. 
The cost of the lease purchase in 1982 dollars, based on calculations of the net present value of the 
lease-purchase over a fixed term, could be greater than the traditional form of construction. However, 
cost efficiency achieved by the private sector in the actual construction phase, such as a shorter 
construction 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1211 

period or innovative design solutions would, in fact, reduce the lease-purchase to the point where it 
could be as cost efficient as government construction, if not more so. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — This, Mr. Speaker, is another example of the forward-look approach which 
this government will take to bring business to the province, and to provide investment opportunity and 
jobs which will allow —s to be number one and thus build a strong future for the people of the province. 
Again, I can just repeat that this is another example of a government which cares what happens in this 
province. 
 
This also ensures, Mr. Speaker, that in reducing the immediate cash flow requirements of the provincial 
treasury, our government will be managing the finances of the province in the same careful, 
value-conscious manner as the farmers, businessmen, and individuals who live in this province, who are 
not unlike the farmers, businessmen and individuals who live in the riding of Maple Creek. 
 
Our government has diligently, over the past five to six months, looked at the former governments 
budget, that of the NDP, the one they brought down in March of this year. In reworking that budget, we 
have not cut government programs, but have reallocated money away from less productive projects to 
more important projects in health and education. We have achieved savings of $170 million in several 
areas with the introduction of efficiency measures, and with the elimination of some new programs 
announced by the former government which they had not yet introduced. With reductions to the existing 
program base, reducing the training budget of DNS, with the elimination of the gas tax, and with some 
reductions to capital budgets, our government expects to spend slightly more. 
 
It is important to note that the NDP budget grossly overstated revenues by $420 million, and grossly 
understated expenditures by more than $110 million. A total of $3,125 million in revenue was claimed 
in the NDP March budget. Our government estimates to date say that these revenues will only be 
$2,075, a drop of $420 million. Only $122 million of that is a result of elimination of the gas taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Similarly, on the expenditure side the new estimates determine that a number of programs are now 
forecast to cost significantly higher than what was stated by the former government. The former 
government, which now sits in opposition because the people of Saskatchewan voted for a change, 
should have indicated in their budget a $200 million deficit, not a $208 million surplus. And I say sham. 
The ministry of government services has decreased heritage fund capital expenditures from the $17 
million projected by the NDP in their budget to a revised $2,939 million. No longer will the heritage 
fund feed the ravenous appetites of the family of crown corporations. 
 
We as a government are committed to promoting and encouraging free enterprise. We are a government 
committed to helping Saskatchewan residents achieve prosperity and a secure future. Our government 
will not interfere but will help create a healthy investment climate and restore a healthy economic base 
in the true spirit of co-operation with the private sector. We will, as my hon. colleague Bob Andrew 
stated, help each other when times are tough and together we will share the harvest. $157 million alone 
will be recirculated as a result of actin taken by this government in our province this year. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1212 

Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to support the motion on the budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Mr. Speaker, members on the government side of the House, members of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Operation, I’m sorry, Opposition — the operation was held on the 26th of November. 
 
And I’d like to remind the people of Prince Albert-Duck Lake in the upcoming by-election that if the 
attendance in the House and the activity in the House doesn’t improve, why send a new member into the 
legislature in Saskatchewan? Elect a Progressive Conservative in Prince Albert, where you’ll get some 
activity and some action in this House. 
 
I stand in this House today to congratulate our Minister of Finance on probably one of the most 
compassionate budgets, under the financial circumstances of our country and our province, since 1905. 
 
I would like to quote the Hon. Leader of the Opposition from Hansard on November 26, 1982 when he 
said: 
 

. . . considering the difficult material he had to deal with, I thought he did very well. 
 
Well, this is an understatement. I would like to g back a couple of years to a budget of a former minister 
of a former government that some of the members opposite were members of, and the four or five that 
are not present in the House. I think were all members of that government. But I would like to refer to a 
budget on March 5, 1981 read by your former minister of finance. 
 
He said: 
 

I am pleased to announce that in 1981-82 we will set aside for investment in the heritage fund over 
$300 million — the largest amount ever. This will raise the total assets of the heritage fund to over 
$1.25 billion. 

 
Unfortunately, we were led to an empty trough. With the empty trough that we were left we were able to 
present to the people of Saskatchewan a budget that provided not only answers to problems but 
compassion in hard times. We increased the health expenditures by $26 million. There were increases in 
social services and education, and many other areas that the people of this province demanded increases 
in. 
 
Friday last, I heard the Leader of the Opposition, and I believe in the next edition of the New England 
Journal of Medicine he may be quoted in the surgery section. He went through the cut, cut, cut 
exhibition for two hours. Unfortunately the major cut in this legislature, for the opposition in the last six 
months has been in numbers. They were cut from 44 to eight, and I think that will hold up in the 
upcoming by-election to be called in the new year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SVEINSON: — Even in April election campaign their campaign literature misled the people of 
this province. Budgetary figures indicated that $1.9 billion would be 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1213 

spent. The government of the day, in its campaign literature, rounded that figure off and went out to the 
people with $2 billion in expenditures, a simple rounding-off of $100 million. I took that to the doors of 
my constituents, demonstrating their fiscal (and I want to put that in italics) responsibility. They don’t 
have any. 
 
In 1971 the total budget of the province was only $400 million. In 1982 they can go around rounding off 
figures totalling $100 million, somewhat of a disgrace and I think that the electorate answered that on 
the 26th of April. Their cavalier attitude regarding fiscal responsibility was a major responsibility was a 
major contributor to their demise and will continue to be so. 
 
It was said in the first sitting of this twentieth legislature that Regina North West, through the mortgage 
interest reduction and the gasoline tax removal, would benefit by approximately $5 million per annum. 
For the first time ever in northwest Regina, protection was given to families whose homes and autos, 
necessities of life, had to be finances. The NDP couldn’t offer that help. They were suffering because of 
high interest rates, high government expenditures and utilities. They were suffering because they didn’t 
have enough at the end of the month to cover their bills. We offered a solution. We were elected on the 
26th of April, 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, foreclosures and seizures were tearing apart the homes in my constituency. This protection 
came in the former of the mortgage interest reduction plan and the removal of the gasoline tax, a tax that 
goes back far before their administration, but they didn’t offer a solution to the people in my 
constituency. Protection of the family home was a priority with this government. Increased cash flow to 
every resident of Saskatchewan was also a priority of this government, which we have delivered since 
April 26. 
 
A new high school was announced for northwest Regina, which will definitely improve the educational 
opportunities in my constituency. I have to thank this government for that recognition, the recognition 
that we required that facility in my constituency. 
 
We stand on our enviable record of the past six months. I wholeheartedly support the midterm correction 
of Mr. Bob Andrew. I wholeheartedly support his budget. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOUTIN: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure and it’s an honor to have been asked to speak in this 
budget debate. I would also like to compliment the Hon. bob Andrew for a budget well done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 26, the people of Saskatchewan made a decision. This decision, Mr. Speaker, was 
made with great confidence that this Progressive Conservative Party, under the leadership of our 
Premier, Grant Devine, would achieve our goals and bring our great province of —s to be number one. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOUTIN: — Yes, there was a new decision made by the people, Mr. Speaker. On April 26 the 
polls all over Saskatchewan showed the need for a change. The people all over Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, chose a free enterprise system — a system in which people believe in personal ownership 
rather than government ownership. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1214 

The people of Saskatchewan believe that a farmer who owns and operates his own land is amore 
efficient farmer than one who’s only a tenant of the government. We believe that farmers should be 
given the chance to purchase land at a defined, low interest rate. This, Mr. Speaker, will be highly 
beneficial to the farmers. This program is being developed now and details are released. The program 
will replace the present land bank operation that presently owns about 14 per cent of the land in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this new farm program will help more people in one month than the land 
bank did in 11 years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOUTIN: — Yet, Mr. Speaker, the NDP government in their time of office were bragging, yes 
bragging, Mr. Speaker, about what they really cared about — the family farm. Yet in the period of 1971 
to 1982, 1,400 farms were lost. And, Mr. Speaker, our rural population has declined from 438,000 to 
405,000. This shows the incompetence of the former government in seeing through the problems of the 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe, by reviewing the 1972 budget, that the former NDP government could never 
come to grips with these problems. Mr. Speaker, when the NDP took over the government in 1972, the 
budget surplus was $300,000. The actual surplus turned out to be about $2 million, Mr. Speaker. 
Contrast this with the NDP 1982 projected surplus of $200 million, which in fact was a deficit of $220 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to say a few words again on the land bank and crown-owned land. It owns about 14 
per cent of our Saskatchewan farmland. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from the Saskatchewan legislature 
dated February 19, 1971, about socializing of all land: 
 

I ask the people of Saskatchewan to note that, over the years, the socialists have had one main solution 
to farming problems. 

 
Ever since the days of the Regina manifest, there have been die-hards at conventions after conventions 
who had advocated the socializing of all land. They content that farmland should be owned by the 
government. Then they will lease it back, perhaps to the owners, perhaps to his neighbor, depending on 
their political views. Recently these cries for socialization have increased in crescendos. For example, I 
quote from the Moose Jaw Times Herald of January 20, 1969. 
 

Saskatchewan young NDP members voted this Sunday to press for nationalization of the farmlands of 
Canada. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan decided to get rid of socialism as it is something to fear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with all the crown corporations that the former NDP government had, what was happening 
to free enterprise, free enterprise that made this country grow and brought it to what it is today? Many of 
our elderly people left the Old Country for this simple reason — because of government ownership. 
They didn’t want to have landlords on their heels to tell them exactly what to do and when to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to tell the people of Saskatchewan the true meaning of socialism as described 
in the Encyclopedia Britannica. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1215 

Socialism means: completely discarding private property by transforming it into public property; 
dividing the resultant public income equally and indiscriminately among the entire population. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is what the people of Saskatchewan feared. They decided to go with the free enterprise 
party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me elaborate also on our health care program In 1978 and again in 1982, the NDP 
members were gong from door to door telling people, “Don’t’ vote for the Progressive Conservatives. 
They’ll take your hospitalization and medicare away.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to mention briefly our health care program, our Progressive Conservative Party stand 
100 per cent behind universal hospitalization and medicare. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOUTIN: — It is true that the old CCF Party initiated this program, but in 1959, the Progressive 
Conservative federal government nationalized this program and it is here to stay. Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud to bring forth to this House that this medicare system originally started in the R.M. of Birch Hills. 
The sitting member for Kinistino at that time later realized what was going on and brought forth this 
information to the Hon. T.C. Douglas, Premier of Saskatchewan at the time. After realizing how 
beneficial the program was in the R.M. of Birch Hills, he initiated it throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
We, the Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan have spent $26.3 million more on 
health care, beyond the level budgeted by the previous government for the current year. This is just to 
show the people of Saskatchewan that health care in Saskatchewan will be number one — not sic, or 
seven, or eight, Mr. Speaker, but number one in the future years to come. 
 
Also, I would like to remind the members on the opposite side of the House that since we formed the 
government on April 26, we have lived up to our promises. We are building several high schools in this 
province. This, Mr. Minister, will create jobs, or employment. Also, Mr. Speaker, we are building 
nursing homes, which also creates employment, not only for the building of the homes, but also in 
creating staff positions in the years to come. This was also accommodate our senior citizens with better 
facilities and greater comfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP in their years of office have only placed 363 beds. In the short period of time we 
have been the government, we have the facilities of 448 beds. This, Mr. Speaker, also shows our concern 
for health care in this province, being part of our project to boost Saskatchewan to be number one in 
health care. 
 
The Nipawin power project in another addition in job creation. It will give employment to contractors 
from Saskatchewan. The natural gas distribution system, Mr. Speaker, is another job creation program. 
All towns, communities and farmers will benefit as well. The beef stabilization plan, Mr. Speaker, for 
finished cattle will highly benefit farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we formed this government on April 26, and also brought in the 13.15 per cent mortgage 
plan. This is assisting many individuals in this province. 
 
Removal of the gas tax, Mr. Speaker, helped many individual businessmen and kept 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1216 

trucking rates lower, thereby assisting the farmers in many fields. I mean by this importing, exporting 
goods, including repairs for machinery that have to be trucked in. Another thing, Mr. Speaker. The 
public utilities review committee has kept freezes on all public utilities. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to bring to this House, especially to the members of the opposite 
side of the House, that here in Saskatchewan, we are open for business, Mr. Speaker. We are open for 
business for the very first time in the whole history of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOUTIN: — And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a special feeling for myself to be part of a government that 
can achieve such a goal. Let me reassure the people of Saskatchewan that Saskatchewan will be number 
one. I shall therefore be voting in favor of the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MARTENS: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to compliment the 
Minister of Finance, the member for Kindersley, for his first budget. There are times in economic 
history when budgets are easy to make. There are times when economic upturns are a benefit to the 
financial positions of government, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the decline of the interest rates in the 
money markets at this time has greatly assisted our administration in providing benefits to the citizens of 
this province. They have given to us, as citizens in a great province, the opportunity to again invest risk 
capital in agriculture, energy and construction. 
 
The commitment of our government to show fiscal restraint in many areas, particularly in administration 
costs, has given the people of Saskatchewan some reason to appear optimistic. The position our 
government took to adjust the interest rates of home-owners with mortgages has provided not only as 
stimulus to the construction industry, but has also given to those people who were caught with 
substantial increases in interest rates and payments a security in knowing that there is a government that 
cares. Throughout history, excessive taxation has caused people to resist, sometimes by force when 
considering the colonies of New England, or further back in history to the signing of the Magna Carta in 
British parliamentary development. 
 
On April 26, the people of Saskatchewan turned from the ever grandiose schemes of the family of crown 
corporations, always bigger and so-called better, to a realistic approach to taxation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MARTENS: — The tax cuts that we said we would give, we have given. The reduction of 
high-cost administration we have also given because we know it could be done. 
 
We, as government, are gaining a grip on the inflation rates by coming to grips with some high spending 
in government. In dealing with economic issues, I would like to compare some of the floundering of the 
former administration’s takeover from the Liberal administration in 1971-72. A budget forecast of 
$300,000 turned into a surplus of $2 million. A budget of $200 million surplus in 1982 turned into a 
deficit of $200 million — a general deterioration of the controlled budgetary planning. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1217 

One of the statements the former premier and now Leader of the Opposition made was a commitment 
Friday, March 10, 1972. I quote: 
 

In our election platform we reaffirmed our faith that agriculture is the foundation of Saskatchewan life 
— economically and socially. This budget underlines that faith. 

 
It sounds interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that here is a government that really means business; they 
were there to do a job for agriculture. Agriculture will take its rightful place in the plans of the economy, 
but that didn’t happen. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, as the finance minister, continues on in his speech: 
 

Saskatchewan’s developing livestock industry continued to advance. Provincial inventories of cattle 
and calves in 1971 were the third highest of any province in Canada. During 1971 livestock marketing 
increased in all areas — cattle, calves, sheep and hogs. 

 
He went onto say that though some price problems occurred during the year, notably with hogs, prices 
had improved by year end and that these improvements are expected to continue in 1972. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what really happened to the livestock industry is that in cattle and calves we are still only 
number three, and we have cut our cow production units from a high in 1975 of 1.3 million head to a 
low of 875,000 in 1982. That’s the lowest level since July of 1969. Where was agriculture going with 
this socialist cattle program? Down the drain and out of business. 
 
I’d like to mention hogs. In 1971, the hog population was 1,090,000. After a socialist experiment, it 
went down to 492,000 in 1975 and to 500,000 in 1982. Now, Saskatchewan leads all provinces in the 
percentage decline of the sow and gelt herd, while Ontario, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and 
Newfoundland all recorded increases in the total herd, and also in their breeding stock. We are going 
down and they are going up, and they don’t even grow the feed grains. Where is that priority of the 
former administration in their socialistic experiment? The opposition while they were in power, and 
even now, always say they are for the little guys. The average farm size in Saskatchewan went from 845 
acres in 1971 to 973 in 1982. That is almost another quarter section for every farm in Saskatchewan. 
That’s bigger than they were in 1971. The land bank program put 2,800 lessees or government tenant 
farms in place in agriculture over its tenure as a socialist agrarian policy. In the opinion of the opposition 
it’s such a great policy. 
 
I’d like to ask them a question: why did they give our administration the responsibility of collecting 
nearly $5 million of arrears — $5 million of arrears that was their responsibility to collect, and we have 
the responsibility now? We are going to take it, but they should have done it beforehand. In my opinion 
that is typical not only of their agriculture economic policy, but of their total economic accountability. 
No matter how hard they tried to keep renters on their properties, we now also have 100 quarter sections 
of vacant land bank land -—people who gave up because they were crushed by the socialist philosophy 
that says you can get something for nothing. I heard a quote from Mr. Horner and it goes like this: “The 
price of a free ride is your freedom.” And I 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1218 

heard a lot of stories about people going bankrupt on land bank land. This great socialistic agrarian 
policy also reduces the total number of farms in Saskatchewan by 9,652. Everyone gets bigger farms, 
and the number of people in rural Saskatchewan declined by 33,000. That’s what socialism calls helping 
the little guy. 
 
Irrigation is something that I have a special interest in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’d like to point out 
what has been happening there. When the opposition took over the administration in 1971 they had 
77,5000 acres in production, and in 10 years they raised the total to 138,000. That sounds good but it’s 
an average increase of 6,050 acres per year. And there are individuals in the industry, in the service 
industry, that have the possibility to do more than that in any one given year — and we want to think 
that that’s credible. 
 
If they would have encouraged farmers to develop more irrigation, Mr. Speaker, the 500,000 acres along 
Diefenbaker Lake could have sizably reduced the cost of moving feed from Manitoba and Alberta the 
past two years. If the 500,000 acres of irrigation along the South Saskatchewan River and Diefenbaker 
Lake are would have been developed during this time, the economic stability of Saskatchewan would 
have been greatly increased. 
 
The realized net farm income in 1982 is expected to decline by 36 per cent. The anticipated decline is 
realized net farm income in Canada will be the largest in Saskatchewan Statistics Canada forecasts 1982 
realized net farm income declines in Alberta and Manitoba of 15 per cent and 24 per cent respectively. 
And we are sitting at 36 per cent. The declines are less severe in these provinces. Why? Because 
livestock receipts make up a large portion of total farm cash receipts. The increased diversity in 
agriculture shows that it provinces stability, and we have seen diversity in agriculture in Saskatchewan 
in a steady decline. 
 
The net farm income, with the exception of 1977, will drop to 801 million in 1982 from $1,244,500,000 
in 1981. We are almost at the same place we were in 1973 in net farm incomes. The greatest benefit has 
been the increased intensity of production which has made the volume the key to little more than 
breaking even The prospect for tomorrow in agriculture will be greatly enhanced by the introduction of 
our policies as we continue to govern in the province to benefit the farmers and the ranchers who are 
sorely left out of place in the former administration. 
 
The economic diversity is very evident in the southwest. The oil industry has provided a backdrop for 
occasional downturns in agriculture. The devastating consequences of the provincial energy policy and 
the recent national energy program have crippled the oil service industry. The position of the service 
industry in the southwest before the provincial government put in Bill 42 in ’73 was good. There were 
450 people employed in the southwest by 85 companies. Is that big business? These weren’t big, muscle 
flexing oil companies. They were the little guys in the oil business, people with concerns about their 
mortgages and business financing, and they lived in the cities of Swift Current and the villages and 
towns of rural Saskatchewan, towns like Success, Pennant, Fosterton, Shauvnavon, and Gull Lake. The 
effect of the national energy program, to have the Canadian taxpayer buy themselves into the energy 
scene, place d a lot of these little guys in a position where they could no longer afford to operate. Many 
moved or went bankrupt. 
 
We had an election time on April 26 about 50 people employed. They were owners and operators just 
ready to get out. The field was almost completely shut in. I’d like to quote 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1219 

from the Leader of the Opposition’s speech he made when he presented his first budget address: 
 

The importance to our province of a thriving rural sector is paramount. In the past few years, unwise 
government policies have sapped many rural communities of their vitality by making them surplus in 
the economic scene of things. Almost all of the smaller communities have lost population over the past 
10 years. 

 
That was a quote. What’s different today? Nothing. Mr. Speaker, that didn’t stop with the entrance of 
Saskatchewan’s last 11 years of socialism. What those people in the small rural towns needed, Mr. 
Speaker, was to the people of the former administration a dirty four-letter word — plain and simple, 
work. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MARTENS: — The little guys in the oil industry were prepared to work, but the socialism, both 
provincial and federal, took it away and when the work quit, a lot of people had to move. 
 
The position of the service industry, for your information, is beginning to change, and people are 
moving back again, back home, even into Shaunavon. The oil field service industry today is employing 
in the southwest 150 compared to 50 in the spring when we took over. 
 
An interesting surprise that I saw in the budget was the overpayment by the federal government of $100 
million to the former administration. Was that a miscalculation or misrepresentation? 
 
A comment was made by the Leader-Post on November 25, and I quote: 
 

In a shift from past practice, the government presented the budgets from general revenues and heritage 
fund together. The NDP government had always calculated the two separately, presenting a less 
accurate reflection of the entire budget. 

 
I appreciate that the Minister of Finance was open and honest with his first budget. I believe that the 
choice by the Premier of Saskatchewan was a good one. The minister provided a mid-course correction 
that already has given this province a glimmer of hope in the energy field, in agriculture, in increased 
starts over last year in major construction, like the Nipawin dam project, and others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not here to sell the store. Saskatchewan is open for business. We are here to market 
our products, our oil, pulp, wheat, cattle, pork, farm machinery, technology, and we are also here to let 
the people of Saskatchewan make a profit. 
 
I want to congratulate the hon. member for Kindersley on his first budget, and I will be supporting the 
motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, first of all, I want to indicate that following the 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1220 

completion of my remarks I will be moving an amendment which was indicated to the House by the 
Leader of the Opposition when he spoke in the debate on the budget. 
 
I want also to take this opportunity to join with other members in congratulating the Minister of Finance 
who introduced the first Conservative budget in 50 years. I want to say that I certainly feel that he had, 
in fact, given a good delivery and put on a very good face. But, I think that now he must feel awfully 
alone — awfully along, Mr. Speaker, because we have had speeches from the members of the 
government side which have been three minutes long, four minutes long, ten minutes long and seven 
minutes long. Some won’t even speak. One of the central threads that you will find in their speeches is 
no reference to this budget. 
 
The member for Regina Rosemont, if you can believe it, stood up in this House and he spoke about land 
bank. He said nothing about programs or education, social services or health or any programs which this 
budget, in fact would do for his constituency. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the odd minister 
spoke. I’m gong to take a couple of copies of those ministers’ speeches. The Minister of Health, who 
was talking about making health number one in Saskatchewan under his government, couldn’t even find 
enough to say to occupy more than 10 minutes, out of which 7 or 8 minutes were used to attack the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
I want to say that I look at this budget and I want to say that it is characterized by two things: brevity 
and lack of substance. This was the first opportunity by a Conservative Minister of Finance, in the recent 
history of this province, to set out clearly and definitively for the people of this province the economic 
and social philosophy of this government. And, although the minister failed to provide us with any clear 
sense of direction in which the government is going, I want to say that an examination of the 
government’s performance since taking office provides us with significant answers. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will address myself not only to the budget for what it does and does 
not contain but also to the government’s performance in the last seven months. I would suggest to you 
that all of these taken together would indicate quite clearly that this budget does not represent a 
mid-course direction or a “correction” as they term it. Rather it signals a massive change in direction. 
 
Furthermore, I suggest to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the members opposite, that this change, this 
so-called “new beginning”, as you so proudly call it, represents not a new beginning but a return to a 
discredit philosophy of the past that will ensure guarantee to the people of Saskatchewan a dismal future 
under the leadership of this government. 
 
In this seven and one-half page address, the Minister of Finance used four pages to tell us about the 
dismal state of Saskatchewan and federal economics. He talked about the problems of the industrialized 
nations of the world. He used four and one-half pages. He talked about the disastrous foreign investment 
policies, the erratic tax changes, the double-digit inflation, paralyzing interest rates, 1.5 million 
unemployed, a weak dollar and withering productivity. 
 
He talked, Mr. Speaker, about these problems as if they suddenly had appeared on April 27, 1982. As a 
result of the sudden appearances of these problems, the Progressive Conservative commitment — one 
for increased funding for education and health, reduce provincial income tax, removal of the 5 per cent 
E&H tax — was no longer possible. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1221 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative commitment to the oil industry of $100 million was a 
commitment that they never advertised in the election. They never told the people of Saskatchewan. A 
commitment that they didn’t dare tell the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance 
says in his speech on page four: “These adjustments have not been made on the backs of the poor, the 
less fortunate, those on fixed incomes.” Well could the minister explain how he can reconcile that 
previous statement with the freezing of the minimum wage? Millions for the oil industry but he can’t 
afford of 25 cents per hour increase for the lowest paid individuals. Compassion for the wealthy and the 
healthy. Nothing for the poorest in our society. That is what the people of Saskatchewan are finding out 
about this new government. 
 
And Mr. Andrew says the heritage fund, the heritage fund — our hedge against tough times — he says 
was empty. Well, I want to say he knew that the heritage fund had been invested in the future of this 
province and I will say that either he knew or he demonstrates a total lack of any ability. I have another 
word for it. He knew that the revenues had been used to provide real jobs in the resource sector of 
Saskatchewan. He knew that these resources had been used to create the head office here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But, he chose to ignore these facts and he indicated his displeasure. His caucus indicated their 
displeasure. And the Conservative Party indicated their displeasure. Why? The answer is obvious. IN 
their desire to loot this province on behalf of their corporate friends, they did not, as they hoped, have 
access to ready cash. Rather, they will be forced to show their real color by liquidating some of the 
assets that people of this province have built up in order to feed the ravenous appetites of their corporate 
bed partners. 
 
The Premier calls it Saskatchewan Open for Business. What he really means is for sale, cheap, we’re 
giving it away. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that this government doesn’t believe in crown corporations. We know that they 
believe in private enterprise as the only solution. But what of the co-operatives? What of the 
co-operatives? A Saskatchewan tradition Well, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance clearly indicated 
how he feels about the co-operative tradition of this province. Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we 
had what was called the Saskatchewan corporation tax. Co-operative insurance companies, only, used to 
be exempt. But not any more, Mr. Speaker, not any more. The government has seen to that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Well, I want to say that obviously Ross Sneath thanks you. Will Klein will thank you. Pioneer Life will 
thank you, London Life will thank you. But I want to say that the co-operative movement of 
Saskatchewan will not thank you. I want to say that the co-operative movement of Saskatchewan will 
not thank you. I want to say that obviously the Conservative Party is indicating its true strategy. They 
don’t care about the co-operatives; they are not a part of the Conservative economic strategy. They and 
the crown corporations will have no future role to play in the Saskatchewan economy under the Tories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we examined the performance of this government, another characteristic stood out, and 
that is the unwillingness or the inability to make decisions. Seven months have passed. We have a 
government, as has been indicated, of review and revision and retraction, over and over again. One 
minister makes a 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1222 

statement; the Premier denies it. The Minister of Northern Saskatchewan says, for example, “No help to 
Uranium City.” The next day the Premier says, “We are rethinking it.” The Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan gets on and says, “ Well, I’ve made my position clear, but maybe we’ll reconsider it.” Of 
course, it’s been delayed; no action for Uranium City. It’s the same in many aspects of the programs 
which need attention. 
 
I want to say that there have been some clues which tell us something about the economic and social 
philosophy of this government. But first, this caveat or this warning. I want to say: don’t listen to what 
they say; see what they do. Because it seems that although to err is human, to prevaricate is divine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us now examine this government’s performance, so that it becomes obvious why some 
people have difficulty understanding the Conservative position on issues. I have here a Conservative 
commitment in the past election. Here it is, this is what it said: 
 

Safe, clean water supply to the people of Regina. 
 

That’s what they said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is what they said. What did they do? The government 
purchased some water purifiers and installed them in the Legislative Building. They purchased these 
from a friend of theirs, Ross Reibling, a defeated Conservative candidate in Regina Elphinstone. I want 
to say that it’s not what they say, but what they do. 
 
I have here also a copy of the Progressive Conservative convention resolution book. Do you know what 
it says? This is what it says: be it resolved that we appreciate your efforts in returning sound business 
principles to Saskatchewan. This is what they said. This is what they did: awarded a government 
contract without tender to one of their supporters. That’s what they did. So much for the sound business 
principles; so much for the spirit of free enterprise; so much for the spirit of competition these birds 
indicate they breed. 
 
Mr. Speaker I have also here a story for the Leader-Post. This is what it said: 
 

No crown corporation will be dismantled or sold until after the commission makes it recommendation, 
Berntson said. 

 
That is what they said. This is what they did. The Attorney General went forth and announced a decision 
to dismember SaskMedia and the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Board has been completely dismantled. 
Don’t listen to what they say. Take a look at what they do. And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
have here another Conservative advertisement and this is what it says, Mr. Premier: 
 

A Progressive Conservative commitment to Saskatchewan public servants. 
 
I’m going to read this to you, Mr. Premier. For 11 years this is your ad: 
 

NDP mismanagement has stifled energy, ambition, dedication throughout the public service. And 
when you think about it, it is not surprising. What’s the use of caring, or trying hard when you know 
all the good jobs go to the political supporters, the so-called party hacks? Progressive Conservatives 
will change that. Under the Progressive Conservative government, promotions and positions will be 
based on ability and seniority. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1223 

That’s what they said. That’s what they said, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say this is what they said and 
what have they done? What they have done, Mr. Speaker, is to populate the civil service with political 
hacks the like of which has never, ever been perpetrated in Saskatchewan before. But not only that. 
What they have done is to go to all of the crown corporation boards and commissions, and I want to say 
that here again they fill them with their political hacks. Let’s just run through what they’ve done. Staff 
Barootes, PC bagman, appointed to federal board; Brian Keple, defeated federal candidate, SMDC 
board; Ross Reibling, Mr. Nimbus himself, defeated candidate, to Sedco board; Don Meyers, defeated 
PC candidate, to Sedco board; Larry Kyle, unsuccessful PC campaign manager, Sedco board; George 
Hill, former provincial party president, SPC board; and good old Morris Cherneskey, unsuccessful PC 
leadership candidate, defeated provincial candidate, to the board of SaskComp. 
 
All of these people with their sorry record of failure are in the words of the Premier, sorry record of 
failure, defeated, defeated, defeated. And the Premier has said that he’s going to build the best province 
and the most capable government in Saskatchewan. Other Canadians are going, are looking at 
Saskatchewan for direction. We will, with our team, win the Canadian championship, he says, in that 
regard. Well, Mr. Speaker, some team and some direction. But let’s continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again I have the convention booklet from the last Progressive Conservative convention. This is what it 
said. 
 

The constitution of the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan has stated that the objects of 
the party shall be the recognition of the dignity and the worth of individual citizens and a passionate 
concern for individual liberty. 

 
That is what they said. And let’s see what they did. I want to draw to the attention of the Premier — I’m 
glad he’s here — what they did. Headline in the Leader-Post: “Remove Rats from Civil Service, the 
Tory Leaders Told.” That’s what they say. This is what they do. And I want to say that in replying the 
Deputy Premier, Mr. Berntson, agreed, saying that many more public servants must be fired. He bragged 
and he used his figures: 
 

1,500 to 1,600 vacancies have been created as a result of both dismissals and resignations. 
 
And then he said, there will be more but you won’t read about it in the newspaper. 
 
And he continued: 
 

The widespread firings this summer barely made a dent in the number of public servants who should 
be dismissed. 

 
Another delegate said at the convention: 
 

Recent order in council appointments to provincial boards, commissions and agencies appear to be 
based on political patronage. 

 
And he asked the Deputy Premier to explain. Even their own members are rising up 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1224 

against it, and do you know what the Deputy Premier said? He said: 
 

I’m sure a lot of them are. 
 
And his delegates gave him some support. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, so much for the dignity and the worth of the individual. So much for 
compassionate concern for individual liberty. Well, Mr. Speaker, since what they say and what they do 
rarely appear to be the same, then how do we establish the economic and social philosophy of this 
government? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, at least here we have an obvious answer. We look to the past, Mr. Speaker, not back 
to the last Conservative government — no, Mr. Speaker, no need to go back that far; we do not have to 
go back that far — we merely have to return to the Thatcher years and the Liberal government, because 
Grant Devine’s message is Ross Thatcher’s message. The only difference is that Premier Thatcher said, 
“The welcome mat is out,” whereas Premier Devine says, “We’re open for business.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Let us examine the philosophy of these two: Grant Thatcher and Ross Devine. In 
1964, Mr. Speaker, Davey Steuart said: 
 

We are going to throw this province wide open; we are going to throw out the bonds and shackles of 
. . . (inaudible) . . . for 20 years. 

 
In 1982 Premier Devine says: 
 

Saskatchewan has never been able to capitalize on its strength because the NDP attempts to control the 
economy. 

 
Davey Steuart, in 1970, said: 
 

The idea of this speech is to sell Saskatchewan to the American investors. Saskatchewan is wide-open 
country. Saskatchewan is a land of opportunity for American capital. 

 
And Mr. Devine, our Premier, in 1982 says: 
 

Saskatchewan is open to business. 
 
Davey Steuart, in 1965, said: 
 

Our new oil and gas resources policy will spark record development in both these fields. 
 
Mr. Devine, in 1982, says: 
 

The next step in bolstering economic activity in the province will be a reduction in the government’s 
royalty and tax structure on oil. This government will take whatever steps are necessary at to get 
Saskatchewan’s oil field producing again. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1225 

Same words, same philosophy. Or as a new member of the Thatcher family, the Minister of Energy says 
in 1982: 
 

We are hoping to develop an oil royalty structure that is acceptable to the industry. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that indeed is one success story for the Tories. They’ve certainly 
succeeded in satisfying the oil companies. 
 
Again in 1965 Mr. Thatcher said: 
 

The welcome mat to private enterprise is out. Time and again our ministers have been invited, have 
invited businessmen from Canada, from France, from Germany, United States to locate in this 
province. 

 
And now, Mr. Speaker, even now the Minister of Industry and Commerce is in Europe, visiting 
England, selling coal to Newcastle, and selling steel to West Germany. The invitation is out. The acts 
are the same. Well, Mr. Speaker, and what was the bottom line? Well, I want to say that I have here 
what the former Liberal government’s Mr. Allan Guy said in the Financial Post, the same Financial 
Post that was the sponsor of our Open for business seminar this last summer (I want you guys to listen to 
this because you might get a few more ideas): 
 

Equally significant for Saskatchewan’s future is the drive of Premier Ross Thatcher to remake the 
image of Saskatchewan and present it as a place where government administration is friendly and 
hospitable to business. 

 
Mr. Guy went on: 
 

Since that day when the new Liberal government took over the administration of our province, they 
have been taking determined steps to provide the stimulus and atmosphere to star tour economic 
recovery, to halt the exodus of our people from the province, to eliminate waste and inefficiency so 
prevalent in our former government, and to provide the businesslike leadership we had promised 
during the campaign. The companies were not prepared to compete with the monopoly government, so 
they waited patiently for the day that they knew would eventually come when the red light of 
socialism would go out and the green light of private enterprise would flash. 

 
Well, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this is the same philosophy. And he goes on: 
 

Our new ministers were hardly settled in in their desks before they were besieged by individuals and 
companies stampeding to be first to get to Saskatchewan, this new economic paradise that Ross 
Thatcher offered. For the first time in 20 years the welcome mat was out. Meeting with various 
industries were held. Regulations were overhauled. Incentive programs were introduced. 
Encouragement was given. 

 
Does that sound familiar? Does that sound familiar, Mr. Speaker? It certainly does. But now we have to 
examine what happened in the new economic paradise back in 1964-71. Between 1964-71, under the 
same economic policy that has been put forward by the Premier, unemployment rose to a record level, 
investment declined, population 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1226 

declined. The greatest exodus of young people from Saskatchewan in the history of this province was 
under the economic policies similar to this government — under Ross Thatcher. I want to say they 
promised 80,000 new jobs but they didn’t tell our young people that the jobs were going to be either in 
Alberta or in British Columbia or some other province, because their record was dismal and obviously 
the record of this government will probably be about equal. 
 
It was obvious, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan that all of the free enterprise 
rhetoric in the world couldn’t disguise the fact that the only thing that was wrong with this unbridled 
free enterprise was that it didn’t work. It doesn’t work. Yet today, Mr. Speaker, this government seems 
intent on setting out on the same barren road to economic disaster. Surely, Mr. Speaker, one doesn’t 
ignore history. Surely one doesn’t ignore reality. Surely this government deludes itself if it believes in 
this outmoded economic philosophy. 
 
Can this government not look next door to the neighboring province of Manitoba? There too, Sterling 
Lyon, who was the premier of the Conservative government, came into office with a total blind devotion 
to free enterprise — total blind devotion. And I want to say that he was a one-term government, rejected 
by the people of Manitoba. I want to say as politicians, Mr. Speaker, perhaps we should be happy as we 
see the members opposite sowing the seeds of your own political destruction. And I want to say we 
cannot applaud your certain downfall because we know that what it will bring is hardship to the people 
of this province, developing that economic philosophy. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, now we know where the Tories obtained their new, dynamic economic 
philosophy. They found it in the trash can of history. Mr. Speaker, let us re-examine the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible) . . . premier, the Minister of Finance, and I say Charles Dickens hasn’t 
come. Now, Mr. Speaker, with apologies to Charles Dickens, the Conservatives have authored a blue 
version in their budget of A Christmas Carol. This Tory revival of that old classic has, however, some 
slightly different twirls and turns to the plot. In the new version the Minister of Finance plays all the 
roles. As the Spirit of Christmas Past, he blames the abject failure of his government to come to grips 
with the problems in the Saskatchewan economy on the past administration. “If they hadn’t invested in 
the heritage fund,” he said, “in Saskatchewan’s future,” he bleats, “we would have been able to give it 
away to our friends. There would have been more for the banks; there would have been more for the 
insurance companies; there would have been more for the real estate companies; there would have even 
been more for the oil companies.” We’ll ask poor Bob to provide a little bit for the trucking industry, the 
interprovincial. He could give a fairly healthy touch to the banks. In fact, he could give a little to the real 
estate industry. I tell you he was able to give a large proportion to the oil industry. They got more even 
though they needed it least. Because the Tories believe that the bigger you are, the more you need. 
Greed, not need, is their mode. 
 
Then the Minister of Finance changed roles. Now he is playing Scrooge, an unrepentant, tight-fisted, 
mean-spirited Scrooge, in the great Dickens tradition. And what was there in this budget for our senior 
citizens? What was in there for our senior citizens? What was there for the people who contributed to 
building this province? What was their reward for participate in this new beginning, as the Tories call it? 
Didn’t they receive anything in recognition of their long labors on behalf of this province? What was 
there in this budget for them? 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1227 

The answer is simple, Mr. Speaker — nothing. Oh, I guess that’s not quite right, Mr. Speaker, because 
there was something in there. As their contribution to the new beginning, the Minister of Finance added 
$220 on behalf of each and every senior citizen in this province, a debt. This will be the first of many 
sacrifices that they will make as their contribution to the new beginning. 
 
And what did Scrooge have for the people of Saskatchewan who are fighting inflation and fixed 
incomes? What did they receive as their share of the new beginning? Surely, these people must have got 
something. Scrooge had something for everybody. Surely there was something. Well, there sure was, for 
the rest of the people: increases in SGI rates, increases in registration and licence fees, cuts in pension 
for seniors, increases in nursing home fees and reduction in day care services. 
 
We must remember that when you have a new beginning, someone must make sacrifices. Who are better 
able to afford to the sacrifices than the ordinary people of Saskatchewan who need nursing homes, 
mothers who need adequate care for their children, and people on fixed incomes? Those are the ones the 
Tories say must pay the price for the new beginning. 
 
I want to say that Scrooge didn’t forget the turkey, Mr. Speaker. What we have in this budget is the most 
expensive turkey in the history of this province. Scrooge has given every man, woman and child in 
Saskatchewan a $220 million turkey in the form of a deficit. I want to say: what does this deficit do to 
create jobs? I want to say, in this budget, very little — precious little. 
 
Let’s look at their job creation record. Fourteen hundred construction jobs were lost when they 
immediately cancelled the Bredenbury mine — another 400 potential permanent jobs. We have record 
unemployment in the construction industry: over 800 were laid off at IMC; 900 workers at Ipsco; and 
1,200 potash workers will be laid off on December 19. I want to say that it you are to believe the 
government’s figures, 1,500 to 1,600 jobs vacancies, they claim, have been created in the civil service, 
as part of the Minister of Agriculture’s rate extermination program. Thousands upon thousands of 
skilled Saskatchewan workers have been laid off as a part of this new beginning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been some job creations. The Tories found employment for a psychic. The 
Tories found employment for a chauffeur for the Premier. The Tories even found employment for the 
Premier’s brother-in-law. Now, I want to say, on the job issue, that’s really really performance, isn’t it? 
Why can’t these people create jobs, Mr. Speaker? Why is it that, when there is a crying need for capital 
work projects, such as technical schools, hospitals and highways, why is it that we have skilled people 
who are unemployed? The answer is simple, Mr. Speaker. The answer is obvious. There is no place for 
the public sector in the job creation plans of this government. 
 
Let us now look to what has happened to one of the largest corporations in Saskatchewan. To examine 
the full and the sorry implications of this government’s bias against public corporations, let us look at 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
PCS is the largest single employer in the mining sector of Saskatchewan. In 1980, PCS returned at $167 
million profit to the people of this province. In 1981, PCS returned a $141 million profit to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The PCS head office in Saskatoon employees about 300 people. I want to say that, 
overall, the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan has provided more than $400 million in profits to the 
people of this 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1228 

province, plus countless other benefits such as high-quality head office jobs and also increased 
researched and development. 
 
I want to say that this corporation had a record probably unequalled anywhere in Canada as a crown 
corporation, But, Mr. Speaker, PCS does not fit into the new philosophy of the development of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on May 3 (I want everyone to listen), on May 3, 1982, just seven days after the election of 
this new government — just seven days, Mr. Minister — the writs of the election had not yet been 
returned, no cabinet had been announced, no minister had been told the responsibility, no caucus 
meeting had been held. None of the above had occurred, Mr. Speaker. None. But there appeared in the 
fertilizer market intelligence weekly, Green Markets, volume 6(18), dated May 3, 1982, the following 
story: 
 

Robert Andrew, the party spokesman on the resource issues, outlined the following areas for changes 
at PCS: a curtailment of market expansion (that’s the first thing); a re-examination of the scheduled 
withdrawal of PCS from Canpotex at the end of June; a re-examination of the present high production 
rates; a re-examination of the PCS planned Bredenbury mine. 

 
Mr. Andrew went on and added that emphasis would be placed on the private development of 
Saskatchewan resources, rather than buying up existing private mines or building new ones. The article 
states that Mr. Andrew also believes that there may be a chance for Central Canada Potash to get 
government tax concessions to expand its mines. The policy is simply to destroy the public sector and 
give the tax money to expand the private sector. I want to say that that is a disastrous course that will 
have disastrous effects for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Here, Mr. Speaker, we have the blatant conflict of interest, which has existed since the Conservatives 
took office, with respect to dealing with PCS. I say that they have a responsibility to the people of 
Saskatchewan to manage that corporation in the best interests of the people. I want to say that some 
action has been taken by the government. Instead they have proceeded to cut back PCS little by little 
since election day, by forcing PCS to drop plans to compete with the multinational private potash 
companies on the international markets. In other words, they have scrapped PCS International by forcing 
layoffs at PCS to reduce the public corporation’s market share and by deciding that all future expansion 
in the industry will be in the private sector. 
 
I want to say that there is no doubt that under the previous government they had established the PCS 
International. I want to say to the minister in charge that the international arm of PCS had indeed been in 
negotiations with India and China and Brazil. I want to say they had commitments to the extent of a 
million tonnes, and what the minister did was to destroy the instrument of sales of potash on behalf of 
the public sector. No doubt about it. The facts are there. He destroyed it and he gave it to Canpotex. 
Canpotex picked up, from the countries he named today, one-third of what the international arm of PCS 
indeed had commitments for. 
 
I want to say that this minister has been undermining, undermining, I must say, Mr. Speaker, the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. He has done a good job, Mr. Speaker, but who pays the penalties? The 
penalty is paid by the workers at the potash mines in Saskatchewan. I want to say that he indicated that 
he was going to have a sale to Malaysia and because of that, maybe there would be no layoff necessary. 
Today he did not indicate whether he was going to delay or reduce the number of layoffs. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1229 

According to the Star-Phoenix, the acting president of the potash corporation said: 
 

In 1983 it is expected that the potash workers will be laid off from three to four months. 
 
Laid off this year, laid off next year, and the responsibility, I say, rests with the minister in charge who 
has, I indicate, Mr. Speaker, lost faith with the people of Saskatchewan by undermining that corporation 
for the benefit of his private corporate friends. 
 
I want to say that it is interesting that the Tories during their campaign didn’t tell the people of 
Saskatchewan what their plans were prior to April 26. The answer is obvious in respect to potash. I’ll 
tell you they wouldn’t, and they didn’t dare to because they knew that the people of Saskatchewan 
would not stand for the sell-out of this public corporation to private foreign interests. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say: let it be known that the government opposite has merely postponed the 
day of reckoning. Let the foreign corporate friends of theirs be aware that if they take up Mr. Thatcher’s 
invitation to purchase PCS and all its assets at fire sale prices, the day will come when the people of 
Saskatchewan will once again regain control of their resources. I want to say what a sad and sorry tale 
this is, Mr. Speaker. Here we have a political party trapped by its own ideology, a prisoner of a 
philosophy that has never worked and will not work in the future. 
 
Let us look at the last example. First to the past when Mr. Thatcher as premier. In order to attract foreign 
investment to Saskatchewan, he came up with the wage guidelines in the public and private sectors. I 
want to say at that time they didn’t work. They caused hardships, particularly to the people with low 
incomes. They cost us jobs. They causes labor-management conflict. They were unmitigated disaster. 
 
So, what did the Conservatives do as part of their new beginning? They, too, introduced guidelines that 
don’t apply to everyone. They, too, have asked every working person in Saskatchewan to take a cut in 
their real income as their contribution to the real beginning. Hospital workers, janitors, typists, teachers, 
clerks, nurses - -all will have their incomes cut as part of a new beginning. Everyone will have to make 
sacrifices in Saskatchewan to save for foreign investment. 
 
Well, almost everyone, Mr. Speaker. The following PC appointments are evidently not called upon to 
make the same sacrifices as the average working person in Saskatchewan. They have been exempted. 
Let’s take a couple of examples. Derek Bedson in the Premier’s office received a 36 per cent increase of 
some $23,000, giving him a salary of $85,000 or 86,000. Keith Lampart received a 78 per cent increase 
of some $21,000, giving him a salary of $48,000. They also provided him with a senior administrative 
assistant who will be paid $39,000. No position existed before. SO I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that is 
part of the new beginning. As part of the new beginning some people will make more sacrifices under 
Mr. Andrew’s budget than others. 
 
The Premier said in his throne speech that this administration will be a reflection of the compassion and 
the competition are the fundamental characteristics of Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, this 
government certainly does not reflect those characteristics of compassion and competition. Rather, this 
government exhibits great compassion for the interprovincial trucking industry, a great compassion for 
the oil industry, a great compassion for the life insurance companies, a great compassion for the real 
estate, and a great compassion for 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1230 

people who are on high incomes. 
 
But it also believes in competition. And now in Saskatchewan what we have is a Tory type of 
competition. We have thousands of young people competing for too few spaces in our technical 
institutes. We have thousands of young people competing for no jobs. I want to say that we have 12,000 
unemployed young, so-called competing for those 27,000 jobs in this work-for-welfare program. And 
we have our senior citizens competing for nursing homes in Saskatchewan, and this government stands 
still. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we have the poor, the sick, and the disadvantaged; we have youth and 
many hundreds of trained and skilled workers competing with each other for too few jobs, for scarce 
resources that they so desperately need. 
 
And I want to say the wealthy and the healthy can look to the future secure in the knowledge that this 
government will represent the best interests of its limited ability for their interest. The poor, the sick, the 
disadvantaged, and the unemployed can look to a pretty bleak future under this administration. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I indicated to you that I would be wanting to move an amendment to this 
budget, and now that the Minster of Finance is in here, I want to say to him that I had some kind words 
to say with respect to his delivery, but very little good about the substance. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, let me summarize, if you will, why it is necessary and why it is right that we 
move an amendment. This government told the people of Saskatchewan in April, “There is so much 
more we can be.” And now after its first budget, the people know what the Tories meant. So much more 
in debt, so much more unemployment, so much more economic recession. This budget gives the people 
who voted for something more a $220 million deficit, with more money set aside for welfare payments 
to unemployed employables than for job creation. Program service and benefit cuts occur in almost 
every department of government, and in almost all cases these cuts impact upon those most in need. 
 
All government members should be ashamed of this budget, and the impact that this will have on our 
economy and the people of this province. And that is why, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleagues, I’m 
proud to move an amendment, seconded by my colleague, the member for Pelly, that the motion be 
amended by deleting all the words after “That” and substituting the following: 
 

This Assembly expresses its shock and dismay with the budget because: 
 
1. It contains the largest deficit in the 77-year history of the province. 

 
2. It offers totally inadequate expenditures on job creation at a time when unemployment is at its 

highest level in this province in more than 20 years. 
 

3. It contains dozens of destructive cuts in programs and services to those most in need. 
 

4. It fails to recognize the role of Saskatchewan crown corporations in maintaining the economic 
activity and the need for proven financial management of these corporations. 



 
December 1, 1982 

 
1231 

Mr. Speaker, I so move and I will be supporting the amendment and voting against the original 
resolution. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I find the amendment in order and the debate continues concurrent on the 
amendment and the main motion. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to apologize to the House at the 
outset. I was assigned to follow the dynamic member for Quill Lakes and respond to anything he might 
have had to offer to the debate, and I want to apologize because I fell asleep about five minutes into his 
talk. I missed most of what he had to say — I’m sure it wasn’t a great deal, but I think maybe there is a 
positive side to this. We should maybe bottle that dude, because what we have here is a walkin', talkin', 
sedative and we could maybe bottle it and get it on the formulary, and it would be a cheap source of 
medication for those who need it. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, in order that we may get out into the fresh air and shake off some of the doziness 
that seems to have overcome this House, I would beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Just on a point of order, I would like to inform the House Leader that he did 
adjourn the debate once and cannot, a second time, himself, adjourn the debate. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn the debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I think we still have a problem. You can’t have two motions to adjourn without 
something happening in between. 
 
On a point of procedure, the first one was out of order, so I guess the second one is in order. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I think this one is in order. I move this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:54 p.m. 



1232 
 

CORRIGENDUM 
 
Hansard (N.S. Vol. XXV, No. 26A, Monday, November 29, 1982) incorrectly reported remarks by the 
Hon. Mrs. Smith. The fourth paragraph on page 1113 should read: 
 
In summary, I am being told that many seriously troubled youths are being denied services, and yet the 
former administration had $6 million to advertise crown corporations, $35 million this year for a self-pat 
on the back, but they didn’t have $12,500 for a youth diversion program. 
 
[NOTE: The online transcript for Monday, November 29, 1982 has been corrected.] 
 


