






















































Hansard: March 23, 1982


777 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 23, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
MRS. DUNCAN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to introduce to you, and to members of the 
Assembly, a group of 24 Air Cadets sitting in the east gallery. They have travelled here to Regina today with 
their commanding officer, Captain M. Clary. They are accompanied by two chaperones, Mrs. Eleanor Clary 
and Connie Flaherty. They had a bit of trouble starting out, Mr. Speaker, but they resolved the problems with 
the bus and they were able to get here on time. I hope you have an enjoyable day in Regina and enjoy the 
proceedings of the House in the next half hour. We think question period is one of the most exciting times of 
the day. I will be meeting with you at 3 o'clock for pictures and drinks. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
MR. PEPPER: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to introduce to you and to welcome another group of grade 8 
students. I think they are some 54 in number from the Weyburn Junior High School. They are sitting in the 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and are accompanied by their teachers, Mr. Jim Nedelcov and Mr. Dale 
MacNaughton, and their bus drivers, Mr. Les Stock and Mr. Wayne Vielea. This, Mr. Speaker, completes the 
total number of grade 8 students from Weyburn Junior High who were to have visited this Chamber this year 
in 1982. I'm sure that I am expressing the wishes of all members that their visit here in the Legislative 
Building proves knowledgeable and pleasant for them. 
 
Might I add, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this will be Mr. Nedelcov's 15th consecutive year chaperoning the 
grade 8 students to our building, a record in itself I assure you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — I look forward to meeting with the students a little later this afternoon. I am sure that it is 
the wish of all members here that they have a safe journey back home. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and through you to all members of 
this Assembly, 17 grade 12 students in the east gallery. They are accompanied here today by their teacher, 
Mr. Duncan McKeller, and their bus driver, Charlie Dombowsky. I had the opportunity to meet with the 
group for pictures and a drink just prior to coming into the House. I would hope that they enjoy the question 
period and the tour they will be having following question period. A portion of the girls' high school team 
and a portion of the boys' high school team that are going to the provincial finals this weekend is here. I hope 
all members will join me in wishing them  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
778 

luck. I hope they enjoy their stay here and have a pleasant journey back home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I, too, have a group of visiting students from my constituency 
who, I believe, are in the Speaker's gallery. They're from W.P. Bate. I'd like to welcome them to the 
Legislative Assembly in Regina. It is a group of grade 8 students numbering 36 in total. They are 
accompanied by Mr. Garry McKenzie and Mr. Ron Boden of the school. It was my pleasure to have visited 
W.P.Bate a couple of weeks ago. We had a very lively question and answer period. It's a pleasure to see them 
here in Regina. I'll be seeing them for pictures and drinks later, too. Thank very much. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 
QUESTIONS 

 
Alleged Interference Concerning Egg Marketing Board 

 
MR. ANDREW: — My question is to the Attorney General. Yesterday we delivered to you copies of 
correspondence we had obtained regarding the egg marketing board in Saskatchewan. Accusations were 
made in that correspondence of political interference in the workings of the marketing board. As well, there 
was some doubt raised as to whether or not there was interference by the Department of Agriculture in the 
judicial process itself. As the chief law enforcement officer of the province of Saskatchewan, could you 
advise this Assembly what investigations members of your department have made with regard to these 
accusations. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — First of all, I've not yet had an opportunity to fully consider the documentation 
which has been forwarded to me, but I must say (I could be wrong on this) that my reading of the material 
does not corroborate or support the statements of the hon. member about allegations of interference in the 
judicial system. 
 
It is correct to say that there are allegations of political interference in the operations of the egg marketing 
board, which may or may not be the subject of a political debate. The question is whether or not there is 
anything beyond that. The material that was forwarded to me does not seem to indicate this. In any event, to 
make my answer more complete I have raised this matter with the deputy attorney general to see what his 
opinion is. His preliminary opinion seems to be the same as mine. I'll have further information from them in 
the next while. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question to the Attorney General. Mr. Attorney General, are you 
telling this Assembly, or are we interpreting you correctly when you suggest that correspondence from Linda 
Boxall to the Minister of Agriculture suggesting political interference by both the Minister of Agriculture 
and the MLA for the constituency involved ("blatantly political," I think, is how she described it and 
"muddy") - are you suggesting that is not a serious matter? Is the Attorney General telling us that a matter 
such as this, which has been in his hands for some 24 hours now, has not been investigated any more 
extensively than he has indicated at this point? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I'm telling the hon. member precisely what I told the first 
questioner about the activities of the Department of the Attorney General. We will take as much time as we 
need to examine this. I have not seen the words "blatantly  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
779 

political." There is in that letter the statement: 
 

. . . that the board has been concerned over the recent apparent political persuasion used by 
members of your ministry (if I am reading the letter correctly) in attempts to keep the issue 
out of the public forum of a court case. 

 
That may be an issue; it may be an issue properly debatable, but whether it's an issue which falls into the 
court of competent jurisdiction or a legal aspect is something which I am not able to agree on with the hon. 
member opposite and would require more advice and information before I even get to that point. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — A supplementary question to the Attorney General. Mr. Attorney General, on 
numerous occasions you have demonstrated a very ruthless lack of hesitancy to use your Department of the 
Attorney General for political purposes. I want your assurance today that you will not be using your 
department as a means to shield a minister, as you have used your department to attack opposition to the 
New Democratic Party, and I want your assurance today that this matter is not going to be swept under the 
rug under the guise of being investigated by the deputy minister or somebody else in your department until it 
can very conveniently be forgotten by the potential calling of an election. In other words, are you prepared to 
give us a clear, definitive statement when you department will tell us what their findings are in this matter? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I'm not prepared to give that assurance to the hon. member and, 
of course, by the hon. member's questions, it's a no-win situation. He does not want the Attorney General 
involved in the decision because that would be political, and he doesn't want it in the hands of the deputy 
attorney general because it would be swept under the table and hidden under some unknown timetable. So 
you can't deal with it that way either. You simply can't deal with it in any way which seemingly would satisfy 
the hon. member for Thunder Creek, except for the inevitable conclusion which they have jumped to for 
political reasons and which, as I say, requires much more careful consideration than that. 
 
MR. LANE: — Would the Attorney General, keeping in mind past problems he's had with time, be 
investigating the great delay that seems to have taken place on actions against the Bouffards and also take 
into account allegations in the chronological listing of events from the chairman of the board that, in fact, in 
November the solicitor for Mr. Bouffard stated that his client had in fact breached the regulations? Will the 
Attorney General be investigating the length of time that it took to bring this matter to a head? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we may or we may not in the department be investigating 
that. It strikes me on first reading that that is very much a secondary issue. The fact of the matter is that a 
charge has been laid. Nobody has been prejudiced by the fact that the charge has been laid. It also seems 
apparent to me, from examination of the documentation, that there was an opinion held that in the matter of a 
provincial statute, such as concerning egg marketing under the marketing control legislation, where possible 
there ought to be a resolution, not by virtue of the full mechanism of the law but wherever possible, 
particularly in this case presumably, to work out some form of a conciliation committee hearing or some 
form of conciliation to avoid the matter going to court. One may disagree with that posture, but I think one 
can also see a positive side to that point of view, if that were the position that were being advocated and at 
issue. So, accordingly, it strikes me on first reading and on further  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
780 

consideration of the matter that that aspect of the hon. member's question is, to me, very much a peripheral 
issue and of less concern. The fact is the charge has taken place, and it seems that from that point of view the 
rest speaks for itself. 
 
MR. LANE: — Of course, it's not a matter of lesser concern when you put it in the context that since 1980, 
when the matter was first raised, and in 1981, November 17, there were admissions by the solicitor for the 
accused that there are serious allegations that there was political interference through the course of this 
against the minister in the Department of Agriculture. So I suggest to the Attorney General, and will he not 
admit, that in fact the length of time it took to get action on this is a matter of serious concern and deserves 
the same priority under his investigation? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I hear what the hon. member is saying. I'm not ruling that 
out as a part of the consideration, but by the same token I would have the hon. members take into account the 
view that I have offered with respect to this matter. One can read the chronology however one wants to. You 
can start in 1980 and take the longest construction on it if you want to. Perhaps that's a reasonable 
construction. 
 
I think an equally reasonable construction is to start in November - or September but certainly November - of 
1981 and see the information laid in January, 1982, and say that two months is not an unreasonable amount 
of time for a charge to ultimately have been made, especially if there was consideration and some thought 
given to a possible conciliation of this matter or resolution outside the court. This, in a provincial statute of 
this nature, where one is trying to get acceptance, presumably, of orderly marketing and with the limitation 
of relatively new concepts in legislation, is an understandable position. It may not, as a consequence, attach 
any further seriousness to it. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — My question is to the Attorney General. The correspondence indicates, with regards to 
the sequence of events, that on December 18 Miss Boxall met with not only members of the council but also 
the entire council to go over this particular matter. If you refer to that particular document, they agreed with 
us after explanation that "we have little opportunity but to proceed," referring to proceeding to court. That 
was in December. 
 
Now, can you tell me, Mr. Attorney General, how the Minister of Agriculture can on February 22 say, "No, 
we need more conciliation; we have to appeal this to the council," when they have already sat and heard it? 
That would be prejudiced by it, and they would have already made a decision that they should proceed in 
court. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I want to be absolutely clear to the members that I 
will be taking advice from my department officials on this matter, if an when they have completed the study 
of the issues. But the simple fact of the matter is as I understand it (I have not done a complete study of the 
bill myself) that the egg marketing plan provides that there shall be a committee known as the egg board 
conciliation committee, and "the board shall refer all unresolved grievances to the conciliation committee for 
recommendation." It says not "may" but "shall" refer all unresolved grievances to the conciliation committee. 
 
One can argue that this was an unresolved grievance and one can also argue that the egg marketing group did 
not follow the compliance of the statute where it says "shall" in referring that to the conciliation committee. 
One can also argue that the minister is responsible for the administration of that act, including those words 
and the conduct of  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
781 

the group. If there is no reference of unresolved grievances to the conciliation committee (by the way, with a 
subsequent appeal to the full council as this legislation applies), the minister who is responsible for the 
overall administration of the statute could raise the comments which apparently he did to the appropriate 
people in February 1982. 
 
MR. LANE: — The Attorney General is fully aware that in such situations a council which is an appeal 
body that has already heard it cannot re-hear it or it is prejudiced and the individual accused (if the council 
heard it) would have no difficulty getting the prosecution thrown out in court. I'm sure the Attorney General 
is fully aware of that. 
 
My question though is to the Minister of Agriculture. I wonder if the minister would mind explaining to us 
how it is, in his idea or concept of orderly marketing, that the premeeting research of marketing boards takes 
into account the voting patterns in particular ridings and the voting plurality of cabinet ministers? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of the matters referred to by the hon. 
member in his question directed to me. 
 
MR. LANE: — The minister has had ample time to inform himself, Mr. Speaker. I am going to quote from a 
paragraph in a memo from the manager of the egg marketing board to the board of directors marked 
confidential: 
 

We suggested that since the community of Kincaid is already aroused, the magistrate's court 
trial would not arouse it further but bring out the facts. They were concerned and were 
reacting to concerns of MLA Dwain Lingenfelter. Our premeeting research indicated he won 
the seat in the last election by less than 400 votes on a split vote. 

 
I ask the Minister of Agriculture: what does the plurality of a cabinet minister have to do with orderly 
marketing and the votes in the administration of a marketing board? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the hon. member knows that the correspondence 
which passes between the chairman of the board and the board members of the egg marketing board is a 
matter for the egg marketing board and not a matter for the Government of Saskatchewan or a matter for the 
Minister of Agriculture. 
 
MR. LANE: — Is the Minister of Agriculture stating that he and his officials have not had access to the 
materials before the egg marketing board? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, we receive the minutes, as I understand it, of the egg 
marketing board meetings and they are reviewed by the natural products marketing council. That's the 
information I understand that is made available to us, let us say, the government, but it is made available to 
the natural products marketing council. 
 
MR. LANE: — I wonder how the Minister of Agriculture justifies the statement made by the chairman of 
the board that "this board has been concerned over the recent apparent political persuasion that has been used 
by members of your ministry in attempts to keep this issue out of the public forum of a court case"? I suggest 
to you that that indicates there was significant political interference by the ministry of agriculture. I'll ask the 
minister now to tell us: are there any directives from the Department of Agriculture that in fact marketing 
boards must take into account the political plurality of cabinet ministers? 
 



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
782 

HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Qu'Appelle knows the correspondence 
that has transpired between me and the chairman of the egg marketing board because he has a copy of the 
correspondence. I understand it was made available to members of the legislature here yesterday, and in no 
way whatsoever would I say that the hon. member, or anyone else, can interpret political interference. The 
hon. member, from my correspondence to the chairman of the egg marketing board, can interpret that; that's 
fine. For my part, I do not. Mr. Speaker, in my correspondence to the egg marketing board I make no 
reference to the court case at all in terms of seeking to suggest that the board should withdraw from its court 
case. 
 
I do very clearly and I very emphatically express disappointment that the use of conciliation, that the use of 
appeal through the natural products marketing council wasn't provided. And I will continue to do so as I deal 
with situations with respect to orderly marketing, egg marketing boards, and whatever. I think the 
opportunity for farmers to have available to them conciliation is essential in dealing with matters of disputes. 
I think it was essential here, and I support that position, and I continue to express my disappointment to the 
egg marketing council that that wasn't followed. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Supplementary question to the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, may I refer to 
correspondence one year earlier of one Harry-Jae Elder, where Mr. Elder in his correspondence to you says: 
"The appropriate course of action is to access the excess layer fees and to collect such fees through the 
courts." That was in correspondence to you. Harry-Jae Elder further goes on to say: "The board should also 
carefully weigh the cost and benefits of prosecution of these persons, aside from the legal aspects." Mr. 
Minister, I invite your comments on these, when one year earlier Harry-Jae Elder is recommending that this 
matter go to court. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Correspondence addressed to whom? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a copy in the file of a letter dated February 5, 1981, 
signed by Harry-Jae Elder, chairman of the natural products marketing council. It is addressed to Mr. Keith 
Colburn, chairman, Saskatchewan Commercial Egg Producers' Marketing Board, Box 183, Delisle, 
Saskatchewan. My name happens to be Gordon MacMurchy. I'm the Minister of Agriculture. My address is 
either 328 Legislative Building, Government of Saskatchewan, Regina, or my address is Semans, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A question to the Minister of Agriculture. When you wrote the letter to one Linda 
Boxall on February 22, 1982, were you aware at that time that one month earlier an information had been 
sworn out before the court charging this Mr. Bouffard in a court of law? Were you aware that that charge 
was in fact laid? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, yes, I was, and in my letter to the chairman I made no 
reference at any time to suggest that the board should drop the court case against the Bouffards. If the hon. 
member can see it there, that's fine. I simply can't see it there. I ask the hon. member to consider very 
carefully the letter and, if he can find it there, point out to me where I suggest that the board should drop the 
court case against the Bouffards. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Minister of Agriculture, in that letter that you wrote you indicated,  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
783 

and I quote: 
 

I am disappointed that the board proceeded with court action. 
 
You also said at the start of it: 
 

However, I remind you that as Minister of Agriculture, under the terms of The Natural 
Products Marketing Act, I bear the final responsibility . . . 

 
What inference did you have in that letter, other than to tell that board to get their case out of court and get it 
settled before it proceeded any further? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I answered the question of an hon. member opposite (not that 
particular hon. member) along the same lines earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there's no question that in my letter I suggest, and suggest emphatically, that I would prefer the 
board's proceeding on the basis of providing conciliation and appeal to the natural products marketing 
council before we get into the courts, before we get into the police. I think that's a legitimate position to take 
as the Minister of Agriculture, and I say to the hon. members opposite and that hon. member for the 
constituency of Kindersley, I will continue to do so. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LANE: — Unfortunately, the minister's letter goes a little further, and I refer to the last paragraph of 
the letter, where he says: 
 

However, I urge you to meet with council to determine whether it is possible to resolve this 
dispute through conciliation or an appeal to council. 

 
After it is already in the courts you are asking then to pull it out of the court and take it to appeal, to council 
or to conciliation. So I suggest to the Minister of Agriculture that in fact you went far beyond the bounds of 
propriety to say the least, and that when the matter . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! The member before rose and rebutted the answer of the minister. It was 
the Attorney General. It was improper in the question period because there is nothing in the rules of the 
question period that allows a member to get up and give a rebuttal. Now the member for Qu'Appelle has 
stood up and given a rebuttal under the guise of asking a question. I ask the members to adhere to the rules, 
because when members give argument and debatable comment in this question period, they are bound to 
generate debate, and there's no opportunity for debate in the question period. 
 
MR. LANE: — I wonder if the Minister of Agriculture has asked his officials if they in fact supplied any of 
the marketing boards with the voting tabulations of the various constituencies and with the pluralities of the 
various ministers, so they have that information prior to making decisions? 
 
HON. MR. MacMURCHY: — Mr. Speaker, I have not. I would be glad to ask them, and I will be glad to 
present to the hon. member the answer to the question. 
 
MR. LANE: — Thank you. When you answer the questions and determine (and I am sure you will) where 
they got that information . . . I am sure the Minister of Agriculture,  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
784 

deeply concerned about natural products marketing, will try to find out how any marketing board took into 
consideration the voting pluralities of cabinet ministers. 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the committee of finance, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Rousseau. 
 
MR. PEPPER: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to speak in what will almost certainly be my last 
budget debate. This budget is a fine budget, and a shining example of what governments can accomplish for 
their citizens. I congratulate the finance minister, the member for Humboldt, on a job well done. 
 
In the face of hard times the Blakeney government has shown that it puts people first, and that it is no 
handicap to do so, as some would have us believe. The opposite is true, Mr. Speaker; Saskatchewan's 
economy has prospered because the New Democratic Party government has worked and continues to work 
for the people of Saskatchewan to establish and to maintain proper health care, equal education 
opportunities, and decent working conditions. The achievements of the Blakeney government have been 
memorable. The budget indicates that as time goes by they continue to grow. I speak from personal 
experience. 
 
Nearly 18 years have passed since I was first elected as Weyburn constituency's representative in the 
Saskatchewan legislature. For the past 11 of those years I have been proud to be a member of the Blakeney 
government. Any fair-minded person who remembers what it was like in 1971, when our government was 
first elected, will know that many beneficial changes have taken place over the last 11 years. We have seen 
the establishment of a dental care program, a prescription drug program, a hearing aid program, senior 
citizens' housing, new nursing homes, a home care program, new hospitals and new schools, premium-free 
medicare, development of northern Saskatchewan. Yes, we have seen new and innovative programs in 
agriculture like FarmStart and land bank, and the establishment of voluntary marketing boards for hogs and 
cattle. There has been greatly increased funding for both rural and urban governments, new highways across 
the province, community college systems and provincial library systems as well. 
 
These are just a few of the many changes for the better that have taken place in Saskatchewan over the last 
decade. The Blakeney government's record is one of outstanding social and economic progress and I am 
proud to have been a part of it. Each step toward economic and social justice has helped prepare the way for 
the next one. As a result, it seems that we are able to make greater progress as the base we build on 
strengthens. I think this year's budget proves what I say is true. 
 
The budget is built on the principles that have always guided the New Democratic Party and, formerly, the 
CCF. The first of these principles is put people first. The central goal of this budget, and the budget which 
preceded it, is to meet the needs of the people of Saskatchewan through maintaining and expanding 
government programs 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
785 

and services. 
 
The second of these principles is to make each budget another step in the province's long-term economic 
strategy in planning and building for the future. Our long-term economic strategy is based on the careful 
management of the province's resources and is to smooth out economic cycles to provide stability and 
prosperity in the face of high interest rates, high inflation, and high unemployment. 
 
The third principle is that the government must manage public funds responsibly. 
 
These three principles of service, honesty, and sound management have served the people of Saskatchewan 
well. They continue to do so. This budget protects Saskatchewan people from high interest rates, high 
inflation, and high unemployment through government action. 
 
First, Saskatchewan people will be protected from the rising cost of living. Home-owners with interest rates 
over 15 per cent will benefit from mortgage interest relief of up to $2,400 over one year and from a freeze in 
utility rates as well. Senior citizens will receive a new shelter allowance program to help ensure they can live 
in decent housing. Financial help will be provided to 20,000 senior citizens whose shelter costs are over 25 
per cent of their income. The shelter allowance will especially help those who are living alone. Property tax 
payers will be protected from rising costs through increased property and renter tax rebates. Families with 
children will have increased family income plan benefits and day care subsidies and the elimination of the 
tax on children's clothing and footwear. 
 
Second, Saskatchewan people will be protected from a shortage of affordable housing. Over 4,000 new 
housing units for those with low and middle incomes will be built throughout the province. 
 
Third, workers will be protected from unemployment and a downturn in the economy by $2 billion in 
job-creating capital investment through crown corporations and government agencies and through 
low-interest loans for small businesses. 
 
The people of Weyburn constituency, Mr. Speaker, will be pleased to know that farmers and rural 
communities also receive a special emphasis in this budget. A new five-year $12 million rural capital fund 
will be established to provide financial assistance for capital projects which are designed to enhance the 
quality of life in rural Saskatchewan. Effective April 1, 1982, the tax on fuel used in tandem-axle farm trucks 
will be eliminated. Rural hospitals will receive money for more staff and an increase in the number of 
special-care beds. The training service for volunteer firefighters will be improved and expanded. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, $175 million has been budgeted to extend the rural natural gas network. Over the 
next three years, the natural gas network will be expanded to thousands more customers in rural 
communities and on farms. So for those who do not have access to natural gas, the Warm Up Saskatchewan 
program will be expanded by $75 million, paid by the heritage fund. Home-owners will be eligible to receive 
interest-free loans up to $3,000 and rural businesses, community halls, recreation facilities, schools and 
hospitals will receive up to $10,000 in interest-free loans for energy-saving activities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these programs in the continued expansion of health and social  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
786 

programs are made possible by the Blakeney government's resource policies. In 1982 the heritage fund will 
provide $900 million for today's needs. That accounts for 27.2 per cent of the total revenue of the province of 
Saskatchewan. It will pay for $2,000 worth of services for every family in the province. Resource revenues 
now bring in more revenue than any other source, including personal income tax. 
 
This budget also maintains the New Democratic Party's commitment to health and social services, which has 
been well recognized over the years. Nowhere is that more evident than in the budget's health care programs. 
This year, in the 20th anniversary of medicare and the 35th anniversary of fully-insured hospital services, it 
pleases me, Mr. Speaker, that we can mark these anniversaries with a 22 per cent increase in our health care 
budget, providing over $700 million. That increase will keep Saskatchewan health care healthy, despite the 
federal funding cutbacks which have damaged the health care offered in other provinces across Canada. 
 
We now recognize that good health care requires more than modern hospitals and trained staff. That is why 
this budget contains $50 million for preventive health. Greater mental health services will be offered through 
community-based programs. Speech therapy services will be doubled, and the campaign to discourage 
smoking will be expanded. These programs join the extremely successful childrens' dental plan, which has 
always emphasized preventive health and quality treatment. So I am pleased to see the dental plan will be 
expanded to children from ages 4 to 16 and will receive a one-third increase in budget to $17 million. 
 
Social services and education are two other areas which are also introducing important expansion to their 
programs. In social services the home care program will receive $17 million in 1982 to expand its services 
so more senior citizens can live in their own homes, near their families, and lead the most active lives 
possible. One hundred and thirty-three new nursing beds will be constructed in 1982, and day care will be 
expanded by 400 spaces this year. 
 
Education will receive a 25 per cent increase in school capital grants, a 15 per cent increase per student in 
school operating grants, a 17 per cent increase in university operating grants, and a 24 per cent increase for 
student bursaries. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, as the representative of a constituency where agriculture is so important, I would 
like to make just a few remarks about the agricultural programs announced in this budget. The tradition of 
the CCF and the New Democratic Party governments of standing solidly behind the farmers in Saskatchewan 
goes back to the early days of the Douglas administration when that government fought a successful battle, 
Mr. Speaker, to save Saskatchewan family farms from the clutches of many of the eastern moneylenders. 
That commit continued in the 1970s as the Blakeney government established such programs as FarmStart, 
land bank, and took action to help producers deal with the cost-price squeeze, including $45 million for hog 
producers in 1973 and 1974 and $80 million in grants and interest-free loans for beef producers between the 
years 1974 and 1976. 
 
Both these groups, Mr. Speaker, have more recently been helped through the hog and beef stabilization 
programs. This year the province will spend $10 million on these two programs. 
 
At the same time that farmers were threatened by poor markets, the Blakeney government was defending 
them against another threat - the loss of the crowrate.  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
787 

Without the crowrate, Mr. Speaker, and its two principles of equal rate for equal distance and a fixed rate for 
movement of grain, farming as we know it would disappear. 
 
To protect farmers from high freight rates and the wholesale abandonment the loss of the crowrate would 
mean, the Blakeney government has proposed that the western provinces join the federal governments and 
the railways to make a major capital investment in the rail system. This would not be another public gift but 
an equity investment which would give the West some control, a way to guarantee performance. That is why, 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan government invested $55 million dollars in hopper cars. It is a proposal that 
would work. I am proud, very proud to be on the side of a government that has consistently supported the 
position of farmers in this struggle. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to see this budget recognize the higher costs of farming. I have 
mentioned the elimination of the fuel tax on tandem trucks. FarmStart loan limits have been raised. The total 
loan limit has been raised from $150,000 to $200,000. The subsidized loan limit has been raised from 
$90,000 to $100,000. The net worth limit was increased from $144,000 to $185,000. Magnificent increases, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The future of agriculture in Saskatchewan has never been completely secure. In the Blakeney New 
Democratic Party government, farmers have had a reliable ally in their struggle to achieve a secure and stable 
farm economy. 
 
The initiatives of this year's budget are the most recent of many changes for the better that have taken place 
in Saskatchewan over the last decade. The Blakeney record is one of social and economic progress. I am 
proud to have been part of that progress. 
 
As I prepare, Mr. Speaker, to leave public life, I want to thank the many fine people who have given me 
encouragement and support over the years. I can assure you that I'm retiring with the satisfaction of knowing 
that the constituency of Weyburn has shared in the benefits of Saskatchewan's progress. My time in the 
legislature has been very worth while. 
 
In the near future the electorate of Saskatchewan will be making a choice between continuing to build on 
what has been achieved in Saskatchewan or tearing it down and starting off in a different direction. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe the Blakeney government's course is the right one for Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PEPPER: — I urge the people of Weyburn to follow that course. I hope our constituency will continue 
to have representation in the government after the next election. Mr. Speaker, I'm sure from the remarks I 
have made you will recognize that I am supporting the budget. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a feeling of great pride that I stand in support of this 
budget. I want to extend congratulations to the Minister of Finance for such an outstanding document. In a 
time when other governments are operating on  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
788 

large deficits and are cutting programs, we have provided a balanced budget which provides large increases 
for worth-while programs and the necessary capital for important new initiatives. It is, as well, a budget with 
the right priority, a budget in which people really do come first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been said that we reap what we sow. I believe that for the past 11 years our government 
has provided honest and effective government in tune with the needs of the people of this province. In return 
for careful planning in the resource sector, we have secured a better deal for our people and the rewards are 
evident. Eleven years ago there was no dental plan for our young people. There was no hearing aid plan or 
aids for independent living. There was no family income plan for low-income wage earners. We were 
without land bank, FarmStart and the hog assured returns program. There was no Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and there was no money for a heritage fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a representative of one of Saskatchewan's rural constituencies, the constituency of Quill 
Lakes, I am proud that this government has always shown support for Saskatchewan towns and villages and 
for the rural way of life. In this budget, for example, we are planning for a new rural gasification program. In 
my constituency, this will provide natural gas to the village of Esk, and Kandahar will be in line in future 
development. In the last few weeks, I have been busy visiting some of the communities in my constituency. I 
was in Lanigan the other day to present a cheque for $86,000 for the renovation and expansion of the 
Lanigan hospital. I attended Watson to sign an agreement for $44,000, a new five-year regional park 
agreement with other municipalities. I want to say that I was in Wynyard the other day to announce the new 
social services office which will open soon, which will have a complement of six staff and offer a full range 
of social service programs. I want to say, in addition, a senior citizens' housing project has been approved for 
Jansen and the construction will begin this summer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just a few of the most recent initiatives in my constituency. It is evidence of this 
government's commitment to the people of rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I want to say that these are 
difficult times for our province, our country, and the world. Canada and the world are in the midst of a 
recession, a recession that has brought hardship and gloom to every walk of life. In Canada the rate of 
inflation stands at the highest level in 33 years. Just last month the consumer price index went up 1.2 per 
cent. Unemployment in Canada is a monstrous 9.7 per cent; 1,120,000 Canadians are without work. The 
economic growth in Canada is expected to be less than 2 per cent in the coming year. This is a dismal picture 
that I paint; usurious interest rates, crippling unemployment, astronomical inflation. 
 
Liberals and Conservatives alike offer only one prescription, one cure for these problems; more of the same. 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals and the Conservatives alike, when faced with these problems come up with the 
same tired rhetoric. Who is to blame for these problems? That's obvious they say - the poor, the sick, the 
infirm. It's those who ask of society the right to a decent job, to good health, and decent housing. These 
demands, say the Liberals, are unrealistic. Their spokesmen - the Thatchers, Lyons, MacEachens and the 
Reagans - call on the sick, the infirm, the jobless to make the sacrifices, to bite the bullet. Well, perhaps the 
most important question to be asked of these people is: who is shooting the bullet? Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to illustrate the profound difference between the New Democratic Party and the other political parties in 
Canada. This is the tale of three budgets: that which Mr. Crosbie proposed and which the people disposed, 
that which Mr. MacEachen provided and which the people  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
789 

derided, and that which Mr. Tchorzewski presented and the people applauded. 
 
How do you solve inflation and unemployment and usurious interest rates? Mr.Crosbie thought he had a 
solution. He had carefully read and observed the dictionary of simple economic myths by Ronald Reagan. He 
had listened spellbound to the words of that other great economist, Sterling Lyon, who had added to the 
dictionary of economics the marvellous phrase "acute protracted restraint" to describe the incredible damage 
and misery that he had brought upon the people of Manitoba and for which he was so richly rewarded when 
he gave the electorate a chance to express their feelings about acute protracted restraint. 
 
And armed with this gospel according to the neo-conservatives, Mr. Crosbie labored mightily on his budget. 
He knew the slogans well - misery seeks company; hard times can only be cured by more hard times; in 
order to reach for the top you must first hit the bottom. And he accomplished his aim. His first budget was a 
masterpiece of neo-conservatism. He taxed the poor and the sick and the infirm with his energy policy. He 
did nothing for unemployment. The jobless would have to make the sacrifices. He did nothing to lower 
interest rates. They were necessary to encourage continual foreign ownership of our resources and industry. 
But, Mr. Speaker, he did some things. He gave millions of dollars to the oil industry; he cut taxes for the 
wealthy. For being rich, they obviously deserved more. Mr. Speaker, it was his first budget; I predict it will 
be his last budget. 
 
This past year the federal Liberals, flushed with power, watched and listened as MacEachen brought forward 
his budget. And who were his teachers, Mr. Speaker? Who did he look to for solutions? Well, the answer 
was obvious. He, too, had learned the obvious. He, too, knew who were the experts. He, too, had listened to 
the Thatchers, the Lyons, The Reagans, and even to Mr. Crosbie. He brought in the same budget Mr. 
Speaker,. Oh, there were a few cosmetic changes, but basically it was the same document. Mr. MacEachen 
launched his Big Mac attack - a stale bun for the jobless and two old beef patties courtesy of low beef prices 
to the farmers, and he imported lettuce so he wouldn't discourage foreign investment. Mr. Speaker, there was 
one final ingredient - a special sauce in the form of lower taxes for the rich. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the rich 
deserved a break today from Mr. MacEachen, and he gave it to them. 
 
Marie Antoinette said, "Let them eat cake," Pierre Trudeau said, "Let them eat crow." And MacEachen said, 
"Only the rich can afford to eat." I say, what is the reaction of the people to this budget? I want to say that the 
people didn't like it very much. Robert Kaplan called it a political disaster. Monique Begin said that it did 
nothing for the unemployed. And they were his friends, his fellow cabinet ministers. The rest of Canada was 
much more unkind - all except John Crosbie, who of course was the original author, who had very little to 
say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in comparison to our budget I want to say that this budget brought down provides protection 
for people of Saskatchewan, but provides it in the following ways: protection from the high interest rates, 
protection from inflation, protection from the threat of unemployment. And, Mr. Speaker, all of this is being 
done without raising taxes and with a balanced budget. 
 
As a member of the New Democratic Party, and as Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, these are 
two aspects of this budget which I am particularly proud to support. We have often heard the old adage "A 
man's home is his castle." Everyone agrees with that old saying, but here in Canada the policies of the 
Liberals and the  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
790 

Tories alike have not only made it virtually impossible for young people to buy new homes but they are 
actually causing people to lose their homes. 
 
The interest rate policies of successive Liberal and Tory governments have placed enormous pressure on the 
home-owner. Security of the family home remains one of the highest priorities of this government. The 
home-owners' mortgage entitlement program is the second phase of this government's program to assist 
those caught in a financial squeeze by the federal government's high interest rate policies. The HOME 
program, as we are calling it, will provide eligible home-owners with some $20 million in direct assistance. 
Approximately 25,000 home-owners whose mortgage rate exceed 15 per cent will benefit from this program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a good deal has been said and written about the first phase of our home-owners' program - The 
Home-owners' Protection Act - since it was introduced. One commentator had this to say about it: 
 

The Saskatchewan government, to its credit, has just made it illegal for families to be forced 
from their homes because they cannot afford to pay painfully high mortgage rates. This law 
will ensure that decent, hard-working people won't be run out of their homes by high interest 
rates. 

 
The cause of all this is Ottawa's misguided policy of encouraging high interest rates . . . 
Ottawa seems prepared to tolerate an unbearably high price in economic stagnation, business 
and farm bankruptcies, unemployment and now even in letting some families lose the very 
roof over their heads. 

 
If the Saskatchewan government's policies are rough ones, at least they are compassionate 
policies . . . It's a novel and humane approach to a heartbreaking problem. It's the sort of 
protection that the Ontario government, and Ottawa for that matter, should be studying with 
keen interest. 

 
Those comments, Mr. Speaker, were found on the editorial page of the Toronto Star. Unfortunately no other 
government in Canada has come up with a program to prevent people from losing their homes - no other 
government, except the New Democratic government in Manitoba. But, elsewhere in Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
from Tory Newfoundland to Social Credit British Columbia, there has been much wringing of hands, much 
wailing in anguish, but no concrete action. 
 
Make no mistake about the reason why this legislation was introduced. There was a real need for this 
program here in Saskatchewan. Last year in Saskatchewan we averaged almost 80 applications for leave to 
foreclose per month. There were 965 applications for leave to foreclose last year. How many this year? Well, 
in spite of the disastrous interest rate policy of the federal government, there have been 34 applications for 
leave for foreclosure, of which only one has been granted. 
 
Perhaps an editorial cartoon which appeared in the Toronto Star best illustrates the situation. A family is 
seated on their sofa, surrounded by all their worldly possessions. They are obviously getting read to move 
out of their home. The headline on the newspaper which the father is reading states: 50,000 freed of 
foreclosure fear in 1982." And the father says, "Only in Saskatchewan, eh?" And mother says, "Pity." 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
791 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, the second aspect on which I would like to speak in some detail is 
the establishment of the commission to review the Saskatchewan Power Corporation rates and public 
participation in the rate-setting process. This new commission will be charged with the responsibility to 
examine and to make recommendations or comments on the following areas: 
 
1. The present level of rates charged for natural gas and electricity in Saskatchewan together with the history 
of rates charged by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation; 
 
2. The present level of rates charged for natural gas and electricity in other Canadian provinces, together with 
the history of rates charged in those provinces; 
 
3. The major factors which will influence future rates for natural gas and electricity in Saskatchewan such as 
interest rates, the national energy program and existing energy agreements; 
 
4. Public participation in the rate-setting for electricity and natural gas throughout Canada, and opportunities 
for the encouragement and enhancement of the public's role in Saskatchewan; 
 
5. Any other related areas which the commission judges to be appropriate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this commission is a public inquiry under The Public Inquiries Act and, therefore, has the 
authority to summon witnesses, obtain evidence under oath, and receive such documents as it deems 
necessary in carrying out its responsibilities. To head this commission we have chosen the former chief 
justice of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, Mr. E. M. Culliton, a man of highest integrity. This 
commission is being established because my government is aware that Saskatchewan residents are concerned 
with the rising costs of energy. Factors beyond our control, such as the national energy program and high 
interest rates, are contributing to these escalating costs. Understandably, the public is interested in why rates 
are rising and this interest has motivated us to look at the methods used to inform and involve them in the 
rate-setting process. 
 
Over the last few months we have been in dialogue with groups such as the Consumer's Association of 
Canada, Saskatchewan branch. They requested the establishment of a commission to review public 
participation in the rate-setting process. Our recent initiative is a response to this request. 
 
I would like to emphasize a point that I've maintained on a number of occasions. I believe that the method 
presently being used for setting utility rates is an open one. Indeed, I think that we have reason to be proud of 
this system. However, in light of the above considerations, we as a government recognize that now is the 
time to reaffirm that the public interest is in fact being considered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an open mind on this issue. We believe that, although the present method of setting 
rates has served the people of Saskatchewan well, it is appropriate at this time to re-examine this issue to see 
if there are any other realistic alternatives. 
 
Unfortunately, such is not the case with the members opposite. Entrapped by their  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
792 

blind ideology, they have already arrived at their solution. Did they consult with the people? No. Did they 
examine the public record? No. Did they examine the Saskatchewan tradition? No. No - in the best tradition 
of Conservatism, without the benefit of the facts, without consultation, they arrived at their solution; a public 
utilities board. Why? Because it was used to regulate private utility companies in other provinces and other 
states. It is obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the only reason the members opposite wish to impose their 
bureaucratic solution on the people of Saskatchewan is not to provide better services but to attack the crown 
corporations. Their final solution is not to establish a public review board but rather to pave the way for their 
ultimate objective: the selling of the assets of the people of Saskatchewan to the private sector. As the 
member for Moosomin said, 
 

We are now, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan and out of their concern, beginning to 
question whether or not the government involvement even in utility corporations, let alone 
resource development through the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, is the route to go. 

 
"Government involvement even in utility corporations" - those are his words. That's what they believe, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have dealt with these issues, but in this budget there is much more for the people of 
Saskatchewan. These additional programs illustrate profoundly the difference between us and the members 
opposite. And let me just briefly summarize some of the benefits to the people of Saskatchewan in this 
budget: an extension of the dental plan to include young people from 4 to 16 years of age, a $20 billion 
mortgage subsidy program, a new $6 million senior citizens' shelter allowance, increases in renters' rebates, 
senior citizens' school tax rebates and property improvement grants totalling $8 million, 4,100 new housing 
units to be built because of this budget, the removal of sales tax on children's clothing and footwear, a freeze 
of Saskatchewan power rates for residential and farm customers, a $175 million program to extend natural 
gas networks to thousands of customers in rural communities and on the farms, a $75 million expansion to 
the Warm Up Saskatchewan program to assist those who do not have access to natural gas, and an increase 
in the operating grant to the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan by 20 per cent to a total of $338 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is the exact opposite of those brought down by Liberals and Conservatives. Their 
budgets hurt people; ours protects people. This budget protects the home-owner, the renter, the senior 
citizen, the family with children, the taxpayer, the small businessman, and the farmer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget protects people of Saskatchewan from the disastrous policies of members opposite. 
Why, Mr. Speaker, is it so different from the documents of gloom and doom that come from the Liberals and 
the Tories alike? Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, it is because whereas the Liberals and Tories place their belief in the 
market place, we place our faith in people. Whereas the Liberals and the Conservatives seek only to 
encourage the growth of corporate sectors, we believe in encouraging the growth in people. Whereas the 
Liberals and the Tories look to the past for their solutions and groan in dismay, we look to the future with a 
joyful heart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only limitation to our realization of tomorrow will be our doubts of today. Let us move 
forward with a strong and active faith in the people of Saskatchewan. Let us move forward in the realization 
that institutions were created to serve the needs of people. Let us make decisions that need to be made, 
knowing full  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
793 

well that no achievement of merit is ever accomplished by shirking decision, by apathy, by timidity, by a 
lack of commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us have a dream - a belief that we can make our province a better place in which to live. 
We have the resources and we have the people to make this dream a reality. The people must make this 
choice. The future is in their hands. This budget, Mr. Speaker, provides the people of Saskatchewan with the 
tools. Working together, we can build that dream. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by my comments, I will be supporting the budget and voting against the amendment. 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mr. Speaker, before making my remarks on the budget this afternoon, I am certain that 
all members of this House and the listening audience would want to join with my colleagues in this House, 
in particular my colleague for Moose Jaw South, the Hon. Gordon Snyder, in wishing Mayor Herb Taylor of 
Moose Jaw a speedy recovery. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — Mayor Taylor's involvement in SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities' 
Association) executive is well-known, and I know that his people on SUMA have missed him, along with his 
colleagues on the city council and the citizens of Moose Jaw. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the Minister of Finance at this time for the budget that we have before us 
that has been geared and earmarked for the benefit of all of our Saskatchewan communities, both people and 
business alike. It amazes me, Mr. Speaker, to hear the Conservatives opposite say they will not support a 
budget that makes up for the failings of the federal government, and meets the challenges being faced by our 
people and our Saskatchewan-based large and small businesses in this province. 
 
It is a pleasure to take this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, in congratulating the citizens of Moose Jaw and those 
other centres that are celebrating their 100th birthday this year. Moose Jaw has had a celebrate Moose Jaw 
100th birthday committee, under the chairmanship of L. H. 'Scoop' Lewry for some time now. Many 
functions have been held and many more will be held in the coming months. I personally, on behalf of that 
committee, invite each and every one of you here today to attend some of those functions and to be our 
guests in Moose Jaw throughout this 100th birthday celebration. 
 
It is also a pleasure to take part in this budget debate, particularly since it probably will be my last 
opportunity to rise on behalf of the constituency of Moose Jaw North in this legislature. It has been an honor 
to represent Moose Jaw North, an honor to represent the city of Moose Jaw over the last seven years. Moose 
Jaw is a city that has had a difficult time in previous years. We have seen many things happen in that 
particular city. We have seen a major packing house plant close, three oil refineries close, a flour mill close 
and a cutback in CP rail personnel, to name but a few. But still, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw has remained 
strong and vibrant. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
794 

MR. SKOBERG: — She has, and her people have fought back against these odds. Moose Jaw has been able 
to retain a respectable position in our province and in our nation. I have been fortunate in serving this 
legislature under the leadership of the Premier, Allan Blakeney. Premier Blakeney has the respect of this 
House, this province, and this nation. Even those opposite know that the Premier of this province has the 
respect of all segments of our population, the respect and honesty so necessary to be a leader of such a 
diversified province as ours in a nation that some people are attempting to destroy. 
 
I have also been fortunate in having had the opportunity of serving this House, and my colleague, the Hon. 
Gordon Snyder, MLA for Moose Jaw South. His advice and support have made my years most rewarding. 
 
And now Mr. Speaker, for the future. I believe the people of Moose Jaw will want to see two NDP MLAs 
from their city following the next election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SKOBERG: — There is no question in my mind that two government members can and will represent 
the desires and wishes of the Moose Jaw businesses and people in a way that will benefit them and their 
community. I know Moose Jaw will benefit by re-electing the Hon. Gordon Snyder in Moose Jaw South, and 
electing my successor, Glenn Hagel, in Moose Jaw North. 
 
I need not repeat, Mr. Speaker, the many, many programs that have been strengthened in the budget that we 
have before us today - a balanced budget. It is a balanced budget that has been lauded by the construction 
association. What other province has increased its housing budget by 130 per cent in attempting to improve 
the supply of housing in all communities? How could the Conservatives opposite possibly oppose the 
provision of adequate housing and job creation programs such as constructing at least 1,000 houses and 500 
apartment units for our citizens in this province? Are the Conservatives saying they do not support the 
construction association in its desire to reactivate the industry? Are the Conservatives not interested in 
having housing for our Saskatchewan people? 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most important programs is the home-owners' mortgage entitlement protection 
program which will provide up to $2,400 for those home-owners who are renewing or have recently renewed 
their mortgages at above 15 per cent. Already the Tories opposite and their absent leader are criticizing this 
program. Already they are saying loud and clear that those young and not so young people should never have 
gotten themselves into the present high interest rate situation and should have done without a roof of their 
own over the heads of their families. 
 
But really, Mr. Speaker, who is to blame for this usurious interest rate? Why did the Conservatives or the 
Liberals fight to eliminate the 6 per cent ceiling rate which prior to 1967 was protected by federal 
legislation? Only, Mr. Speaker, the NDP voted against the Bank Act, as it knew that once the 6 per cent 
ceiling was removed exorbitant interest rates would be charged by the lending institutions with massive 
profits being chalked up. All of this has been proven to be true, but it would not have happened if the 
Liberals and the Conservatives had not joined ranks in Ottawa to change the rules concerning mortgage 
interest rates. 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
795 

At one time, Mr. Speaker, a home-owner could count on an interest rate of 6 per cent or less, but the 
Conservatives and the Liberals changed all that after it having been in effect 100 years. For the benefit of 
those opposite, the then federal housing minister, the Hon. Paul Hellyer, in 1967 helped engineer the 
removal of the 6 per cent ceiling. I believe those opposite know who Paul Hellyer was. Since 1967, the 
situation has grown progressively worse with neither the Conservatives nor the Liberals really caring what 
happens to those people who today are caught in their interest rate web. 
 
In the early days, people's savings were loaned out by the goldsmiths and it was generally termed usury. 
Today, the people's savings are loaned out by the banks, but instead of calling it usury the banks call it 
interest. 
 
The Conservatives and the Liberals have been rewarded, Mr. Speaker, for the sudden change in direction as 
far as interest rate ceilings are concerned. Between 1978 and 1980 the Conservatives and the Liberals have 
received over $1.2 million in campaign contributions, some of which has floated down from the federal level 
to the provincial level of the Conservative Party. 
 
The banks themselves have been rewarded. Since 1977, the five major banks in Canada have reaped a profit 
of $967.7 million, an increase of 143.8 per cent most of it on the backs of those people trying to get a 
mortgage for their homes. I ask you today, my friends opposite, who is using whom to feather their own 
nests and fill their own pocketbooks? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention a few of the benefits Moose Jaw itself has derived from this balanced 
budget. I say Moose Jaw but many similar benefits will apply to other communities in our province. While I 
realize the actual percentage increase in the revenue-sharing pool for the city of Moose Jaw is not as much as 
we would like to see, it is based on a formula which applies to all communities in Saskatchewan. A very 
significant benefit to the economy of Moose Jaw, apart from the urgent need for increased technical and 
vocational facilities, is the announced over $5 million additional expansion at the Saskatchewan Technical 
Institute. This additional phase is over and above last year's expansion which is now under way. Some $12 
million has been allocated to the Saskatchewan Technical Institute expansion, which will not only enhance 
classroom space and provide more training facilities but also will provide added impetus to the construction 
industry. The latest $5 million announced expansion will provide 250 new training spaces and continued 
assurance of the excellent standard of education that has been evident at the Saskatchewan Technical 
Institute in Moose Jaw with the administration and the teachers that they do have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another major item in Moose Jaw and district is the construction of two new dams on the 
Moose Jaw River. These dams will be at approximately the same locations as the present five-mile dam and 
Kingsway Dam, where they were previously located. The estimated costs will be in the vicinity of $1 
million. Again, this will not only provide much needed water control and storage, but also jobs during the 
construction stages. These dams will greatly benefit the users of water, such as Valley View Centre and the 
wild animal park, and will provide water for the developmental plans of the Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
Again, we look at the municipal transit assistance program, Mr. Speaker. In 1981-82, the municipal transit 
grant was $3 per capita. In 1982-83, the grant has been increased to $5 per capita. The formula for the 
incentive grant, which takes into account passengers carried and annual transit deficit, remains unchanged. 
This means  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
796 

that there will be an increase of almost $1.3 million to nearly $5.6 million in 1982-83 in Moose Jaw alone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has played a major role in providing public housing in 
Moose Jaw and elsewhere. In addition to the most recent senior citizens' development known as High Park, 
which is almost completed - a 152-unit building which will be known as Victoria Towers - the housing 
corporation has joined with the city in a land assembly project which will provide much needed land for 
future development at a controlled price. Tentative new projects will include a 16-unit apartment building for 
the disabled, a 20-unit family apartment building, 11 family units, 55 single detached units and a 24-unit 
apartment building in that city. The 1982-83 spending for the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is 
estimated to be $6,131,780. This again, Mr. Speaker, particularly for the Conservatives opposite, means 
more construction investment and more job opportunities for our Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe one of the more important programs to be announced in this budget is the shelter 
allowance program for senior citizens in Saskatchewan at a cost of $6 million. Average shelter costs for 
home-owners and renters indicate that many senior citizens, particularly single seniors, are experiencing 
shelter problems. Shelter costs will be reduced to 25 per cent of income up to approved shelter-cost ceilings. 
I might say that of the programs previously mentioned, there are a number of other programs and benefits 
which will ensure that future generations to come along or today's citizens will continue to enjoy the 
traditional people first philosophy of the Blakeney government and the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province have and do still have a vision. The vision is shared by government. 
The vision is not centred on acquiring great wealth or on material success alone. It is something much more. 
Our grandparents had a vision when they first came to Saskatchewan and when they first came to Canada. 
They settled to build a society based on co-operation in which young and old alike can grow together, share 
together and succeed together. They aimed for material success, yes, but with a purpose - a shared purpose, 
Mr. Speaker. This vision can be summed up by saying that people do come first - not interest rates, not 
foreign exchange, not profits alone, but people. People do come first and that's what this budget is all about. 
Mr. Speaker, I will with great respect and honor be supporting the budget which has been put before us at 
this time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, may I congratulate all members who have 
participated in this important budget debate? I want particularly to congratulate the Minister of Finance who 
gave us such a fine address last Thursday, in terms of his fine budget. I want to mention the members who 
have preceded me today: Auburn Pepper, the member for Weyburn, who spoke so eloquently earlier today. 
He represents so well the kind of people who have served in this legislature over the years. John Skoberg, the 
member for Moose Jaw North, just spoke and spoke so eloquently on the subject of this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has entered the '80s with promise and confidence. Saskatchewan had the fastest 
growing economy in Canada during 1981, the ninth consecutive year of positive growth. These facts make a 
sham of the oft repeated predictions by the members opposite of doom and gloom. Saskatchewan's buoyant 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
797 

economy, maintained despite the disastrous economic policies of the government at Ottawa, is more than 
needed proof that the Saskatchewan government, under the leadership of Allan Blakeney, governs for the 
benefit of this province's people and on behalf of the people of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — This is not just my view. It is a view which is widely held, and held even by 
those who are known to be less than sympathetic politically to this government. The Toronto Globe and 
Mail, on February 27 had in a feature article this quote from a leading government finance official with the 
financial house of McLeod, Young, Weir: 
 

Saskatchewan is in excellent health, even better than Alberta in terms of future financial 
footing. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

The resource sectors look very strong, they have an extremely capable administration and 
they tend to be a lot more prudent than other provinces in the way they spend their money. 
 

The Government of Saskatchewan has continued and will continue to encourage and support policies which 
keep vital communities an important part of our way of life. This budget is a confirmation of that. I 
congratulate the Minister of Finance on that. 
 
There are strong forces at work today, Mr. Speaker, that are determined to end the life of many of rural 
communities. The Leader of the Conservative Party opposite makes statements in support of the huge 
corporate farms as the wave of the future. He praises and pushes for the development of inland grain 
terminals to close down our communities as grain delivery centres, and he publishes papers in support of the 
elimination of the crowrate. All of these, Mr. Speaker, are directly aimed at ending the life of our rural and 
smaller communities. The people of this province have labored long to build these communities. The 
provincial members opposite as well as other politicians in Ottawa in supporting the Liberal and 
Conservative parties would as a result of their efforts wipe those communities off the map. 
 
We continue, in this government, through new rural initiatives to try to assure that our rural way of life 
remains as important today as it has been in the past. 
 
Our crown corporations in our government are part of the province and believe in the people of this 
province. They are the servants of the people - the hired help, as Premier Blakeney has called us. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has always based its programs in and for people. Our strength lies with 
the ability of our citizens to participate fully in Saskatchewan's many opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Minister of Finance, spoke earlier of a vision this government shares with the 
people it serves. Nowhere today is this vision more clearly focussed than on the towns and villages and 
hamlets and farms of rural Saskatchewan. A healthy and vibrant rural way of life is both our heritage and our 
future. Much more  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
798 

than our agricultural economy is at stake if the very roots of our existence here are neglected. The 
Government of Saskatchewan will vigorously fight the attacks on our rural communities mounted by those 
who have them under attack. We value our communities and our rural life and we will continue to defend the 
very existence of those communities. 
 
Last Thursday the Minister of Finance announced that the provincial government will introduce a new rural 
energy program beginning in April of this year. Today I want to give you more details about this program. 
 
Energy, in terms of costs and supplies, is of critical importance to householders, farms, business, and 
industry in our province. The past decade has been one of tremendous uncertainty and change. Energy 
policies, supply and demand estimates and prices have all gone through much change and redetermination. 
 
As a government, we have undertaken, in the midst of all of this uncertainty and change, to help ensure the 
availability of low cost and reliable energy. We have not, and we do not assume that this is our responsibility 
alone. Much of our energy supply originates outside of Saskatchewan, and even those supplies located 
within provincial boundaries are influenced heavily by federal government policies and national and world 
events. We do not, and cannot, operate in isolation. 
 
Provincial crown corporations and government departments with energy responsibilities have, however, been 
vigilant during this period of change and uncertainty to ensure that our programs and policies are sensitive to 
changing conditions and changing circumstances. We have recognized that general energy scarcity and 
ever-increasing prices make energy conservation absolutely essential. We have recognized that policies and 
programs must take into account our best estimates of available supplies of different forms of energy. In 
keeping with this, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has undertaken to respond with policies and 
programs appropriate to known conditions of the time. We have given and continue to give conservation, 
electricity and natural gas each the appropriate emphasis and role in provincial energy programs. 
 
By way of background, Mr. Speaker, throughout the 1950s and 1960s natural gas was extended to an 
ever-increasing number of communities and customers in this province. During this period, natural gas was 
expected to remain cheap and in abundant supply. This situation changed dramatically in the early and 
mid-1970s. Both the federal and Alberta governments concluded that natural gas supplies would not 
continue to be in abundant supply in the future, with some of the most reliable estimates indicating that 
supplies would run out within a decade. Prices were also projected to increase markedly both in absolute 
terms and in comparison to other forms of energy. 
 
The Saskatchewan Power Corporation and other gas utilities reacted, understandably and appropriately, by 
sharply curtailing extensions and expansions of costly transmission and distribution systems. However, these 
estimates began to change markedly again in the latter part of the 1970s. Exploration work largely associated 
with the search for new oil supplies uncovered extensive new conventional and frontier gas supplies in 
Canada. Further, early information associated with the national energy program indicated a likelihood of 
natural gas prices increasing less markedly and rapidly than other forms of energy. 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
799 

As a consequence, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation undertook a series of financial and engineering 
feasibility studies to determine the costs of extending the natural gas system to customers not now served. 
These studies provided the basic cost data against which any particular extensions could be evaluated in 
economic terms. As facts on pricing and supplies became more predictable, we undertook as a next step a 
rural heating study conducted in 1981 and early 1982. The purpose of this study was to determine the 
appropriateness and advisability of meeting rural space heating needs in the 1980s and 1990s through 
various energy alternatives including conservation. 
 
This study concluded with a number of major findings, the most significant of which are the following: 
 
First, in general, conversions from oil to electricity for space heating are not generally advisable either from 
the point of view of the power corporation or individual customers. 
 
Second, oil will become a less and less attractive heating alternative both from the point of view of cost and 
convenience in the future. 
 
Third, many consumers can obtain more significant cost reductions through conservation than through 
conversions to other forms of energy. 
 
And fourth, with much-expanded proven reserves of gas and with approved price prospects in relative terms, 
certain further extensions in the gas distribution system are now advisable. 
 
I wish now to provide you with some details on the programs that will be introduced as a result of these 
findings. 
 
The new natural gas extension program will commence immediately, with a goal of extending natural gas to 
150 communities and several thousand farms not now served by the end of 1985. This will, Mr. Speaker, be 
the largest and most ambitious program of extension of the natural gas system ever undertaken by the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. The power corporation will invest up to $175 million in this program by 
the end of 1985, and I'm pleased to say that a direct grant from the heritage fund will in 1982 alone 
underwrite $10 million of this cost. 
 
I do want to make it clear that this program will not reach nearly all of the communities and farms not now 
served. To do so would cost close to $1 billion in today's dollars. Such a venture would be wildly 
uneconomic. The return to the individual customers and to the SPC could never justify such a level of 
expenditure. We have chosen the responsible route of investing in extensions that can be justified in 
economic terms, taking all factors into account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the year 1982, this year approximately 50 towns, villages and hamlets will be 
brought into the system. The following communities are scheduled to receive gas service in 1982. In the 
northwest area of the province, which will receive a great deal of attention, the towns of Adanac and Edam, 
Marshall, Meota, Primate, Ruthilda, Frenchman Butte, Goodsoil, Lashburn, Maidstone, Marsden, Mervin, 
Neilburg, Paradise Hill, Paynton, Peerless, St.Walburg, Spruce Lake, Turtleford, Vawn, and Waseca will be 
included in the program. 



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
800 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — In the east and central areas of the province, the communities of Atwater, 
Bangor, Bounty, Bradwell, Esk, Markinch, Meacham, Otton, Sanctuary, St. Isadore de Bellevue, Sheho, 
Tuffnell, Valparaiso and Zelma will be included in the program. In the southern area of the province, 
Bracken, Kendal, Kroneau, Limerick, Melaval, Meyronne, Orkeney, Rhineland, Springfield, Val Marie and 
Woodrow will be included in the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just the communities for the year 1982. These communities will be completed by the 
end of 1982, and there will be many more communities to come. As well for 1982, SPC is still evaluating the 
feasibility of including Roche Percee and North Portal and acreages in the Pike Lake and Holbein areas as 
part of the program. 
 
SPC will, with the help of local organizations or service clubs, conduct a sign-up campaign in each of these 
communities in an effort to attempt to get 65 per cent of the customers to accept service as part of the basis 
for providing service. Each customer applying during this period will pay a $200 deposit which will be 
refunded if the gas is used within two years. 
 
The hon. members opposite, Mr. Speaker, wish to have me speak about the farm program. Let me now turn 
to the farm program. This program will provide for the construction of plastic pipeline systems to farms 
which are generally located near existing or future pipelines. While SPC will not be assuming the total cost 
of construction, its share will be substantially increased compared to existing policies. As a result, a farmer's 
share will be reduced substantially and natural gas will become an attractive alternative - a new option to 
many farmers. 
 
In keeping with the history of this province, the program will encourage farmers to organize on their own 
into co-operative area groupings. By getting together, many elements of pipeline systems can be shared in 
order to reduce construction costs, and in turn, farmers' costs. To further reduce construction costs farmers 
will have the option to do some of the work themselves under a self-help program. Under our new policy, the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation will assume the first $1,000 of construction costs and share the balance of 
the costs on a 50-50 basis with the farmers. SPC's total share under this program will be up to a maximum of 
$8,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this farm program will bring natural gas to thousands and thousands of farmers across 
Saskatchewan who want gas and are not now served by gas. SPC will serve as many farmers as possible this 
year. There are construction and weather and planning limitations, but we will nevertheless do the very best 
we can to serve as many farmers as possible who wish to take service. 
 
In general, priority will be given to those projects along the pipeline systems being installed this year to serve 
the new communities, and I should explain that this being done because it is easier to make the necessary 
taps and connections while these lines are not in operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should point out that this natural gas extension program will have benefits additional to the 
obvious ones and extended access to natural gas. Products used and new heating installations will provide 
new business opportunities for Saskatchewan businesses. Four to five hundred person-years of new work 
will be  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
801 

created by the pipeline installations alone, and another 500 will be created within service industries in a 
given year, making this one of the largest single job creation projects in this province. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, expanded supply options cannot constitute the whole of a comprehensive rural 
energy policy. Conservation is also a must. In this regard the Government of Saskatchewan will implement 
two significant developments. 
 
First, we will make available to energy users in Saskatchewan a new system of energy use evaluations. 
Energy advisers, approximately 30 in number, will be based in major SPC offices all across this province. 
The cost of this program, shared by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation and the Department of Mineral 
Resources, will be approximately $750,000 in the first year. Through this program, energy users will be able 
to get comprehensive energy use and energy conservation reviews and advice before undertaking conversion 
or conservation measures. 
 
Second, we will make available a new $3,000 interest-free residential loan, and a new $10,000 interest-free 
loan to small rural businesses, community halls, recreational facilities, schools, hospitals, and the like, under 
the Warm Up Saskatchewan program. These loans will be available to customers in communities and areas 
not served by natural gas who undertake measures to reduce energy use for heating, as recommended in the 
energy reviews mentioned earlier. Total cost of this extension to the Warm Up Saskatchewan program will 
be $75 million over five years. I am confident, Mr. Speaker, that this complex of rural energy programs will 
establish Saskatchewan as a world leader in rural energy programs. I fully expect to see other utilities and 
other governments in this country following in our footsteps as the success of our approach becomes evident. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Many of you, Mr. Speaker, will remember the massive rural electrification 
program of the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s. One of the success stories of that era was the self-help crews of 
farmers that banded together to help build power lines to serve their farmsteads. Mr. Speaker, it is our 
intention, as is evident from this program, to build our program now with respect to natural gas extension on 
the strengths of those things that we know we have done well and can do well. One of those strengths is the 
ability of Saskatchewan people to work together for the common good. As I have indicated, we intend to 
emphasize co-operation and self-help in our gas extension program, and I'm pleased to note that the 
Department of Co-operation will be helping in assisting in this regard. The power corporation was formed, 
Mr. Speaker, to serve the needs of the citizens of this province and it has done that well. One recalls with 
pride, as I mentioned, the electrification of the province and the co-operation of all of the people of the 
province, farmers, SPC workers, businessmen and others to accomplish this massive project. It was a proud 
time for Saskatchewan when the first gas flames were lit at ceremonies in 380 communities in the '50s, '60s 
and early '70s. We intend to have another 150 such flame-lighting ceremonies in the future. We intend to 
continue to give people in Saskatchewan those opportunities - opportunities to be proud of their respective 
communities, to contribute to their development, and to ensure their future by securing a safe and efficient 
energy supply in the future. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
802 

HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Saskatchewan is proud to boast the most widespread gas network in all of 
Canada. We are a large province with a large area and we are, as a people, very, very widely dispersed and 
diversified. Therefore, it is no mean feat to put our gas system into place. It has been no mean feat to have it 
reach where it has reached now and we will continue to go on from that. Skeptics said it couldn't be done 
when we started but we went ahead and did it, and we are prepared to do more. 
 
Let me add one more point, Mr. Speaker. As you can see, we have made every effort to keep the cost of 
service to new customers low. But we also recognize that there will be costs involved for conversions when 
customers must replace and convert their existing heating equipment. I am please to indicate, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Hon. Walter Smishek, minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, has informed 
me that there will be financial assistance available to potential customers in order to make these conversions. 
Home-owners replacing or converting their heating equipment are eligible for loans and, in some cases, 
grants through the various home improvement and rehabilitation and other programs offered by the housing 
corporation, as well as through our other government departments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that indicates a very, very aggressive and new approach with respect to rural energy - one that 
we can be definitely proud of. Mr. Speaker, this budget contains so much and that is just one indication of 
one part of this budget: so much for people, help and assistance and protection for people, support for people 
in their search for independence in their work life, in their community life and in their home life. 
 
Our way of life, Mr. Speaker, is also enhanced through our educational system. I would like, as minister 
responsible for the Departments of Education and Continuing Education, to go on from discussing the rural 
heating programs to talk about our education system. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Our great-grandparents, rural people mostly, built schools and began 
educating their children long before there was a provincial government because they saw education as an 
investment in the future. The pioneer's dreams for the future of this province have become a reality. The 
graduates of those small, rural schools have helped and made Saskatchewan develop and prosper into the 
kind of province we have today. Our schools formed a basis for what has today become one of the best (in 
fact, I am confident the very best) educational system in all of Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — The future of our province and our rural communities is, as I have already 
said, as important today as it was to our pioneers. We have a strong, decentralized school system which gives 
local citizens decision-making powers for their own schools. The Government of Saskatchewan supports this 
decentralized system with increased grants and in the rural school divisions with grants which recognize the 
unique character of rural schools. 
 
In this budget, Mr. Speaker, foundation grants to schools will increase by 15 per cent per student overall to a 
total of nearly $300 million. Capital grants alone will increase by 25 per cent. Mr. Speaker, I want you to 
take particular note of the application of this budget with respect to rural schools. Operating grants to rural 
school divisions will total almost $170 million for 1982-83. 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
803 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, that is an average increase of 17.3 per cent over 1981-82. This is 
an average per pupil grant of $1,762. Mr. Speaker, that is a proud accomplishment with respect to rural 
schools in support for our rural educational system. Mr. Speaker, to ensure that our rural schools can offer 
the same opportunities and programs as are offered within our urban schools, many rural school systems will 
receive even greater increases in recognition of their particular and special needs. Declining enrolments have 
been a major factor in the overall financial planning for rural school divisions in this province. In recognition 
of this, we are providing $7.7 million in funds for school divisions with declining enrolments, an increase of 
24 per cent in overall grant amounts compared to last year, to compensate for higher costs per pupil and to 
maintain program quality. Extra support for small schools with fewer than 20 students per grade will triple in 
1983-83 to $5.5 million. Last year, this factor applied only to pupils in grades 10 to 12. In 1982, I am pleased 
to announce that this additional funding will be extended so as to cover not only classrooms within the 
grades 10 to 12 category, but also the classrooms within the grades 7 to 9 category. 
 
Small rural high schools with fewer than 15 students per grade in division 4 will qualify for even higher 
additional grant support this year under this program. Rural school divisions with sparse populations will 
also be provided with special grants totalling $5.9 million. Sparse population is also recognized within the 
transportation grant which will increase by an average of 14 per cent and will cover the full cost of 
transportation within our rural school system. 
 
Capital grants are being increased by more than 25 per cent in 1982. For many rural communities these 
grants will mean the replacement of older cottage-type schools and so on and the addition of modern 
gymnasia, industrial arts facilities, dental clinics and the like. This is an investment, Mr. Speaker. We're 
making sure that children in today's small rural schools have the access to quality education that they deserve 
and that is equal to their urban counterparts. 
 
Adequate funding is only one part of the answer, however. We must address other concerns and provide for 
other service needs if our rural way of life is to flourish. 
 
In 1981 we began a dialogue with rural educators and parents and trustees with the publication of our major 
discussion paper entitled "Rural Education: Options for the 1980s." And that dialogue is continuing. We are 
talking with people in rural communities about their educational needs and their concerns. And we're acting 
on those needs and concerns. 
 
A full-time rural education co-ordinator has been appointed to provide ongoing support for rural education 
initiatives. A team of program implementers operating from regional offices of the Department of Education 
has been established to mobilize local resources, help smaller school divisions start up new programs and to 
co-ordinate in-service training for teachers in rural areas and curriculum implementation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Government Correspondence School is another important resource for our rural schools. 
Although the school has been operating for nearly 60 years, the services it provides to rural students today 
are as modern and as sophisticated as any in the country. The school experienced a 47 per cent increase in 



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
804 

enrolment during the past year and new staff and funding will be provided in 1982 so that it may serve rural 
Saskatchewan even better in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I speak with some pride about a new shared-services plan which will be implemented in 26 
rural school divisions this fall to provide local speech therapy and school psychologist services for some 
23,000 rural students. 
 
More than $225,000 in special grants this year will enable neighboring school divisions in rural areas to pool 
their resources and share the services of these speech therapists and school psychologists - an innovative 
approach, Mr. Speaker, that puts the assessment of needs and the control of services in the hands of the local 
schools and the local people and the local administration. The shared-services plan is, I am pleased to say, 
meeting with enthusiastic response from rural people because it depends upon the co-operative spirit for 
which Saskatchewan people have become so well-known. Opportunities being provided, once again, as 
indicated by this, for rural people here in Saskatchewan. Because of the response we have had to the shared 
services program with the recent signing of three sets of agreements in the last three week, I am pleased to 
announce that the shared services plan will now be expanded to include all rural school divisions which are 
interested in providing services in accordance with the principles and criteria covering the plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, educational opportunities in Saskatchewan, as important as they are at the elementary and 
secondary levels, extend beyond elementary and secondary education into the whole community through our 
excellent post-secondary education system. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, in talking about the post-secondary education system and the adult and continuing 
education system, let me confirm to this House the importance that we as a government place upon our 
universities. To better appreciate our commitment to our universities, one has only to examine in detail the 
budget tabled last week by the Minister of Finance. Let's examine the highlights of that budget as they relate 
to university funding. 
 
First, universities will get a 17 per cent increase in operating grants for 1982-83 - a total of $117.9 million. 
That's one of the highest increases in Canada. I note that this level of financial commitment to our 
universities is not being followed in other parts of Canada where there are Tory governments in place. I note 
that the provincial Tories here (the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley, for instance) speak very warmly 
of the Reaganomics approach to management of the economy and social programs. Well, we know where 
that comes from, Mr. Speaker. It comes from a common view of government that is held by the Conservative 
politicians all across this country. Let me mention Conservative Ontario, for instance, where we have seen an 
indication that after severe cutbacks within the university system during the last three and four years they 
intend to continue those cutbacks on into the future. They have confirmed that in writing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one only need to look at the Lyon government in Manitoba and its record with respect to 
university funding to once again show that Reaganomics is the policy of the Conservative Party. It is the 
policy confirmed by the hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley. It is the policy that is adopted by 
Conservative governments across this country. Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, to our approach. In Saskatchewan 
over the last two years university operating funds have increased by more than 30 per cent. Our expenditures 
for university education over the last 10 years and over recent years is a  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
805 

great record. It's a record that puts us at the forefront of the nation in terms of supporting our universities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 1982-83 increase in grants of 17 per cent is even more significant if you examine the total 
increase in provincial funds being made available for university education. I will be indicating later that the 
federal government is in the course of cutting back $33 million from its transfer payments to support health 
and post-secondary education in Saskatchewan. In addition to the $17.9 million additional funds that we 
have put into the university sector directly through the growth in grants, we have also had to replace those 
funds. Our provincial budget, therefore, Mr. Speaker, picks up this federal shortfall as well. 
 
Our support for universities is even made more remarkable when one examines our record for support for 
capital construction. This government will provide a total of $9.4 million to Saskatchewan universities this 
year in capital grants. This funding consists of $6.65 million in regular capital funding - a 66 per cent 
increase over the $4 million provided last year. It also includes more than $2.7 million from the heritage 
fund to complete projects under way and to begin work on the new geological sciences building. 
 
Since 1978, Mr. Speaker, the government's capital grants to the universities have been provided both by 
regular grants and by special grants from the heritage fund. From 1978 to 1981, the heritage fund, made up 
of revenues derived from resources and used for special projects at the university, has provided more than 
$38 million toward new construction projects at the universities. 
 
The provincial government is committed to continue the many major building projects under way at our 
universities and to meet other capital needs as well. Between 1969 and 1981, the government provided the 
universities with more than $138 million for capital construction and renovations, and this record is being 
continued with these expenditures this year. 
 
Included in the regular portion of the capital grants to universities this year, Mr. Speaker, are such things as 
$775,000 for the purchase of McLean Hall at the University of Saskatchewan, $295,000 for construction of a 
campus "steam loop" at the University of Regina, $535,000 for renovations at both universities to improve 
access to facilities for disabled people, and $1.25 million as a special one-time grant for the purchase by both 
universities of additional library materials and teaching resources. 
 
In addition to the many capital projects under way, the Saskatchewan Universities Commission is currently 
priorizing further capital requests for university building and renovation projects, which will total more than 
$250 million. University capital construction needs are always in the forefront and Saskatchewan has met 
them well. It now has two excellent campuses of which we can be tremendously proud, with ongoing 
building projects and equipment purchases continuing to provide the highest quality support possible by our 
many university programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our support for universities is also greatly enhanced by our direct support to students. To 
maintain our position as one of Canada's fastest growing economies, it is essential that our young people be 
prepared to contribute to our future. Since 1949, Saskatchewan has led the way in Canada with student 
assistance programs, now including the Saskatchewan Student Loans Plan, the Saskatchewan Student 
Bursary  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
806 

Plan and the graduate scholarship program. We will increase financial assistance for students this year by 
more than 24 per cent, Mr. Speaker, to a total of $10.5 million. 
 
The bursary program provides non-repayable funds to students in amounts matching their federal student 
loans. The Saskatchewan Student Bursary Plan will increase by 17 per cent this year to provide for the 
growing costs facing students. The Saskatchewan government has, for some time, been urging the federal 
government to increase its expenditures for student assistance through the introduction of a national 
federal-provincial student assistance program with a federal bursary component as well as the provincial 
bursary component. But I regret to say, Mr. Speaker, that negotiations with the federal government have met 
with little success. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan will introduce a new supplemental assistance program, I'm pleased to say, 
to provide extra funds to students whose needs exceed the maximum amounts available now to them under 
the existing federal loan and matching provincial bursary program. We are doing this because the federal 
government has failed to move on the co-operative joint program that has now been under discussion for two 
years. Our program will not only increase the bursary level for students who are in the greatest need, but will, 
if the federal government takes no action, also be prepared to provide an increased loan maximum to our 
students. 
 
In addition to these initiatives, Mr. Speaker, our budget provides for an increase of 42 per cent in financial 
assistance for graduate students. New scholarship levels have been set to better reflect the varying needs of 
graduate students. Masters non-thesis students will be eligible for $4,560 scholarships, masters thesis 
students will be eligible for $6,840 scholarships, and doctoral students will be eligible for $9,120 
scholarships. This is a very, very substantial change, Mr. Speaker, and one I know will please the university 
community. 
 
With the increased support for university financing and student assistance, we will not only guarantee 
increased opportunities for students but we will also continue to decrease the percentage that tuition makes 
up toward the total costs of university education. Current tuition fees constitute just over 10 per cent of the 
universities' operating costs, down from 11.4 per cent in 1976 and far below the mid-1960s level, which the 
member for Thunder Creek will recall, when tuition fees paid for approximately 27 per cent of total 
operating costs. 
 
This government takes a much different view from that of the old right-wing free enterprise parties that sit 
opposite and have sat opposite. The Saskatchewan government and Saskatchewan universities are committed 
to a policy of keeping tuition fees down to a low percentage of university operating costs. This is an 
important time when universities across Canada are being forced to use tuition fees, as a result of policies by 
many Tory governments, to pay an increasing percentage of their university operating costs - one only need 
look, for example, at the pseudo-Tory government in British Columbia where the university of British 
Columbia has been forced to announce a tuition increase of more than 30 per cent this year. That is 
something that could not happen in this province because of the approach we take with respect to the funding 
of universities and the support that we provide and give to our universities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go on and talk about other parts of our education system. One of the great success 
stories in Saskatchewan is our community college system which has helped promote the economic and social 
development of Saskatchewan. Last year our community colleges recorded enrolment of 92,705 participants. 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
807 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — These colleges bring volunteers, educators, and students together to provide 
adult programming to the community so that people in communities throughout Saskatchewan can 
participate in a variety of locally identified and locally offered programs which are designed to ensure that 
continuing education is a reality and that independent learning is a goal that can be fulfilled by people in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to further provide for this successful program we will increase basic grants to community 
colleges by 14 per cent in this budget year, to a total of more than $6.8 million. This basic grant will not only 
provide for administrative support to colleges, but, as well, provide programs to our smaller communities. 
Types of programs that will be offered include recreation, arts, crafts, basic education, skill training, 
technical and vocational training, and university courses. 
 
The unique aspect of our community college system is the philosophic basis upon which it was established. 
We have not built large buildings for our colleges. Our system makes the best use of existing facilities in our 
rural communities in order to maintain flexibility. Its programs are defined by local community committees 
volunteering their time in order to serve their rural village, town, or city residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our colleges are more than just delivery agents of educational programs. More and more they 
are becoming agents of local community development . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Perhaps we can have a 
short break from the speech for the member opposite and then I can return, Mr. Speaker. I would be very 
interested in hearing what the member for Thunder Creek has to say. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I think it's clear the member for Thunder Creek wants a permanent break; the 
Minister of Education is talking about a temporary break. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, our colleges are more than just a delivery agent of educational 
programs. More and more they are becoming agents of local community development. They bring together 
and foster both economic and social development for people around our province - developments which 
otherwise might never occur. The recent Saskatchewan Committee on Rural Area Development meetings 
held around the province are a prime example of the way our colleges act as social catalysts enriching the 
fibre of this most important part of Saskatchewan society. New initiatives to enhance the quality of life in 
rural Saskatchewan through our community colleges have been provided in the 1982-83 budget, Mr. 
Speaker, and I wish to take a moment to mention a few of these. 
 
I am pleased to announce that we will be expanding the emergency medical technician program throughout 
rural and urban Saskatchewan. We plan to deliver nine emergency medical technician programs and nine 
emergency medical technician refresher programs, available not only in Regina and Saskatoon, but to show 
our commitment to rural Saskatchewan and our commitment to decentralization, available in such places as 
Melfort, Wadena, Humboldt, Esterhazy, Shaunavon, Weyburn and Estevan, to name but a few. 
 
Our philosophy of bringing services to people in their own communities illustrates our commitment with 
respect to the unique nature of Saskatchewan society. 



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
808 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, our government also plans to provide in-service training to home care boards and 
staff, special-care staff and day care workers throughout the province under our college system. 
 
And third, we are in the process of designing more programs for our colleges, in areas such as improvement 
of lifestyle and pre-retirement planning, to name but a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these programs will cost in excess of an additional quarter of a million dollars, and reinforce 
our belief that our citizens have the right to lifelong learning, the right to enhance their quality of living. 
 
And the colleges will provide for even more development in rural areas in the future. Here I am speaking of 
the development of more accessibility to educational opportunities, more and better programs being offered, 
more technical, vocational and university credit courses offered, and as a result, more opportunity for rural 
people to learn. 
 
In co-operation with our school boards and our technical institutes, the community colleges will become 
more involved in technical training in order to provide our residents with opportunities for the jobs that will 
help them to benefit directly from Saskatchewan's tremendous economic growth in the 1980s and beyond. 
Through our community colleges, Mr. Speaker, we will be offering more than 7,000 classes this year, many 
of them providing greater employment opportunities for people. This will mean our colleges will be 
delivering such programs as production line welding in Swift Current through the Cypress Hills Community 
College, apprenticeship training for industrial mechanics at Melville through the Parkland Community 
College, motor mechanics at Melfort through the Cumberland Community College, business education at 
Kindersley through the Prairie West Community College. Our increased appropriations for the cost-shared 
programs and for the basic flat grant, Mr. Speaker, would mean the total allocation to colleges in 1982 will 
be $18 million, a 27.3 per cent increase over 1981-82. 
 
I believe our community college system illustrates a clear understanding of the way of life in Saskatchewan. 
Through our colleges we bring services to people where they live. Our residents are able, through their own 
initiative, to define their educational needs, and we have a framework to provide the services which meet 
those community needs. We have a system which provides for greater equality of opportunities, which 
enhances quality of life, and which increases opportunities to learn those skills necessary to obtain jobs in a 
rapidly expanding economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this college system has the pioneer spirit characterized by our forefathers in the development of 
this province. It provides for self-initiative and respects the viability of our rich rural lifestyles. It is a system 
that is built on participation and co-operation. Surely our way is the proven successful Saskatchewan way - 
the one pioneered by this government and so strongly opposed by the members opposite. 
 
Of course our system does not end with our community college system. Educational opportunities for our 
residents can also be achieved through technical institutes, universities and the like. I previously mentioned 
that our healthy economy has resulted in and will continue to provide greater opportunities for jobs for 
residents, and in order to create greater opportunities for our people, we must increase our training capacity. 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
809 

In recent years we have announced major new initiatives to provide improved training opportunities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
First, we have developed an Outreach program whereby skilled training programs, occupationally related, 
have been decentralized, and we have begun to make more and better use of the excellent training facilities 
available to us in our comprehensive schools. Our government will continue this approach. It has provided a 
total of over $1.2 million for Outreach this year, an increase of more than 60 per cent compared to 1981-82. 
 
Secondly, we have introduced new delivery approaches in our technical institutes in order to make our 
programs more accessible and flexible. In the last five years participation rates in our technical institutes 
have increased 12.3 per cent in full-time programs, 73.3 per cent in apprenticeship and specialized programs, 
and 32.2 per cent in extension courses offered to Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we are indeed proud of the initiatives being undertaken in our capital program for our 
institutes. Within the last three years we began the process of expanding the Saskatchewan Technical 
Institute in Moose Jaw at a cost of $6.1 million, and, as well, announced the construction of a new technical 
institute in Prince Albert at a total cost of more than $15 million. These recent developments will increase 
our on-site training spaces by more than 600, Mr. Speaker. We will be continuing our expansion at STI, I am 
pleased to say. A further, 4,400 square metres at a cost of $5.1 million will be constructed, resulting in an 
additional 250 training spaces - training in those fields experiencing the most pressing labor demands today. 
In addition, the Government of Saskatchewan will provide an additional amount of approximately $5 million 
in La Ronge to provide new training facilities for the North. 
 
Briefly, Mr. Speaker, let us look at the record in this area. We have, in the last five years, seen enrolments in 
institutes increase by 6,441 students, and we now have on the drawing board capital expenditure plans in 
excess of $31 million in order to provide new and additional training opportunities for a further 1,200 
students. I believe the record is one to be envied. 
 
Let it be known that our government puts its priorities with the people, not simply on cold economics and 
profits. We have made opportunities for education and for jobs the number one priority for the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our concern for training has not been reserved only for the privileged and the rich in our 
society. Creating opportunities for all people to grow and enrich their lives in one of the major roles that 
education plays in this province. This government has planned for and has provided opportunities for those 
who suffer from the cycle of poverty, failure, alienation and underachievement. One of the groups that has 
experienced a high degree of poverty has been our native people. 
 
The hon. member should listen very carefully to this kind of thing because if he listened carefully, I am sure 
he would find that he would want to support this budget not oppose this budget as he has been doing to date. 
The things I'm talking about - schools, universities, community colleges and programs for our native people - 
the hon. member would do well to consider supporting if he hopes to have any political future in this 
province. 
 
In that regard, we are providing funding for the non-status Indian and Metis program at  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
810 

a total of $4.8 million this year - a 21.4 per cent increase over 1981-82. We have also reorganized the 
delivery of the non-status Indian and Metis program whereby native people can be directly involved in the 
identification of training needs and determining the programs required. We have established area committees 
with native and community college representatives - a move that I believe will greatly improve the 
effectiveness of the NSIM program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a year and one-half ago I announced to this House the establishment, with provincial 
government support, of the Gabriel Dumont Institute, a centre of research and education serving the Metis 
and non-status Indian people of this province. In support of this initiative, Mr. Speaker, we are this year 
providing the Gabriel Dumont Institute with an additional $130,000 to develop community educational 
programs. This new program, along with the increase in base funding will provide the institute with a total 
grant of $881,000, more than a 57 per cent increase over last year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Our programs for native people do not end there, Mr. Speaker. They go on 
into support for the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College with funding of $350,000 and a further 
commitment of providing an additional $1 million to the college over the next five years for research and 
development and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our approach to accessibility to educational opportunities is extremely important. Our record is 
a proud one with respect to the opportunities that we have provided to our native people. Mr. Speaker, we 
are determined to make these programs work. They will provide real, not imagined, equal opportunity for the 
people involved. I take a great deal of pride in our achievements to date and take very seriously our 
responsibility and my government's responsibility to provide increased support to enhance greater 
opportunities for all people in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before closing I want to turn to a subject that goes back to the question of the universities and 
colleges in our country and in our province. Mr. Speaker, our universities and our colleges have been under 
attack in this province and in this country on the part of a variety of politicians for some time. I speak in 
particular, Mr. Speaker, about the attacks that have been mounted by federal ministers in the federal Liberal 
government in Ottawa, as well as by certain Conservative politicians outside. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order. I want to assure the Minister of Education that relief is in sight. I notice 
the Attorney General has been provoking the opposition all afternoon and he now has some work that he can 
do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Perhaps as a result of that, the House can come back to order and we could listen to the 
Minister of Education conclude his remarks. 
 
HON. MR. McARTHUR: — Mr. Speaker, I very much appreciate your help. I was having a great deal of 
difficulty following the debate that was going on. I was interested in it and I look forward to having a chance 
to hear it on some occasion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I say, I want to turn to the question that has been very much on the minds of people 
concerned and interested in the future of our universities in this country - the unilateral changes that are 
being proposed by the federal government,  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
811 

the Government of Canada, with respect to future financial support for our universities. Mr. Speaker, the 
federal government and the politicians involved clearly have in mind cutting back (and they have already 
done so) the financial support that is available to our universities. This is based very clearly on the 
philosophy of Reaganomics, the philosophy of Reaganomics that has been adopted by the members opposite, 
that has been promoted in the Parliament of Canada by the federal members of parliament representing the 
Conservative Party, and now is being supported and advanced by the Liberal Party as well. 
 
The right-wing parties in this country, Mr. Speaker, have joined together to mount and ever-growing attack 
upon the social institutions and the social programs that are offered in this country. The hon. members laugh. 
I ask them simply to look at the statements that are made by their finance critic and by any number of 
Conservative politicians representing this country and this province in Ottawa. Look at the statements that 
are made with regard to economic policies, high interest rates. Look at the statements that are made with 
respect to social programs. What did Mr. Crombie say? Mr. Crombie, who is on the progressive side of that 
member's party, so they say - what did he say when Ronald Reagan was elected? He said, "Hallelujah." This 
is showing you that politically you can sell this kind of stuff. Therefore, the Conservative Party itself will 
begin to adopt and follow these programs. Mr. Speaker, the cutbacks that the federal government is 
proposing with respect to post-secondary education and health is small potatoes compared to anything the 
Conservatives would do if you believe the statements of their federal members with respect to their approach 
to social programs. The fact of the matter is that the attack that is being mounted on our universities and 
colleges today in Canada, while it is being directly mounted by the federal Liberal government, has its roots 
in the attacks on social programs and social spending that has been undertaken by members of the 
Conservative Party as well as the Liberal Party in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say that the federal government has in mind two things. I think this is clear. They 
intend to spend less for our social programs and they also intend to have greater control over what is done. 
 
The federal government has made it clear that it plans to change the terms and conditions for funding higher 
education under the so-called EPF (established program of financing) arrangements. The results of these 
changes will be very, very serious. They will mean that overall spending from the federal government will be 
reduced and, as a result of that, without question, generally across the country so will spending that's 
available for the university and college sector. The federal government proposes to reduce direct payments to 
post-secondary education and health care in Saskatchewan over the next five years in the amount of $211 
million. In 1982-83, the amount of the reduction will be $32 million. These are the reductions that we know 
of at this stage of the debate. This is a serious abdication of federal responsibilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An allegation often made by the federal political spokesmen is that their transfer payments are, as they say, 
not being fully used for health and educational purposes. I have some difficulty judging that allegation as it 
applies to other provinces, although I'm skeptical about it. I do know that it is nonsense as it applies to 
Saskatchewan. I note with interest the Prime Minister's mathematics in describing post-secondary education 
funding here in Saskatchewan. He said that five years ago Ottawa paid 46 per cent of higher education costs 
and the provincial government paid 41 per cent. He said that today Ottawa pays 62 per cent and 
Saskatchewan 23 per cent. 



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
812 

Let us look at the real facts. A review of the 1983 budget shows that the provincial government will spend 
approximately $700 million for health care and $200 million for higher education - a total of $900 million. 
The EPF agreements provide for financial transfers to the provinces to assist the provinces in underwriting 
the costs of those programs. There is no distinction within the EPF payments between health and 
post-secondary education. They are block grants made in support of those two programs. The federal 
government, if one looks at the estimates (those figures are taken from the federal figures provided to us), 
will this year through EPF make payments to the Government of Saskatchewan of an estimated $298 
million. Mr. Speaker, my mathematics would indicate to me that the federal government, through its EPF 
payments, will therefore be providing about 33 per cent of the combined spending for health and 
post-secondary education here in Saskatchewan in the coming year. That is a drop from earlier years. 
 
Some will note from speeches that I've made earlier that in past years that figure was somewhat higher. The 
federal contribution is dropping substantially and will drop substantially because of their cutbacks and 
because of our rapidly increasing spending in the health and post-secondary education areas. The fact of the 
matter is that if they go through with their plans their contributions will drop well below 30 per cent. 
 
The Prime Minister's claim that somehow his contribution is so much higher for education can only mean 
that his contribution is so much lower for health because this is only one bundle of money. Therefore, his 
figures clearly are ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second objective of the federal plan is to target funding to specific programs. The federal 
government seems preoccupied with questioning the relevance of university teaching and research and its 
relationship to labor market needs and manpower needs today. Therefore, they want to get greater control 
over the use of those funds and the direction over the programs that are offered. 
 
An inevitable result of federal control is that the internal university budgeting, and with it decision making 
about research and scholarship and teaching, will be subjected to direct federal influence. Our universities 
would be transformed into occupational training centres in the narrowest sense of the word. Freedom and 
independence would be sacrificed to the whims of federal bureaucrats and federal politicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, they wish to spend less and control more - something that I think is unacceptable with 
respect to the post-secondary education system. Furthermore, they continue to confirm that they still have 
plans (not certain plans but contingency plans) which may come about to introduce voucher systems. 
 
Very simply, under this system, federal money would not go directly to universities and colleges. A student 
would obtain a voucher from the federal government which could be used to shop around for an education. 
Universities would be placed in the position of competing for students' voucher dollars. A variation of this 
theme, of course, would see the vouchers used for certain programs which are related to the federal 
government's ideas of manpower needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us in this House should recognize the disadvantages of this program for what they would 
be - another blow to the academic independence of our universities and colleges. What will happen to 
programs which attract small numbers of students? I think we can guess the federal government's answer to 
that one in the so- 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
813 

called free market approach to education - those programs must go. And what will happen to the small 
universities and the federal and affiliated colleges, and so on? Well, they won't be able to compete in this 
free market economy in the universities and colleges system, and they too will die. The federal government 
says, "Too bad." 
 
The strong - not necessarily the best - would get stronger and the weak would wither and die. It is also likely 
that student program choices would be limited by these distortions. Institutions would no doubt promote 
higher profile programs to attract student buyers, and would eliminate or not make well-known the 
opportunities of other excellent programs which might not have the same attraction. Vouchers could also be 
used in quota amounts, thereby making them a mechanism for directing and influencing according to federal 
objectives what the universities teach and do not teach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government clearly wishes to spend less and control more, in keeping with its 
notions of Reaganomics and competitive federalism and direct federal control over the affairs of this 
country. We know the federal plan of action, Mr. Speaker. I want to assure you that this government, and I as 
minister, will not stand by and let our excellent public education system be destroyed by these federal 
government actions. 
 
Let us have no doubt that if the federal government begins to deal directly with the institutions, employers 
and individual students, then not only will our public education system be undermined, but basic educational 
principles, which play such an important part in our system, will be lost. Self-governance and decision 
making would be effectively removed in the sense that we have known it, not just from provincial 
jurisdiction, but also from the universities and the colleges themselves. 
 
Provincial responsibility for education is clear cut. It is spelled out in the constitution and I do not take that 
responsibility lightly. We will continue to face the federal government and advance the causes of our 
universities and colleges, and our university students and faculties, in order to try to ensure that the costly 
kinds of moves, the dangerous kinds of moves, which they are threatening do not come about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying that I believe Saskatchewan people can be very proud of their work 
over the years in building our educational systems in this country. The roots of our systems have been based 
on the co-operative spirit of working together, a desire to provide for a greater equality of opportunity, and a 
drive for excellence. Our economic future will be assured if we protect that system, and if we build and 
extend that system, and therefore provide for well-trained, well-educated people for the future. 
 
We have developed, here in Saskatchewan, a Saskatchewan option - a public educational system which suits 
the Saskatchewan way of life. Thanks to our economic and social development policies, the forward looking 
policies of our party, which have given Saskatchewan people control over their own destiny, we have now in 
Saskatchewan an educational system which is second to none. We on this side of the House would keep it 
that way, and further improve it. The policies and programs, and the very, very substantial increased 
spending which has been announced in association with this budget is part of keeping that promise - keeping 
the promise to our people, for our people, and of our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the future we will keep that promise to the people of Saskatchewan as well. I look forward to 
the future, and I am optimistic about the great strides we will  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
814 

make to further ensure our quality of life and improvements in our quality and our way of life. Out initiatives 
in education and in our rural energy programs, together with the other budget initiatives introduced by my 
colleague, the Minister of Finance, and further laid out by other colleagues in the cabinet, reflects our 
commitment to Saskatchewan, to its people and to its future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I proudly and strongly support this budget and I reject emphatically the rejection of the budget 
by the hon. members opposite. Thank you very much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to take part in this last budget debate of this legislature. 
I sat with amusement, as did many members on this side of the House and perhaps on that side of the House, 
as the Minister of Finance delivered his little dissertation last Thursday. Mr. Speaker, I couldn't help but be 
reminded of some of the comments that have come from other political parties as they concerned the 
opposition in the Saskatchewan legislature. I couldn't help but be reminded of a comment by the Attorney 
General, who said that the members on this side of the House were the worst opposition that he had seen in 
30 years. I can recall a comment by . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I was going to say somebody but I 
suppose Mr. Nobody. He goes by the name of Ralph Goodale, who was elected leader of an obscure party 
many months ago. And Mr. Goodale said at the outset that one of the reasons why the Liberal Party must 
come back is because of that inept, incompetent opposition in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'd briefly just like to run over a few items that that incompetent, outmoded poor opposition has 
been proposing since 1978. I'll start with the smaller ones. First, we had the gall to propose something 
known as tax-free gas in tandem trucks for farmers. Now, Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that everybody 
knows that farmers are having to drive their trucks a little father than what they used to and, consequently, 
the economics dictate that a little bigger load is going to have to be taken. Consequently, two or three times a 
session colleagues on this side of the House have asked the Minister of Agriculture, "What about the use of 
tax-free purple gas in tandem trucks?" 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you ever wanted to have the Minister of Agriculture absolutely start to turn red from the neck 
up, it was to start talking about multi-axle vehicles to be used by farms. So, as you would ask that question 
several times in a session, the minister would get up; you could see the blood literally flowing up; you could 
see the adrenaline flowing and he would answer in the highly predictable fashion. He would say, "The use of 
tax-free purple gas in tandem trucks . . . This government doesn't support inland terminals; this government 
doesn't support the destruction of municipal roads; this government is not going to support the destruction of 
our rural elevator system." And he would rant and go on and on. Now, that was an answer. That was an 
answer to the use of tax-free gas in tandem trucks. This has gone on at least three or four times a session and 
the process was repeated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I couldn't help but notice as the Minister of Finance was reaching that particular page on the 
budget, the Minister of Agriculture was having a little bit of difficulty keeping his head above his desk. He 
was slumping down and down and down. But, heavens, I commend you for seeing the political realities. I 
don't suggest for one moment that your attitude has changed. But none the less, as has been fully pointed out 
in another medium, when it comes time to putting food on the table, nobody can turn 



 
March 23, 1982 

 
815 

his philosophy around quicker than a socialist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing we have proposed in this Assembly many times is mortgage assistance - not only 
to home-owners, but interest rate subsidies, help to small businessmen, help to farmers. We have always 
received in return the answer, "We are not going to put more money in the coffers of the Royal Bank or the 
Toronto Dominion or the Bank of Commerce. Heavens, no. We can't do anything. It is all Ottawa's fault." 
Generally - in fact, I won't say generally - always the answer is, "We can't do anything about interest rates. 
The opposition on that side of the House knows it can't do anything; it couldn't do anything better. When the 
opposition proposes help to the average person - the average farmer, the average businessman and the 
home-owner - the opposition is proposing to put more money into the profits of the banking institutions." I 
may have done a little paraphrasing there, but if that sounds like the Attorney General, that's who it was. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It wasn't merely coincidence. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, is it just a bit of coincidence that when this government is fighting for 
its very survival and doing its sophisticated polling, all of a sudden it sees the light? Well, they didn't see 
much of the light, because it's a big $20 million for the average guy. They really are big time spenders. You 
are spending money through your crown corporation medium and your government medium to tell us how 
well-off we are in this province, how much money will be coming in - the $5 billion oil agreement. But at 
this time, in these economic times that are probably the worst since the '30s, you have all of $20 million out 
of a budget of $2.7 billion. This at a time when the average guy needs it worse than he has ever needed it at 
any time since World War II. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there's another one which the incompetent, decrepit, worst opposition in 30 years has 
been talking about - a public utilities review commission. When that one was proposed in response to the 
outrageous price hikes of SPC, SaskTel and SGI, the government on the other side said, "That's crazy. We 
don't need anything like that. You already have that - you have a crown corporation committee." I won't go 
into that one; everybody in this Assembly knows how ridiculous that one is. Of course, Alberta does need it, 
because all of the utilities are privately owned over there. But over here, we're the good guys; we're on the 
side of God and motherhood, we don't need any scrutiny. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when that public utility review committee, or its equivalent as such, was announced in the 
legislature the other day, I don't know how you people could keep a straight face. If there is anything that this 
province needs right now, it is exactly that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these crown corporations have continued on an unbridled, unaccountable basis for too long. I, 
for one, hope I get the opportunity to go before that Culliton commission and ask for an investigation of 
what went on down in Coronach. I want somebody from SPC to tell me who made that blooper to build a 
power plant down in an area where the coal doesn't produce enough heat to generate electricity. Everybody 
knows that you have hauled in more fuel oil than you have coal this year to Coronach. Coronach has been 
one of the biggest bloopers in power history. What do you have in down there - $500 million or $600 
million? And you are not even getting 5 per cent of your total power requirements out of Coronach. Who is 
accountable? Who made that decision? Who made the blooper? Who was it? How would we know? We are 
only members of the Assembly. 



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
816 

You know, you can pose a question in the crown corporations committee. Do you know the answer you will 
get from the minister? He will say that it's not in the public interest. Mr. Speaker, that is one of the most 
galling things in this province today. These crown corporations are accountable to no one, certainly not this 
Assembly. Hopefully, the minister is accountable in some fashion. I even doubt that in many respects. 
Something that is needed dramatically is to investigate all the crown corporation monopolies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing that this worst opposition in 30 years has been calling for is a power freeze. 
"Irresponsible," said the minister in charge of SPC. "Costs are rising dramatically. We have to put them up." 
He didn't justify the costs. He just announced that they were there. Mr. Speaker, I don't have to remind you 
of what this government did with its principles in that area in the last budget. They conveniently borrowed it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this worst opposition in 30 years was proposing another little item for rural Saskatchewan. We 
were proposing that the benefits of our natural resources be extended outside the city limits and that they go 
out into the country. We proposed extensive expansion of our rural gas distribution system out into the 
towns and villages and, where possible, onto the farms. But the minister in charge of SPC said. "That is the 
most outrageous, irresponsible expenditure I have ever heard of. It would cost $1.5 billion to do that." We 
were flogged incessantly for daring to suggest that the people in rural Saskatchewan should be treated in a 
similar fashion to those in urban areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the time we proposed that program, we suggested the cost would be $200 million. 
"Ridiculous," said the minister in charge of SPC. "It is $1.5 billion." Well, Mr. Speaker, it came down in the 
budget last week and the cost allotted to it was not that $1.5 billion. It was $175 million. We said it would be 
$200 million. The person who had access to the SPC estimates said $175 million. I would say that is not bad. 
We won't argue about it. None the less, the proposal that came from that worst opposition in 30 years 
became an integral part of the budget of this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the contents of that budget perhaps led to a bit of speculation about who wrote it. I suggest that 
the biggest input to that budget didn't come from the vast array of cabinet ministers or from the deputy 
ministers or from the budget bureau. I suggest to you that that budget was dictated solely and completely by 
the computer print-out sheets in the possession, way down in the basement, of the member for Biggar. 
 
That budget had to be one of the most incredible flip-flops since World War II. That budget confirmed what 
everybody knew: this government was in deep, deep trouble, knew it, and was moving to correct the areas of 
neglect of the past 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, assuming that the Premier of the province follows through with the hype that he's put out and 
calls an election, the people of Saskatchewan are shortly going to have an opportunity to assess 10 years of 
NDP government. I suggest to you that the people of Saskatchewan are going to welcome that opportunity. 
They're going to welcome the opportunity to assess 10 years of NDP policies in rural Saskatchewan in 
agriculture. 
 
Briefly, there's one bottom line that will assess the NDP performance in agriculture. When you came to 
power in 1971, we had 82,000 family farms. Today, 10 years later, we have 67,000. Mr. Speaker, 15,000 
family farms disappeared under these great socialist programs that were going to rejuvenate rural 
Saskatchewan - things that  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
817 

were going to make it so easy to transfer land from father to son, programs that were going to make it so 
simple to get young farmers on the land and functioning. Today we are reduced down to that bottom line: 
15,000 fewer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the level of help that this government has provided to the remaining 67,000, I suggest that 
another four years of this government would see a heck of a lot more of them going down the tubes because 
our farmers are facing the most difficult times that they have faced since the '30s. I don't have to tell you 
why. Where's the help from this government? Where's the leadership? They refuse to give help in providing 
reasonable interest rates, reasonable help for operating loans. No way. Where is it? It's not there. 
 
I suggest to you that if and when you call an election, rural Saskatchewan is going to be in open rebellion 
against the New Democratic Party. I suggest to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now, the yappy little 
member for Morse, who is already past tense, I think is going to be in a life and death struggle to stay in 
second place. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I sympathize with him because his neighbors tell me (the 
ones I talked to while working his constituency last week) that he needs the job. He's such a lousy farmer 
that he needs a salary from here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to you that agriculture's answer to New Democratic policies is going to be to virtually 
reduce you to a few urban labor seats, and I think rural Saskatchewan is going to be delighted to have an 
opportunity to pass judgment on you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a day or two ago in the legislature an interesting item was brought forward that I hope to have 
an opportunity to pursue - that is, if we don't go out onto the hustings - that that is an incident in Calgary, 
Alberta, with Intercontinental Packers, which is owned 45 per cent by the Government of Saskatchewan and 
was charged by the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs with price-fixing - price-fixing against 
Alberta hog owners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I raised this item in the Assembly and was astounded to find the degree of casualness that the 
matter received from members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their logic absolutely went by me. Why, if the packing industry is in the process of possibly 
stealing from Alberta hog producers, would these same packers not be doing the same here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was shocked when the Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs refused to even look at 
the matter. He said it will ultimately come out in court in Alberta. Yes, it sure will - six years later, six to 
eight years later. Mr. Speaker, where there's smoke there's fire, and our hog producers have just had one 
blazes of a time. But how do we know it hasn't been extended? How do we know that it hasn't been extended 
into the cattle industry? Mr. Speaker, there's only one reason you don't want to open that can of worms in 
Saskatchewan - you're afraid of it, because Intercontinental Packers is 45 per cent owned by the NDP 
government and a strong possibility exists that Intercontinental may very well have been part of a conspiracy 
to defraud Saskatchewan livestock producers. And this government is afraid to look into it, probably because 
you know there's something to it. 
 
You know, the record of the Department of Consumer and Corporate Affairs in these  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
818 

prosecutions is reasonably good - considerably better, I might suggest, than is the record of the Attorney 
General's department. I understand they hit about eight out of ten - not bad. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the refusal of this government to look into that is an indictment of government ownership in 
this sector. I suggest you are afraid to look into it and it's something I invite you to discuss on any potential 
election trail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the resource sector I don't have to go into. Your uranium philosophy lies in ashes for everyone 
to see. The uranium sector has come crashing down on top of you, and after the expenditure of hundreds of 
millions of dollars, when the rest of the world is backing away from uranium, you're still investing. The 
private sector is running away from it, but you have your policy on the line and you're ploughing more and 
more money into it. It's absolutely ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can talk about the potash industry. And I say to many of those workers employed by PCS 
(Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan): are you ever lucky that we're on the eve of an election, because I 
suggest that there would be layoffs approaching 800 or 900 in that industry except that you're - what do they 
call it? - redeploying them into something else. And I suggest that, if there wasn't an election imminent, these 
people would be laid off right now. Again, hundreds of millions of dollars of somebody else's money was 
put into that needlessly and risks were taken that didn't have to be taken. Here was Central Canada Potash 
Corporation Ltd. willing to put up its own money to go into an expansion. You said, "No, we don't want you: 
we don't need you." So then you say, "All right, PCS are the good guys; we'll let them expand." Then the 
potash market goes to blazes. Whose money is on the line? Well, it's not yours - the last of the big spenders 
over there. They're spending somebody else's money. Again, this is an example of the NDP resource policy 
coming down on top of them Let's talk about that out on the hustings, if and when you choose to go. 
 
In the oil industry, about the only company that was left with any significant activity is Saskoil, and the bulk 
of that work is being done elsewhere. They're doing more work in Manitoba than they are on this side of the 
border, and they're doing a bad job at what they're doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their resource policy is in shambles. The agriculture policy is in shambles. So they have 
brought up this sham of a crow debate hopefully to create the smoke screen that will perhaps put the 10 years 
of NDP government on the back burner so maybe they could creep through a 28-day campaign. 
 
As we came back to this legislature, theoretically we were going to go into one of the great debates in 
legislative history - at least I read that in the paper; it must have been the Leader-Post - and that debate went 
pretty flat the first two or three days. Out of that debate was merely coming the confirmation that all we had 
here was a non-issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I've found it very amusing the past couple of years the way the alliance between the federal 
Liberal Party and the provincial New Democratic Party here has developed. I think I've gone through the 
coercion or the conspiracy that went on during the constitution negotiations. But as the crowrate debate fell 
flat in this legislature, who did we have to bring into town to perhaps rev it up a little bit? The call went out 
to - who else? - your federal counterparts. So they bring in Pierre Elliott to make a speech. You know Pierre 
Elliott talked to about 100 paying Liberals and about 700 freebies were given to anybody who could take 
time to go and listen to him. And what did Pierre talk  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
819 

about? Well, obviously he had the message that the crowrate debate just isn't going the way that his NDP 
friends had hoped: "Pierre, you have to help us. Pierre, you have to hype it up; you have to reaffirm that 
you're going to change the crowrate." So Pierre, talking to the 700 freebies, reaffirmed his support for 
altering the crowrate, and the people got up and they clapped and applauded, and it still didn't really get 
things going again. It still didn't really improve the quality or the zip in the debate in this legislature. Mr. 
Speaker, regrettably, the momentous debate became the non-debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suggest to this Assembly that the people of Saskatchewan are going to judge you very harshly 
for your alliance with Pierre Elliott Trudeau, and I suggest to you that the people are going to judge you 
harshly for the role the New Democratic Party played in the resurrection of Pierre Elliott Trudeau. I suggest 
that people will judge you for being one of the reasons that there even is a crowrate debate or a crowrate 
issue, because as I have indicated in this Assembly previously the only reason it goes on is that the New 
Democratic Party defeated a Conservative government that was committed to its retention - a western 
Canadian government that was committed to its retention. And the New Democratic Party is going to have to 
live that one down. 
 
You defeated a western prime minister, a western minister of transportation; you have supported Pierre 
Elliott Trudeau all the way, and that Pierre Elliott Trudeau is today doing what he can to bail this 
government out - a government that is headed for certain defeat, a government that is about to be reduced to 
an urban labor party. Mr. Speaker, there is an excellent reason why this government is going to be 
decimated. I don't mean just defeated but I mean decimated in rural Saskatchewan. This government has 
made one of the great mistakes. You know, it is a basic error: never underestimate your opponent. 
 
This government has underestimated an opposition, but most importantly this government has 
underestimated the leader of this opposition. Let me tell you something. If and when you call this election, 
there are going to be two leaders on the hustings. There is going to be one who has become indecisive, one 
who is looking old beyond his years, one who doesn't really walk in with the authority and the aplomb and 
the coolness and the feeling that he has the grip on things that he used to have. 
 
And then there is another one out there who is coming on young, fresh and just a darned good campaigner. 
Let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, the great miscalculation you have made. I believe you have gone too far; I don't 
think you can back off. Grant Devine is going to kick the blazes out of Allan Blakeney in rural 
Saskatchewan. He is going to do it because Grant Devine has credibility. You lost your credibility when you 
brought that budget down, and you gave it to us; you passed it to us. If you ever tagged us with something 
successfully, you passed it right back to us and you lost that one forever. You gave us the one intangible with 
which we had perhaps had some difficulty. You gave us instant credibility! And let me tell you, Grant 
Devine is going to kick the blazes out of Allan Blakeney in rural Saskatchewan. He's just one heck of a good 
speaker up on the platform. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THATCHER: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a look at the laughter that's going on over 
there. I want to take a look at the guys over there who are laughing. They will tumble like ten pins. I won't 
refer to the little member for Morse, because he's past tense. The member for Kinistino will be gone; the 
member for Regina Wascana, gone;  



 
March 23, 1982 
 

 
820 

the member for Yorkton, dead; the one for Cut Knife-Lloydminster, gone. He's pretty shaky. I look at the 
member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, desperately clinging to Ralph Goodale's coat tails, saying, "Come on 
Ralph, save me, help." He's probably gone. The member for Kelvington, gone; the member for Estevan, past 
tense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the respected member for Weyburn, who is not seeking re-election, is a gentleman whom we 
will all miss in this Assembly; very respectfully I suggest his seat is gone. We have it. The member for 
Saskatoon in the back row - gone. You're gone because you have underestimated your opposition. While you 
people have been neglecting this province for four years, Grant Devine has been out in the country and in the 
hustings and learned the hard political knocks of Saskatchewan politics. He is now ready to walk out into the 
hustings and kick you guys all over. Do you know what? As much as anything, you people have helped us. 
You have helped us because you have lost contact with what is going on out there. Grant Devine has been 
out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night I had a nomination meeting in Thunder Creek. I had had Grant Devine out in my 
constituency a couple of years ago. He was there last night addressing a packed, overflowing hall. I heard 
afterward from people who were saying, "When Grant was out here a couple of years ago . . . I just can't 
believe the way he's improved. The job he does in there - I just can't believe it." 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those people over there with the big laughs and the big grins who are about to tumble, 
there's one way to confirm the accuracy of what I am saying. Get Al in here. I'll give him the floor; if he has 
something he wants to announce, he still has time for April 21. I'll give him the floor immediately. But for 
some reason, Al isn't here. I wonder where he is. He is probably trying to marshal the troops. Do you know 
why we're not into it? Because you can't marshal your troops. Your troops are saying, "Listen, we got trouble 
out there; there's turmoil." The people are unhappy. You have the polls. You know what I'm saying. You 
can't muster your people. So the argument goes on across the way. "What do we do? Do we go now, in April, 
because we're declining fast? Devine's coming up. The PCs are coming up. We're going down. Do we go 
now before it gets worse or do we sit tight until June? After all, we don't have to go. We don't have to go 
until October of '83." And the debate goes on. The debate goes on, "Do we go now before it gets worse, or 
do we wait and see what happens?" Well, if you want input from me, if I had a personal choice, Wednesday, 
June 23 would be an ironic date and I would love to be counting ballots that night, and I leave you with that 
suggestion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know what's waiting for us - do we ever know what's waiting for us! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I saw you backing out of the town hall last night. 
 
MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, I've been out on the hustings and I'm confident of what's there. And 
what waits for you in the decimation of the New Democratic Party. And you have helped us. And one of the 
reasons the decimation is there is that you have underestimated your opposition. And let me tell you, when 
you call it, Grant Devine is going to blow Allan Blakeney right out of the water because no longer do you 
have a free run on the issue that Allan Blakeney is Mr. Competency, because he's not any more. You know, 
10 years have taken the edge off him. It's a tough job and I don't say that critically at all. It's a tough, tough 
job, but the edge is gone. Mr. Speaker, there's a new one out there and he's looking better every day. As I say, 
once again I invite this government to call it and let's get at it. We're tired of this side and want to go over 
there. Let's have the vote on this budget. Let's get this election called, and hopefully - well, not hopefully - 
shortly afterward we'll get a session of this legislature, when we're  



 
March 23, 1982 

 
821 

over there, and we'll get a budget going that will bring the people of Saskatchewan some of the benefits that 
they deserve. I'm sorry, those doggone town halls again are still getting to me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that this budget contains many things that should be implemented, despite the 
fact that this budget contains many things that we have called for, there is a question of credibility. And you 
have no credibility. You have no credibility here; you have no credibility among your own people. You have 
no credibility out there. And the issue is one of credibility. This budget vote is a question of non-confidence 
in this government and I'm going to be joining in voting against it. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 38 - An Act to amend The Renters Property Tax Rebate Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move on behalf of the minister that a bill to amend The 
Renters Property Tax Rebate Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 39 - An Act to amend The Property Improvement Grant Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a bill to amend The Property Improvement Grant 
Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 40 - An Act respecting Mortgage Renewal Assistance in Saskatchewan 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move on behalf of the Hon. Mr. Smishek that a bill respecting 
mortgage renewal assistance in Saskatchewan be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
 


