






















































Hansard: June 23, 1982


(190) 191 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 23, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
 
DEPUTY CLERK: — Ms. Zazelenchuk, of the standing committee on private members’ bills, presented the 
first report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee met for organization and appointed Ms. Zazelenchuk as its chairman and Mr. Koskie as 
vice-chairman. Your committee has duly examined the under mentioned petitions for private bills and 
finds that the provisions of rules 56, 57 and 60 have been fully complied with in each case: 
 
Of the Canadian Bible Society, auxiliary of the British and Foreign Bible Society, north Saskatchewan 
district of the city of Saskatoon; 
 
Of the Canadian Bible Society, auxiliary of the British and Foreign Bible Society, south Saskatchewan 
district of the city of Regina; 
 
Of the Canadian Theological College of the city of Regina. 
 
Your committee recommends that the full deposit of $250 submitted with these same petitions at the 
fourth session of the 19 
 
 legislature be applied to the renewed petitions without any deductions for printing charges incurred in 
the last session. 
 

MS. ZAZELENCHUK: — I move, seconded by the member for Moose Jaw North: 
 

That the first report of the standing committee on private members’ bills be now concurred in. 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize to the House for not getting the full import of the 
committee report. As I understand it, we are waiving both the fees and the printing charges. I’m not fully aware in 
my own mind of what the proponents of the bills are going to have to pay, having regard for the fact that they 
were all in at the last session and were not dealt with. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — My understanding, Mr. Speaker, is that these private members’ bills were 
introduced prior to the election and the fees and printing costs were filed then. We thought it would be unfair to 
ding them again, so to speak. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICE OF MOTIONS 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
192 

HON. MR. LANE: — I give notice that I shall, on Friday next, move first reading of a bill, An Act t 
amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall, on Friday, June 25, 1982, move first 
reading of a bill, An Act to amend The Education Act. 
 
I shall on Friday, June 25, 1982, move first reading of a bill, An Act to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act. 
 
I further give notice that I shall, on Friday, June 25, 1982, move first reading of a bill, An Act to amend 
The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act. 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall, on Friday, June 25, 1982, move first 
reading of a bill, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I inform this House that there are about 15 students in the galleries from 
St. Mary’s School in Moose Jaw. They are under the direction of Mrs. Pearce, Henry Labois and Bernice 
Miller. They will be sitting in the galleries for approximately half an hour and I will meet with them 
outside. I wish this Assembly to give them a round of applause. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Closure of GWG Ltd.; Small Business Loans 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, in my absence yesterday there were a couple of questions. 
One was from the Leader of the Opposition which I would like to reply to now. 
 
I have instructed my officials to be in touch with the principals of the company in Saskatoon. I 
understand they did so this morning and I am waiting for a report. I will keep the House informed on the 
progress of that company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While I am on my feet, if I may, in reply to a question from the member for Quill Lakes, I believe, about 
the 9.625 per cent program, we are working on developing this program, Mr. Speaker. I will, in due 
time, make some further announcements, I believe there was some concern about applications being 
received. That is so. However, I fail to understand why any businessman would want, at this point, to 
accept a $25,000 loan under the program that the previous government had when he would be paying 
almost double the price on the rate of interest. We are, in fact, receiving applications. None have been 
processed recently, but the program is in abeyance at this time. 
 
Further to your question on the interest abatement program, this program is still in place. The 
announcement which was made by the previous government, Mr. Speaker, 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
193 

on the doubling of those amounts from $500 to $1,000 (I believe that was the amount), in fact does not 
take place for a whole year. As the member well knows, the applications received now are for payments 
from last years expense from the particular business applying. And if the amount to be considered will 
be, in fact, double for this year, those applications will be considered a year from now, following the 
fiscal year. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a brief supplementary to the hon. minister with respect to 
the GWG Inc. close down. As I understood his reply, he said that his officials were endeavouring to be 
in touch with the company this morning and that he would keep the House informed. I thank him for 
that, and ask particularly that this matter be pursued. Perhaps I can put it in the form of a question. Will 
the minister assure us that this matter will be pursued in light of the information which was in today’s 
press about the very difficult economic climate in both Regina and Saskatoon? Perhaps I could phrase it 
another way – the predictions of employment available in the third quarter in Regina and Saskatoon are 
very much lower than the earlier predictions and, accordingly, the 150 jobs at GWG would be of 
particular import. I know the minister feels that, but I ask for his assurance. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure the Leader of the Opposition that my department 
is very concerned about these layoffs, and I give him my assurance that we will certainly endeavour to 
keep this company. We will certainly pursue it and attempt to save any jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Beef Stabilization Program 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. He will be 
aware of a report of the Senate committee of inquiry with respect to the beef industry in Canada, which 
has recently been made public, and he, I suspect, as I, would reach the conclusion that on the basis of 
that report there is unlikely to be a national beef stabilization program sponsored, at least by the federal 
government, in the near future. In light of that, I direct a question to the minister, asking him whether the 
provincial beef stabilization program, on which the minister has had a good number of comments 
publicly lately, will be continued with changes or will be dismantled? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it certainly will not be continued in its present form. In 
its present form, Mr. Speaker, it touches about 10 to 15 per cent of the beef industry. It has been a heavy 
drain on the public purse; it is not actuarially sound. When we hear some final word out of Ottawa 
relative to a national beef stabilization program, we will be making the final decision on the disposition 
of the provincial beef stabilization program. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister has indicated that the plan 
will not be continued in its present form. Will he advise the House whether, in its revised form, it will 
cover cow-calf operators and straight feedlot operators? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, those details of any change in the program will be 
announced in due course. As the Leader of the Opposition may know, there have also been public 
statements from the Minister of Agriculture that there will be changes made very quickly to the board of 
the beef stabilization plan. I will be waiting for input from the new board and also from the livestock 
producers from right across the industry, from the cow-calf to the feedlot man before we come up with 
any final decision relative to a new plan. 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
194 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the minister advise the House 
of the views of the government with respect to the shape of the plan, particularly with respect to whether 
or not the purchase feeder option should be removed or continued, and whether the single selling desk 
arrangement will be continued or removed? Could he tell us what the opinion of the government is on 
those matters? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I think there are valid arguments both for and against both questions. Do 
you want my personal view? I’ll give it to you, but I can’t do that in my capacity as a minister. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I refer to a Star-Phoenix article dated April 21. 
I’d like to just quote briefly from that article as a preamble to my question. The article says, and I quote, 
in respect to the comments of the PC candidate in the constituency of Wilkie. 
 

Garner says the beef stabilization plan is a big sore spot with a large number of cattlemen in his 
riding. Garner says a Tory government would honor the contracts signed in 1982 but would 
otherwise offer farmers and feedlot operators a $50 per head cash grant on animals. 
 

Question to the Minister of Agriculture. When will the government pay out the $50 per head committed 
by the member for Wilkie, and when will the government inform those cow-calf operators and feedlot 
operators that they will in fact be receiving the payment committed by the member for Wilkie and the 
current Minister of Highways? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, firstly I do not accept the responsibility for the 
accuracy of the reporting of the Star-Phoenix, and, secondly, at no time was it the position of this 
government to make a lump sum cash pay-out to the beef industry, although I do admit it has been under 
discussion. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture. Has the member for Wilkie 
made any representations to the Minister of Agriculture in this matter? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Every member in caucus has, and recognizing the tough economic times 
that the beef producers are facing, and recognizing Mother Hubbard’s cupboard as it related to the 
consolidated fund, we have to find a balance to do the most good for the most people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture. Is the minister now saying 
that it is not the intention of the government to act on commitments made by candidates for the 
Conservative Party prior to April 26? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — No. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — When will the government Honor the $50 per head, $40 million 
commitment made by the member for Wilkie? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — You tell me when and where he made it. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
195 

Cost of Farm Fuel 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Recently your government made an announcement to remove the provincial sales tax 
on gasoline. As the minister, of course, will know, there was no sales tax on farm fuel. As a 
consequence, this step you have taken is of little or no assistance to the farmer because there was no tax 
on farm fuel. I want to ask the minister what action, if any, he is prepared to take to reduce the cost of 
farm fuel to the farmer? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I do know a couple of farmers who drive cars and it was a 
welcome tax cut to all the farmers. I have talked to and to all people in the province. I also point out to 
the member that not only has this government called for, but our colleagues in Ottawa have called for, a 
reduction in the 55 cent to 60 cent a gallon federal tax on farm fuel since there is no provincial tax on 
farm fuel, and since agriculture does, in fact, make a very significant contribution to the balance of 
payments for Canada. Since we have a hungry world out there to feed and since this is the productive 
sector of Canada, we think it is only fair and proper that the feds role back their sales tax on farm fuel. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister will obviously know that during the 
election members of the Progressive Conservative Party in their election campaigns indicated that one of 
the promises would be to reinstate the farm fuel reduction program. Could the Minister of Agriculture 
indicate to the House whether he is prepared to reintroduce the farm fuel reduction program to alleviate 
the problems encountered by the farmers of this province due to high fuel costs? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I would just remind the member that it was that party, when 
it was sitting on this side of the House, the eliminated the farm fuel rebate program – twice. It reduced it 
a couple of times, jacked it up and down, depending on where we were in time relative to the next 
election. I don’t recall ever saying that we would ever reintroduce the plan. I do recall saying that we 
would take a look at the advisability of reintroducing the plan. If you can show that I am mistaken I am 
more than willing to apologize. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — In view of the minister’s answers and his indication that he has no programs of direct 
assistance to the farmers, I wonder whether or not he will, in fact, Honor and make payments to those 
farmers who have filed late under the application of the previous program that was in effect, the farm 
fuel reduction program. Will, in fact, you Honor the late applications – and there are several of them – 
which were under the consideration of the previous government to make payment? Will you, in fact, 
Honor those? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — You’re asking me to go back almost as far as you used to ask us to go 
back in crown corporations to review the books. The programs have been out for some considerable 
time. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Two years. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
196 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Two years? Either that or we’re talking about two different programs and 
I would remind members opposite who seem to have trouble pulling these things together that it was 
only a very few days ago that we had a throne speech that commented on some of the things that we may 
be, and will be, advancing in this session of the legislature. One of them happened to be a $350,000 
low-interest loan to qualifying farmers. I think probably that would be well accepted by the agricultural 
community. 
 

Farm Purchase Program 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, my question is addressed to the Minister of Agriculture as 
well, in light of the response. In a recent press release, a steering committee was set up by the Minister of 
Agriculture to study the new farm purchase program which was promised during the election and which 
promised to deliver $350,000 to farms at 8 per cent for five years. What I would like to know is whether 
or not a report has been received and if it has, if he would table it here in the House. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I have not received a report from the steering committee but 
I sit in on a great number of the meetings and I am aware that they are, in fact, generating lots of ideas 
and best methods of getting the program pulled together in place. In addition to the steering committee, 
we also have an internal working group from agriculture and finance. And no, I’m not prepared to table 
any report from many committee at this time. You will see the details of that particular program when 
the legislation is tabled in this House. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the Minister of Agriculture. In light of the 
fact that he has indicated that he has neither received a report nor when he receives it that he will table it 
here, I am just wondering, if this Assembly agrees to stay an extra two or three weeks, as the members 
on this side are willing to do, whether or not that report would be ready. I am also wondering whether or 
not we could move ahead quickly with that program in order to get it in place for the farmers out there 
who have been cut off from the land bank program and are now in limbo and are waiting to buy and sell 
land. Could we get that commitment from the government opposite? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I have told members opposite, the press, and anyone who 
has ever asked me that the legislation will not be in place until this fall. Now, if we can generate enough 
work to keep us busy all summer, and if you want to stay here until that legislation is ready, we will 
certainly give it our best effort. But I don’t think you are asking us to do that. 
 
Secondly, as it relates to my reluctance to table any report that we may be generating internally, I think 
the former minister knows very well that you do not table those kinds of internal reports until the 
legislation is on the Table. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that the government opposite was elected 
on a program of open government and consultation . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — . . . I would very much like to know whether or not this open government 
is any more than idle words, and whether or not we are going to have an  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
197 

opportunity very quickly to move on the farm purchase program, because I can tell you that it will be a 
very hot summer not only for members here but for the farmers who are waiting for the new program. I 
would urge you to tell the House now when you will be bringing forward this program because I think he 
said that it would be in due course. I want to know in order to give an indication to the farmers when it 
will come forward. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — shut up. I want you to get it this time. A minute ago, on your previous 
supplementary, I said the legislation would be coming to the House this coming fall. As it relates to the 
reports and open government, I will just tell you that when we bring in this piece of legislation it will be 
right. It will work the first time. It will not be that mess that you brought in as a beef stabilization 
program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Terminated Land Bank Applications 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. In light of 
your not moving ahead with the proposed legislation until fall, and in light of the fact that so many 
young farmers had applications in with the land bank, are you prepared to reconsider and move on some 
of the land bank applications that you terminated this spring? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, no, we are not, Mr. Speaker. It should come as no surprise to 
anyone that we won’t be buying any more land under the land bank program. It has been our position 
since 1975. That position has not changed. We believe that there should be mechanisms in place to help 
the generational transfer of land – to help them own it, not to put the government in the real estate 
business. So the answer to your question is no. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. About how many applicants were involved this spring 
who were expecting or anticipating to take over some land from the land bank? How many applications 
did you terminate that were in the process of being handled this year? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I don’t know with any great precision but I will find out and bring it back 
to the member. 
 

Ethanol Plant at Canora 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Speaker, last year 
the former government had introduced a program to build an ethanol plant at Canora. Could the minister 
tell me if the government will go ahead with the plans that were in progress at that time? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, there will be an announcement relative to the ethanol plant 
in Canora within, well, I would say, the next week. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — The minister said, while he was in his seat, that he had already made a decision but 
he is not prepared to make it public. Could he tell me if that decision means, because of this delay, that 
the people of Canora should really not expect that ethanol plan then? 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
198 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I think the member is speculating at best. I am not prepared to answer the 
question. 
 

Representation to Ottawa on Budget 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A question to the Minister of Finance. I think he, as most Canadians, was 
surprised to hear the announcement by his federal counterpart that there would be a federal budget next 
Monday. Has the Minister of Finance made any representation to his federal counterpart with respect to 
the contents of the upcoming federal budget, and what Saskatchewan needs to see in that budget? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — In response to that question, Mr. Speaker, no, we have not made responses 
to the federal Minister of Finance. In the past, the federal Minister of Finance has not been very open to 
representations from any government or any interest groups throughout the country. In this new 
Government of Saskatchewan we hope, in fact, to have a more open dialogue with various interest 
groups, farm groups, business groups and citizens’ groups in the preparation of the budget. Any advice 
we have had is that any comments to the Minister of finance go unheeded in any event. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Surely, instead of that attitude of defeatism, the minister might attempt to 
make known in Ottawa some of Saskatchewan’s needs. I say to the Minister of Finance, surely in light of 
the fact that there are no Liberal members sitting in the House . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — does the member have a supplementary? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I was just in the process of spinning it out. In light of the fact that there are 
no Liberal members in the federal House west of Ottawa, surely the minister has a responsibility to carry 
to Ottawa the needs of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I can advise this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, of two things. Firstly, since taking 
office the Government of Saskatchewan has been very concerned, and was while it was in opposition, 
about the impact which the national energy program has on the economic viability of this province. We 
see that as a very serious move by the federal government and we would hope – and we have 
communicated that to the federal government – that it would modify or change its policy to create jobs 
and create the economic activity in western Canada, and throughout the entire country, which is so 
desperately needed. 
 
Secondly, and we have communicated this as well to the federal government – perhaps more clearly than 
any other government with the introduction yesterday of our 13.25 per cent mortgage program – we see 
the interest rates and the whole concept of interest rate policy of the federal government being 
tremendously damaging to the interest rate policy of the federal government being tremendously 
damaging to the national economy, and in that sense damaging to the economy of the province of 
Saskatchewan. We believe that the federal government must act, and must act decisively, on the question 
of interest rates. Otherwise we are going to see bankruptcies, layoffs and massive unemployment in this 
province and in this country over the next six months or one year. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. SUTOR: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to introduce to you, and to the members of this 
Assembly, in the west gallery, the grades 4, 5 and 8 students from St. Anne’s  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
199 

School along with their teachers, Laurie Ruhr and Carol Molnar. I would like to take this opportunity to 
wish them a pleasant visit to the legislature and advise them that I will meet with them for pictures and 
refreshments at 2:45 p.m. I would like, at this time, all members on both sides of the House to welcome 
them to the legislature. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 3 – An Act to provide for the Imposition of Taxes on and the Collection of Taxes from 
Certain Purchasers of Certain Fuels and for the repeal of The Fuel Petroleum Products Act 

 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to provide for the imposition of 
taxes on and the collection of taxes from certain purchasers of certain fuels and for the repeal of The 
Fuel Petroleum Products Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Gift for Newly Born Son of the Prince and Princess of Wales 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like, on behalf of the government, to announce that the 
province of Saskatchewan is sending a gift to Their Royal Highnesses, the Prince and Princess of Wales 
for their newly born son. Fortunately, we have had some time to plan the selection of the gift and, 
accordingly, the government has a gift specially commissioned from a craftsman living in Rosthern, Mr. 
Eric Yoder. Mr. Yoder is a market gardener and a design consultant with the Saskatchewan Association 
of Rehabilitation Centres. He specializes in making wooden toys. The gift we have commissioned from 
Mr. Yoder is a complete set of toys and the toy box for all of these pieces has been made in the form of a 
grain elevator with the word “Saskatchewan” and the wheat sheaf insignia on it. We expect to be able to 
ship the gift to Buckingham Palace next week. 
 
We take pride in the fact that the gift we are sending is a Saskatchewan designed and produced gift 
which benefits the handicapped in our province by distribution through centres for the handicapped. 
 
I might advise, Mr. Speaker, that toys similar to the gift being forwarded by the people of Saskatchewan 
are available to the public at handicap centres throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday members on both sides of the House joined enthusiastically in sending a message 
of congratulation to Their Royal Highnesses. I am sure that all members will now share out pleasure in 
sending this gift to the proud parents who are such popular members of the royal family. This event, as 
we indicated yesterday by a motion of this assembly, strengthens our loyalty to the crown and affection 
for the royal family which will be very evident when Her Royal Highness, Princess Anne, arrives in 
Saskatchewan in two weeks time. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
200 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Address in Reply 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Mr. Hodgins. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take this first opportunity of mine to congratulate you 
on becoming Speaker of this Legislative Assembly. Your reputation as a man, as a parent and as 
somebody in the Saskatchewan community goes before you, and I’m sure your performance here will be 
long remembered in the province of Saskatchewan. You are known as a man of immense integrity, 
honesty and genuine common sense. It is a pleasure for me to see you there and to know you are serving 
Her Majesty and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I wish you well in all you do and, particularly, in your role in this Legislative 
Assembly, and across the nation, and, no doubt, across the world as our legislative ambassador in many 
regards. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say a couple of things to the people of the constituency of Estevan. 
First, I want to say thank you. Thank you for giving me this opportunity to serve at this unique time in 
our history. I say to the people of Estevan that the ultimate power lies with you, and clearly the pressure 
lies on me to perform, Mr. Speaker, therein the fidelity of the democratic process. 
 
Estevan is a microcosm of Saskatchewan. In that constituency there is an abundance of agriculture, 
energy through oil and gas and coal and electricity, tourism, small manufacturing and, indeed, trade. But 
I suspect what is most important in that riding is the community life that is so much a part of rural 
Saskatchewan and the rural way of life. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to all the members of the Legislative Assembly that the view is 
better from here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — May I say congratulations to you all, members on both sides of the Assembly 
and all four corners. My particular congratulations to all the new members and I suspect, for those who 
returned a special congratulations is in order. I am proud to be associated with each and every one of you 
in this Assembly and in our democratic process. I respect what you have done to get here and even more 
I respect what you will have to do to return. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to pay special tribute to the mover and the seconder of the motion that we are 
addressing right now, the member for Melfort and, most particularly, the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
201 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I’m proud of you both. You are not only youthful and handsome, but articulate 
and thoughtful, in so many ways you said things that were so much more profound than I’ve heard in this 
Legislative Assembly for, I suspect, the last two years. 
 
To all those making their maiden addresses, I say, congratulations. They’ve been done well, remarkably 
well. 
 
To the Leader of the Opposition (I note that he just stepped out but I’m sure that you’ll share the 
message with him), I want to say congratulations on maintaining your composure under difficult political 
times. I suppose it would be fair to say that I respect your courage more than I respect your political 
views. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to April 26, 1982, because it was not 
an ordinary day. In fact, it was a unique day in Canadian history and, indeed, in a democratic world. The 
people of Saskatchewan freely chose to march to the beat of a different drummer. The journey began on 
April 26 and will continue for generations to come. 
 
The real question is: why did such a dramatic turnaround take place on April 26? Some people have 
even asked, “Who called the election?” Many have asked, “What were the issues?” Well, it was a 
complex result, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to share with you a few moments of history about the province of Saskatchewan. This province 
has been blessed with no end of God-given talents and resources. We have virtually half the farmland in 
the nation: 46 per cent or 48 per cent. We have been blessed with massive amounts of potash, coal, 
uranium, heavy oil, light and medium crude, natural gas, timber, water, rivers and lakes. We’ve been 
blessed with many good people with a work ethic, with good universities and good technical schools. 
Particularly, we’ve been blessed with two important commodities: food and energy. The world wants 
both. 
 
Given all those blessings, Mr. Speaker, and looking at those blessings that were before the people on 
April 26, 1982, why would they change their minds? Let’s look at the record in the province of 
Saskatchewan over the last 11 years and, indeed, perhaps over 31 of the last 38 years in this province. 
 
We have virtually the same population we had in 1936, approximately 960,000 to 970,000 people, with 
all these blessings, and a birth rate that has been above the national average. Canada’s population has 
doubled from 11 million to 24 million people and Saskatchewan has remained the same. We have lost 
almost a million children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with virtually half the farmland in the nation, we have led the nation in the loss of farms 
and family farms – almost 15,000 in the last 11 years. The feedlot industry has moved out of the 
province. There is one packing plant left in the whole province killing hogs, and it’s half-owned by us, 
bought and purchased by the former administration. 
 
With all those blessings, Mr. Speaker, we find that Saskatchewan’s income was 9 per  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
202 

cent below the Canadian average. We have a tiny population with massive resource wealth and we are poorer than the average 
Canadian. Canada’s income, Mr. Speaker, has dropped from about 3 
 
 in the world to, I believe, 19 
 
. And the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, dropped well below that of the Canadian average under the former 
administration. 
 
We have seen energy shut in. we have seen a growing and increasing percentage of our population become senior citizens; the 
youth have been leaving. Half the towns and villages are dying, Mr. Speaker. In fact, we were the only province in the entire 
nation suffering a net decline in rural population – the only one. So other provinces may indeed have lost some farmers, but 
Saskatchewan was the only province that suffered a net decline in rural population, because even the towns and villages were 
going down. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, was there any growth? People look for growth. Yes, I can admit there was. There was some growth in 
taxes, growth in fees, growth in licenses, growth in the size of government, and growth in the number of people on welfare. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — While the farmers were leaving and the children were leaving and the businesses were leaving and 
the feedlot industries were leaving, there was growth – massive growth in the size of government, which virtually doubled 
from 1971 to 1981. and there was growth in the inflation rate, Mr. Speaker, because in the province of Saskatchewan the 
cities of Saskatoon and Regina often led the CPI, the consumer price index. 
 
I recall, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial government under the former administration was often the major cause of inflation in 
this province. We have heard “Ah yes, but Saskatchewan had low unemployment.” I want to remind you, Mr. Speaker, and 
the people of Saskatchewan and the country, that there is zero unemployment in the Arctic too because there is nobody there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Any province that exports a million of its children and has the same population as it had in the 
1930s cannot brag about low unemployment. 
 
We have also head, “Ah, but there’s going to be growth in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, the real growth could be 
somewhat higher than the national average. “Well, Mr. Speaker, isn’t it about time? We need to have real growth leading the 
national average just to catch up to the rest of the provinces. There’s going to be real growth in Newfoundland and there’s a 
lot of room for growth so they can catch up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our income in the province of Saskatchewan under the former administration remained well below the national 
average. There would be real growth in the province of Saskatchewan without the doubling in the size of the administration 
under the former government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 26 the people of Saskatchewan looked at the potential of the province of Saskatchewan, they looked at 
reality, and they said that the government was not as good as the people. It wasn’t as good as the people themselves and it 
wasn’t as good as the heritage and the blessings of the province. And they demanded government as good as the people. They 
wanted to see performance; they didn’t want  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
203 

to see just blatant advertising. They were tired of rhetoric, and most important, Mr. Speaker, they felt 
that the government had lost its integrity and that it couldn’t be trusted. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — The working men and women of the province of Saskatchewan on April 26 
voted for government that: (1) they could trust, and (2) they could control. And control they will, Mr. 
Speaker. They want to see a government which is sensitive to the needs of the working men and women 
in this province. I believe, Mr. Speaker, there was another important reason for the change on April 26, 
and it’s related to hope. 
 
People who came to Saskatchewan at the turn of the century were men and women of optimism, despite 
adversity. They could see light at the end of the tunnel. They had vision and they had direction. What he 
people in Saskatchewan looked for on April 26, 1982, from the members on this side of the House was 
vision. They heard of an industrial strategy and something that said, “There is so much more that we can 
be in this province.” And they heard about the four cornerstones of an industrial strategy that meant so 
much to the people in the province of Saskatchewan a foundation for economic development. Those four 
cornerstones were identified and will last, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of those cornerstones is government. And indeed there is a big role for government in the province 
of Saskatchewan, but a role which deals with areas of government where it can best serve: health, 
education, social services, the environment. And that role indeed can get bigger and bigger. 
 
The second cornerstone of that foundation, Mr. Speaker, is industry and the business world – industry 
because it provides 65 per cent to 70 per cent of all the jobs and real growth, not only in the 
Saskatchewan economy but indeed across the country. And it’s that balance, Mr. Speaker, that they 
recognized that needed to be improved – a healthy balance of government and industry. 
 
The third cornerstone, Mr. Speaker, is labour, providing the backbone of the Saskatchewan economy. As 
I mentioned, the working men and women, the productive sector of the Saskatchewan economy, needed 
to be included in that industrial strategy and desperately wanted to be included – not just talked about. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the fourth cornerstone is education, that process that allows us to continually 
improve, to provide adjustment and particularly personal growth. And those four, Mr. Speaker – 
government, business, labour and education – provide the cornerstones for an industrial strategy that we 
haven’t seen in the province of Saskatchewan for probably 40 years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the people were glad to hear that the new 
administration will develop something called an economic development board, off the Premier’s office, 
which will first identify the constraints to economic development in this province – and we know there 
were a large number of constraints and they can be identified and the list goes on and on and on – and 
second, will identify opportunities in this great province of Saskatchewan – opportunities to create jobs, 
to  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
204 

create food processing, to create economic activity, and to watch this province grow. 
 
But most important, I believe, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province saw that the new administration 
would fight inflation, fight the rising costs that were crippling farms, fight the rising costs that were 
crippling businessmen and causing families to break up, causing undue hardship. Mr. Speaker, what they 
saw in this government, on this side of the House, and something that would address, I suppose, the 
questions that were brought up in question period, is that this new administration is more concerned 
about controlling costs than it is about controlling people. 
 
They heard the members of this side of the House talk about fighting inflation and they talked about a 
concise definition of inflation, that is, prices rising faster than productivity. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 
the provincial government can be a major cause of inflation, as it keeps raising the costs – the costs of 
administration, and the taxes and the royalties and the fees. And it ca also add to inflation if it 
discourages businesses, or in towns and villages. To the extent that it combines those two in an adverse 
fashion it can be a major contributor to inflation, and indeed it was. Well, the question is what has 
happened to date, Mr. Speaker? What have we done to address that key problem of inflation within the 
provincial government? Since April 26, Mr. Speaker, we have removed the tax completely on gasoline 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — And that fights inflation. That is the most powerful and significant 
cost-reducing program that has ever been introduced to the legislature in the province of Saskatchewan 
in its history. Inflation, as you know, Mr. Speaker, hurts the little person. It hurts people with low 
incomes, with fixed incomes, people who are unable to cope, students, the handicapped, single parents. 
And that single move, Mr. Speaker, was one of the most important things in fighting inflation, 
particularly for people with low incomes, that has ever been introduced. I am proud to say, and I think it 
has been mentioned here before that it is already showing up in national statistics. The consumer price 
index shows that indeed the province of Saskatchewan, due to the move by the provincial government, is 
now ranked in number one position, in terms of fighting inflation, across the nation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, if a government can cause inflation and contribute to it, it can certainly 
do something to help cure it. That was the first step, because that helps reduce the costs, helps bring 
down prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have introduced our mortgage assistance program, the 13.25 per cent for families. That 
does two things. That fights inflation because it removes, or helps people cope with that burden of very 
high interest rates. It does something else. It encourages productivity, so the Government of 
Saskatchewan is now addressing inflation with its double-barrelled effects. We are reducing prices on 
one hand and encouraging productivity on the other. We are reducing prices because we eliminated a tax 
entirely because we are an energy-producing province. We passed that benefit on to our people, and we 
are also helping people here cope with high interest rates which will encourage them to be productive. 
This helps plumbers, carpenters, bricklayers, people who have to deliver goods and services, and most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, it  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
205 

helps people hang onto their homes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — You have to go a long way in North America, or the whole world, Mr. 
Speaker, to find two programs introduced at the same time that mean as much to people on low incomes. 
The reason I say that is because the mortgage program isn’t from $50,000 to $100,000, it’s from zero to 
$50,000. That means any amount up to $50,000. it’s designed, along with that gas program, to help 
people who find it most difficult to cope with the problems of inflation. Like the gas tax, Mr. Speaker, it 
was a discriminating tax. If you were on a fixed income, or a senior citizen or anyone else who had no 
income at all, you still paid the tax for that energy. That’s the reason why the removal of a tax like that 
helps the very people who are least able to cope with it. 
 
What people saw in our programs leading up to April 26 was an ability and a challenge and a 
determination to give ourselves the competitive edge to help our people compete not only against other 
Canadians but also against Americans and Japanese and West Germans, and to pass those benefits on to 
our children and our working men and women. And it is indeed the working men and women who 
deserve those benefits. We wanted to pass the resource benefits on to the real families, the real people in 
the province of Saskatchewan, not just see them go to the Saskatchewan family of bureaucracies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also suggested that we would make modifications to the taxation and royalty 
structure, and the energy industry in this province. In my riding alone, in my area of the province, it is 
estimated that the Government of Saskatchewan (the taxpayers) has lost over $50 million in the last 12 
to 18 months just in royalties and taxes because the oil wasn’t pumping. And that’s a shame, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Farmers were seeding this spring, driving around not only sloughs, but pump jacks that were absolutely 
stationary. They were being asked to pay 55 cents or 60 cents a gallon on an increasing rate of federal tax 
to fill up their tractors. They are asked to pay more and more for transportation and when they look right 
down beside their disker, they find that the pump jacks aren’t even pumping because oil is coming in 
from Mexico. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan under the new administration will do whatever it can to help encourage 
people to get back to work in the province of Saskatchewan and if that means modification of the tax 
and royalty structure in this province because, until now, it has been the highest in the free world, then 
let the men and women of Saskatchewan know that we’re prepared to do it and will do it. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be introducing a public utilities review commission so the consumers in 
the province of Saskatchewan will have access to government. They’ve been asking for it for years. They 
want to feel that they can control government, not be controlled by government. 
 
And with respect to the land purchase program, I believe it is important to remember one small fact. The 
best hedge against inflation is to own property, to own a piece of land. I’ve often asked myself, Mr. 
Speaker, if there had been a big sign up in Europe 150 years ago that said “Land for rent in 
Saskatchewan,” whether we’d all be here or not. Would people have come from Germany, from Russia, 
from Italy, from Ireland, from Great Britain, from Hungary, from Poland, from Czechoslovakia, to this 
great province, if there had been a sign up in Europe that said, “Land for rent, come to North America?” 
I  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
206 

don’t believe so. When my grandfathers came here at the turn of the century to homestead, they didn’t 
come here to rent. And they didn’t particularly come here to rent from the government. In fact, they 
could get a quarter of a section of land if they had the determination and the courage just to take on 
mother nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a government program that has gone to people, moms and dads in this province, and 
purchased land at $60 an acre with the promise of selling it back to the children, a program that bought 
land in 1972, 1973, 1974, at $60, $70 and $80 an acre and is now trying to sell it to the children at $600 
an acre and $1,000 an acre is the biggest economic sin that’s ever been perpetrated on western Canada. It 
provides no hedge against inflation. It provides no guarantee that will maintain the family farm. It turns 
the next generation of young agriculture people into sharecroppers, as they were two, three, four, five 
generations ago in Europe and as we saw in the southern United States 200 years ago – sharecroppers. 
They’d work all their lives for somebody else and when they were all done two things were evident. 
One, they didn’t cope with inflation at all and inflation does not discriminate; it applies to everybody. 
And two, when they were all done, they were poor. They didn’t accumulate wealth. They didn’t have the 
money to put their children through universities to improve them and to expand and develop their 
talents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank goodness that’s come to an end in this province. We see that it is important to make 
sure that land is transferred from one generation to another in rural Saskatchewan. We will make sure 
that it is. We will help them, particularly, in coping with the high interest rates, to make that happen. It’s 
one thing to help people farm, but it’s quite another to buy the farms. Mr. Speaker, this administration 
will not be trying to buy the farms from rural Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, we’re more interested in reducing or controlling 
the costs than we are in controlling farmers. Our idea of a natural gas distribution system was presented 
over two years ago to a SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities’ Association) convention, saying 
that we have close to a 40- or 50-year surplus of natural gas in this part of the country, yet 40 per cent of 
the towns and villages and virtually all the farmers didn’t have access to it. We’ve been pushing since 
that time to provide low-cost energy to family farms to help them compete, to pass the competitive edge 
of our resources back to the people, the working men and women. 
 
Just prior to April 26, the former administration said that they believed in it and they were going to do it. 
Well, whether they did or not, it doesn’t matter anymore, because we do and we are. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — We are going to provide a natural gas distribution system to rural 
Saskatchewan. We will do it as efficiently and as effectively as we can. It has been done before in other 
parts of North America. We’re going to capture all the expertise that we can to make sure that it’s done 
right here in the province of Saskatchewan. It will give us the competitive edge and it will help us fight 
inflation. It helps reduce the costs and it helps encourage productivity. Those two things go hand in 
hand; they are in balance. For once, the province of Saskatchewan, the provincial government, is going 
to understand that and work with it. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
207 

With respect to the federal government, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to encourage it to do the same sorts of 
things that we’re doing in the province of Saskatchewan. We are going to encourage it to take the tax off 
diesel fuel to help all farms. It’s as important to the Ontario and Quebec farmers as it is to the 
Saskatchewan farmers. Why tax the productive nature of our economy? It doesn’t make any economic 
sense at all. The rest of the world looks at us and it’s not much wonder that they question if we know 
what we’re doing. It’s understandable why they may lose confidence in us when there’s an increase in 
tax, a growing tax, on the very productive soul of the Canadian economy. That’s food and agriculture – 
our largest industry. So, we will encourage the federal government to remove that tax. 
 
We’re going to encourage the federal government to move on interest rates, particularly for the 
home-owners, as we’ve done. If you took those two programs – reducing the tax on energy and helping 
people cope with interest rates to stimulate business in the construction industry – they would receive the 
blessing of the Canadian Labour Congress from one corner of this country to another. They already have, 
because: 
 

1. They help those who need it the most; 
2. They address the question of inflation; 
3. They get us back to work. 

 
Those three things (mostly common sense) are things that this government can do and, indeed, the 
federal government can do. 
 
We’ll be asking the federal government to modify its national energy program because you cannot 
strengthen the dollar and you can’t expect to see interest rates come down if we can’t control our own 
destiny with respect to energy. If we can have economic control of our energy destiny, then we’ll see 
economic control. In other words, with energy independence comes economic independence. As long as 
we’re dependent on the United States, Mexico, Venezuela or OPEC (Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries) for our sources of energy, we cannot have economic independence. Anything that 
we do here in this province, in this country, should encourage us to be independent because strength 
comes from our economic independence. 
 
The danger of the national energy program is that it got us to be more dependent on the rest of the world 
and we lost our independence. Confidence moved; people said they’d rather invest somewhere else. 
Even Canadians with savings – and they do have savings – won’t invest here. As that farmer saw in 
Estevan when he was seeding, he wasn’t only going around sloughs, he was going around pump jacks 
that weren’t pumping the energy that’s right here in this country because God blessed us with it; we 
didn’t have the foresight to use it. And you can’t blame the Japanese for wondering if we know what 
we’re doing when that is happening right here before us. 
 
We’re going to encourage the federal government to provide tax incentives to build and encourage 
productivity and to encourage people to work. It doesn’t really matter what you do with respect to prices. 
If you don’t have people going back to work, you’ll never pay the debt. That’s why the productivity 
factor in that equation, with respect to economic development, is so important, and one that this 
government recognizes. We’re going to encourage the federal government to re-recognize what working 
men  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
208 

and women can do in this country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — In summary, in looking at the economic conditions, Mr. Speaker, that 
surrounded the political climate prior to April 26, 1982, people in Saskatchewan opted for common 
sense. Mr. Speaker, they were looking for a government that didn’t just talk but was prepared to take 
action, that made sense because it was based on common sense the pride of Saskatchewan communities 
is in the common sense of the working men and women, and they want to see that reflected in their 
government. They want to be able to travel in other parts of Canada and defend the programs and 
policies of this government. They don’t want to have to travel to Quebec and try to explain why the 
government owns a million acres of farms. But they would be happy to go into the province of Quebec 
today and say, “Yes, we have no tax on gasoline and, yes, we have 13.25 per cent interest rates for our 
people.” “That’s common sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, there was another reason for the results on April 26. I won’t pretend to summarize them all here, 
because it was complex. Another reason for the change, perhaps even more than the caring for working 
men and women of this province, was something related to the priorities of this administration versus the 
last administration. 
 
These priorities revolved around the question, “Who’s first in Saskatchewan, the people or the 
government?” That was a fundamental, basic question prior to April 26. Who will be first in the 
province of Saskatchewan, the people or the government? Who gets top priority, for example, for low 
interest loans, the Saskatchewan family of crown corporations or the real families? Where are the 
priorities? That was a question that I heard if I was in Kamsack, North Battleford, Estevan, Swift 
Current, Maple Creek or Prince Albert. Who counts? Who’s number one in the province of 
Saskatchewan? Which families need attention, the real families or the Saskatchewan family of 
bureaucracies? Who comes first, the state or the people? 
 
Well, we’ve heard that many things could be done “for the people”. But the families of Saskatchewan 
were not fooled any longer by that old tricky saying, “We’ll do this for the people. This is for the 
people.” They didn’t believe it any longer, because they knew it wasn’t for the people, it was for the 
government. And they saw through that old charade. 
 
I suspect it’s a summarized best by the late John George Diefenbaker’s bill of rights, in the first 
paragraph. I don’t have it before me, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll paraphrase. That bill of rights says that this 
country was founded upon the principles that acknowledge the supremacy of God, the dignity of man 
and the role of the family in a nation of free men and free institutions. Those were the priorities in 
founding this nation and keeping it running and the priorities that I found, Mr. Speaker, and indeed every 
member on this side of the House found as he or she travelled throughout Saskatchewan. The dignity of 
men and women was to come first, above all, and certainly above government. That bill of rights of Mr. 
Diefenbaker’s doesn’t say, “the supremacy of the Saskatchewan family of government bureaucracies.” 
No, it doesn’t and it shouldn’t. as long as we’re here, Mr. Speaker, it never will. 
 
What I am saying is that the historical significance of April 26 can be identified in one word and that 
word is liberty. It is recognized across North America and indeed the free world. When I say free world, 
I mean the non-socialist world, the democracies of the world – systems that are set up to respect the 
dignity of man, the role of the family, in a  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
209 

society of free men and free institutions. Only with that freedom do you have the opportunity to develop 
your God-given talents. If ever the system comes first, above the individuals, then you lose not only your 
economic freedom but indeed your political freedom. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that while we were travelling 
around Saskatchewan for the last couple of years, we were looking for the essence of Saskatchewan. 
What is it? What does it really mean? Could we crystallize what the heart and the soul of this province 
is, and was, and wants to be? 
 
It may not be absolutely correct, but there are two words that I think describe (at least in my mind) a 
good part of the heart and soul of Saskatchewan, and indeed a good part of this new administration. 
 
The first word, I would say, is compassion. The Saskatchewan people are filled with compassion. They 
are well-known for their heart and their soul and their caring. It goes back to the pioneers; it goes back to 
the people who homesteaded here. And they did care. It shows up in the service clubs; it shows up in the 
community activities; and it shows up in the way they build churches and schools together, the way that 
they’ll help. It’s a kinship; it’s a family. Indeed no matter where you travel in the province of 
Saskatchewan, you’ll find it. 
 
It’s nothing particularly that has to be, or should be, imposed on people. it’s just there and you couldn’t 
stop it if you tried. You’ll just make them a little bit upset if you try to impose it on them. We see it at a 
sports day; we see it at a church picnic; we see it at harvest time. I am sure, Mr. Speaker, your relatives 
or mine or members’ opposite would be the first to help a neighbour combine in the fall or raise a barn 
or whatever it may be, for nothing other than being a part of the community. That’s in our heritage. No 
matter where Saskatchewan people go, they are known for that and we’re proud of it. 
 
The second word, Mr. Speaker, that describes the heart and soul of Saskatchewan people, is competition. 
Mr. Speaker, we can see people work together for a week and one-half to bring the picnic baskets and 
the tables and everything together for a sports day in Davidson or wherever it may be. They work 
together side by side because of that community feeling and that compassion, but when they get into the 
horse races, the horseshoe pits, and the ball games, they are as competitive as you will find any people in 
the world. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — And those two words “compassion” and “competition” are not mutually 
exclusive. They don’t exist as separate entities. They are one, in every man, woman and child in this 
province – together. You can’t impose one and try to eliminate the other. For years and years and years 
that’s been the case in this province – the imposition of one, because it might be tied to a particular kind 
of philosophy, and the smothering of another because it wasn’t. 
 
The alliance, Mr. Speaker, of the people who came together in this election in 1982 was that 
combination of compassion and competition which says, “Yes, I care for my family and my community 
and everybody around me, but I am going to make sure that I develop my God-given talents. I have no 
reason to be third, fourth, fifth, sixth or  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
210 

seventh. I should be number one and my community should be number one and the province should be 
number one, because we have these talents and they should be developed. I should not have to leave this 
province to allow them to be developed. I should be allowed to do it right here.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have travelled in a good part of the United States and Canada and recently to eastern 
Canada and western Canada and I have met fellow Saskatchewan people. the attitude is there today, as 
well as it is here. I revert back to some of my earlier comments. We have lost a million children, a 
million. The nation has doubled in population from 11 million to 24 million people and we still have the 
same number of people as we did in ’36 because they were forced to move. The opportunities were not 
afforded them here. With all these resources and all of this potential, they had to move because they 
were smothered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you cannot legislate excellence. You can’t legislate against failure. You have to allow 
people to develop and grow and build and make mistakes but continue to develop their talents. 
 
Compassion cannot be imposed; competition cannot be smothered. I want to repeat that, Mr. Speaker, to 
the members opposite. Compassion cannot be imposed and competition cannot be smothered. I might 
add that a socialist will never learn that because, by definition, when they do they become Tories. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, this country needs confidence and it needs some economic 
leadership. Canadians do believe there is so much more that we can be. Saskatchewan is open for 
business, not into businesses. As William Jennings Bryan once said: 
 

Destiny is not a matter of chance; it is a matter of choice. Destiny is not a thing to be waited for; 
it is a thing to be achieved. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan will be number one. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, let there be no mistake that I will be supporting the motion 
before the Assembly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have this opportunity to take part in this debate today 
and am especially pleased that I can follow our new Premier. There are some advantages in this being a 
maiden speech, so if I tell the members opposite that this is my maiden speech as a member of the 
opposition would they give me the same courtesy? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I would like to inform the member that of the 
members sitting in this House, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition and the Attorney General are 
the only ones who have spent more time in this House than I  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
211 

have. So that is an elevation I received in the last election. 
 
My first words, Mr. Speaker, must be to offer you my congratulations on your election to the office you 
hold in this Assembly. Some members will know that the hon. member for Rosetown-Elrose and I share 
some very important fundamental beliefs. It is partly because of this that I say to all of the members that 
I think we made a good choice in electing the member for Rosetown-Elrose to the Speaker’s office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I believe circumstances will prove that the Executive Council’s loss will 
be our gain here in the legislature. While we regret such a loss to the Executive Council, this Assembly 
can in no way be held responsible for that. Mr. Speaker, many of us know you to be level-headed, 
someone who applies a strict discipline to his conduct, and I am sure you will use those principles in this 
legislature. We wish you well in mastering the tasks you have assume. We ask you to keep in mind that, 
like you, many of us are getting used to a new role assigned by the electors. We hope, too, that you will 
always keep foremost in your mind that one of the most difficult challenges and one of the most 
awesome responsibilities is to protect the minority view – the minority opinion – in this Assembly. 
 
I want, as well, to congratulate all the members, particularly the new members, on their election on April 
26. I would also like to offer a special word of congratulations to the member who just took his seat. The 
member spends a fair bit of time in my constituency and it will be our pleasure to entertain both the 
Premier and the Princess next month. It must be at least a bit of a disappointment to him that in his romp 
to power it couldn’t have been a family affair. But I suppose the member for Estevan, the Premier who 
just left (we hope you will pass the word on to him), will be able to find some consolation in not having 
his family at hand – consolation that I gather he might find in having so many new members at head 
instead. 
 
I want to thank those people who worked so hard to return me to this Assembly. I want to thank those 
people who gave me their support on election day. I will do my utmost to serve all the people of the fine 
constituency of Assiniboia-Gravelbourg to the best of my ability for this term of the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am a strong believer in our democratic system of government. It has been developed over 
along period of time. It has grown and been refined to suit modern needs. It has become a strong 
institution, well-sited to the needs of our society today. Being a strong believer, I accept the 
consequences of the system. The people are never wrong. We, over on this side, are alive and well 
although greatly reduced in number, and we have a new government with a mandate to carry out its 
program. Not only do you have a mandate but you have a responsibility. Before very much time goes by 
it won’t be good enough for the people opposite to plead for more time, or complain that they were left 
with a few things to clean up, or even, as the Premier did this afternoon, start blaming the federal 
government. The member for Thunder Creek, or the member for Qu’Appelle particularly, will be experts 
on the subject of cleaning up messes. And it is a good thing too, because a few months from now it will 
be their own messes that they will be dealing with. I expect they will need more help than they can get 
from just Terry Leier or Ron Barclay. 
 
The people opposite have a responsibility, as I said, to carry out their program – not  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
212 

just the planks they were high-flying on the TV, but the entire program, and for my part I don’t intend to 
listen to excuses from the Minister of Agriculture about priorities. That word found no place in his 
vocabulary prior to taking office on May 8. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, today I’d like to spend some time documenting for this Assembly the things that were 
promised to the agricultural community by the people opposite. I want you to know that I still have a 
affair bit of research to do before I can be sure I have a complete list, but I do want to put on the record 
those promises that I have uncovered. And I want to the government spokesmen to tell me, when they 
respond, when we might expect to see these promises kept – in the next year, two years, three years, four 
years? No more pie in the sky. I want to know from them in a very specific way the details as they see 
them, and when these programs will be in place. Then, in time, Mr. Speaker, we and the people will 
measure. 
 
On page 10 of something called Pocket Politics (and I must confess I left it in my office), there is a quick 
reference on PC policies for candidates. It says: 
 

We will Honor all land bank leases, and land bank land will be offered for sale at a price and 
interest rate that will encourage the lessee to buy it if he so desires. 
 

They repeated that in an article on April 22 in the Western Producer and the member for 
Bengough-Milestone repeated that in a campaign ad on April 8 in the Radville Star. I want the Minister 
of Agriculture to tell this House, when he has his turn, how the lessees will be encouraged to buy the 
land they are renting. Will it be done by jacking up lease rates? Is that how he is planning to do it? Will 
he jack up the lease rates and force those lessees to buy and if they can’t afford to do it the land will go 
to the highest bidder? If that isn’t the plan, the minister should tell us just what is in the plans. What 
does he mean by “offered for sale at a price that will encourage the lessee to buy”? 
 
I was interested in the comments of the Premier this afternoon. Does that mean that the rates will be 
more or less than market value? If it means market value, it’s a nonsense statement; if it means less than 
market value, I say to the members opposite: who gets it? Who gets this unfair advantage? One farmer 
who was awarded a lease out of 10 or 20 or 30 of the original who applied for the lease? what about the 
9 or 19 or 29? How is this fair to them? These are questions which the public will want to ask and it 
deserves an answer before very long. 
 
I predict, Mr. Speaker, that the people opposite are going to want to repeal The land Bank Act. They will 
want to bury somewhere in the department or in their new family farm purchase program all the dealings 
in respect to land bank land and leases. Why would they do that? So that the public and the lessees will 
have more difficulty in getting some of their questions answered. That’s why, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While I am discussing land bank, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to tell members about one of the messes 
the people opposite have already created. They sent out a little letter. I asked the minister about it in 
question period today. He has promised to get me an answer. I understand there could be as many as 600 
or 800 people who had applications pending to sell land to the land bank. In some of the cases which 
were brought to my attention, the applicants had already received an offer to purchase from the land 
bank. The transaction was well on the way to being finalized. Then they got this letter, dated May 1982, 
and I want to read it into the record: 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
213 

Dear Applicant: The Saskatchewan Land Bank Commission has ceased its land purchasing 
activities. Therefore, the commission will be unable to proceed further with your application to 
sell. While land bank purchasing has ceased, the Government of Saskatchewan is currently 
considering alternative programs and policies to address the needs of the farming community. 
Yours sincerely, Deputy Chairman. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there were 800 letters like that. Some of those people got those letters during the winter or 
early spring, saying that their application was going to be considered this year. They took that letter to 
their local bank, and the bank advance d them large sums of money – on a half section, maybe $300,000 
or more. They borrowed at 19 per cent or 20 per cent interest and made a commitment to farm. 
 
Can you tell me how a farmer with a half section, carrying that kind of load, can continue to operate his 
farm? On the strength of this letter, they made some commitments. Now this PC government is saying to 
these farmers, “Tough break, maybe you can sell it to a neighbour.” A constituent was told yesterday, 
“Well, you can declare bankruptcy. No, you are not stuck” . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I didn’t he 
was told that in the minister’s office. 
 
Process a few extra applications, Mr. Minister. Why not help these farmers hang on to their farms? You 
are anxious to help people who own their houses in the city hang on to their houses and their mortgages. 
Why not help just a couple more? Is that going to be such a great thing to help a few more renting land? 
Why shut it off dead and leave these young people stranded? There are more than just in my riding. I am 
sure all of the rural members across are receiving some pressure and concerns from people dealing with 
them. 
 
Anyone who was dealing with the land bank is being treated by the Minister of Agriculture in exactly the 
same manner as he dealt with civil servants who were fired. “Tough break,” he says. He shows no cause, 
offers no reason to explain it. That’s the open and fair government my friends opposite have been talking 
and bragging about during this throne speech. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they promised again in Pocket Politics, page 12, something called the 
Saskatchewan Family Farm Purchase Program to transfer farmland from older to younger farmers, 
guaranteeing loans of up to $350,000 for five years at 8 per cent, then 12 per cent or the current interest 
rates. “The program will be similar to a former farm loan improvement program,” they said. 
 
They also said, in a province-wide piece of campaign literature entitled “Commitment,” and I quote: 
 

This program will ensure that farm ownership is within the reach of young farmers. 
 
They also said, and I am quoting an advertisement carried April 8 in the Radville Star on behalf of the 
member for Bengough-Milestone: 
 

These loans would be available to young people who are just getting started in farming. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
214 

So what will they do with these promises, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Will it be limited to people already 
farming? Not if you read the Minister of Rural Affair’s advertisement. He says “to young people just 
getting started.” will it be limited by some kind of arbitrary amount available from the reassure? Not if 
you read the material, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It says, “This program will ensure that farm ownership is 
within the reach of young farmers.” Young farms, not some young farmers, it says. Does it say the 
program will be limited and some young farmers won’t be eligible if they already have some land? I 
can’t find anything that says there will be an asset test. 
 
I can find plenty of ridicule which was heaped on our programs like FarmStart, but none of the literature 
suggests limits in this proposal. So, will we now find limits, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I suspect we will. A 
lot of people may be disappointed come the introduction of this program this fall. Maybe the members 
opposite plan on defining a young farmer as somebody under the age of 25 so as to limit it that way. Or, 
maybe they plan on limiting the amounts to be borrowed to, say, $10 million per year, in which case they 
might help 120 farmers in 4 years, compared to land bank which got over 2,500 people into farming. 
 
Another topic is irrigation and water management in the same Western Producer article that I referred to 
earlier, they promise, and I quote: 
 

To encourage the further development of the Saskatchewan irrigation project with assistance to 
farmers wishing to irrigate. 
 

In the same Pocket Politics they said they would ensure the viability of Saskatchewan’s rural economy 
through the vigorous promotion of irrigation and water management. That was on page 10. On page 11 
they said much the same but they added “with assistance to farmers wishing to irrigate.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they said it almost every way they could. More assistance to farmers? There were 
programs of assistance in place before. Vigorous promotion? There was promotion before, and a water 
management plan which was in place. We will see, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Earlier, they used the promise 
to deliver irrigation to all irrigable land. That is a program we figured would cost more than $3 billion. 
We will be watching to see how much dust the Minister of Agriculture will settle with this program. 
 
Here is a dandy – the farm fuel reduction program. I don’t know if the Premier or the Minister of 
Finance or the Minister of Revenue or the other ministers are aware of this one. We discussed it during 
the question period today. They can find it in the April 22 Radville Star. It is another promise from their 
star promise, the member for Bengough-Milestone. This is what he promised: reinstatement of the farm 
fuel reduction program. 
 
For those new members who are not familiar with what the farm fuel reduction program was, the 
program was not subject to road tax, 20 per cent sliding or standing still. We want to know when the 
Minister of Agriculture and Deputy Premier is going to run this little promise through the treasury board. 
Will it be this summer, this fall, next year, never? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Which one is that? 
 
MR. ENGLE: — Farm fuel reduction. Maybe while he’s telling us about reinstating the farm fuel 
reduction program he will also tell us about another promise found on page 11 of the famous Pocket 
Politics, where they promised, and I quote: 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
215 

To allow the use of purple fuel in all farm vehicles, including three-or-more-axle units. 
 

Maybe the Minister of Agriculture, who helped convince people that farms paid a road tax on purple 
fuel, can now explain why farm fuel costs no less than any other, why someone holidaying in his 32-foot 
motor home pays exactly the same price as the farmer hauling his wheat. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another promise in Pocket Politics on page 10. 
 

Support for marketing boards only if they are approved by a producer vote and producer 
controlled. 

 
This is a promise to undermine the wheat board, thinly disguised. Is this the end of the hog marketing 
commission? The minister should tell this Assembly pretty soon. He should start talking about the 
policies of his ministry. He should tell us of his ministry’s plans to give its support to plans for a new 
hog export corporation, which is being recommended, according to the Leader-Post article on June 16, 
by executives of the Saskatchewan, the Alberta and the Manitoba hog marketing agencies, and by Jim 
Morris, the general manager of our own commission. 
 
Will that support be forthcoming, or will the minister pull the pin on a good proposal because it doesn’t 
fit his dogma? Tell this Assembly and our hog producers about your intentions. Review some of these 
programs and policies, Mr. Minister. Spend some time doing that instead of reviewing lists of employees 
against election sign locations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a long list of promises. Let me just read them to you. I will keep my 
comments brief. 
 

Promise to keep, to expand the natural gas network throughout the province, thereby reducing 
energy costs to our farms, villages and towns. 

 
That’s in your leaflet “Commitment”, and on page 12 of Pocket Politics. And the member for Meadow 
Lake, in an April 21 advertisement in the Meadow Lake Progress adds to that, and I quote: 
 

Not just a practical network (under the headline “Commitment”) – natural gas to every farm in 
Saskatchewan in four years. 

 
What about the towns and villages and farmers that were ready to go this spring? The meeting at 
Woodrow was cancelled not that long ago. “When can we have it? When can we go? We’re ready to 
proceed.” 
 
They said in the Western Producer, and on page 10 of Pocket Politics, and in their province-wide leaflet: 
 

A Progressive Conservative government will be committed to the preservation of the crow rate, 
realizing a farming community cannot afford further cost increases. 

 
And what will they do about it, Mr. Speaker? I wouldn’t fault farmers if they expect this government to 
pick up any shortfall if the federal government pulls out of its  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
216 

obligations. The minister laughs. The people across the way, after all, are committed to the preservation 
of the crow rate – or so they say – and we will be saying, “Put your money where your mouth is.” 
 
They promised on page 11 of Pocket Politics: 
 

To support the development of secondary industries, such as food processing plants, and to 
establish a Saskatchewan agriculture and food processing program to provide both investment 
capital and incentives. 

 
And in their province-wide leaflet: 
 

To place major emphasis on agricultural processing in our rural communities. 
 
The message is clear enough: major emphasis to provide investment capital, provide incentives, locate in 
rural communities. We will see. 
 
They promised to establish an agricultural capital grant, page 11 of Pocket Politics: 
 

To establish an agricultural capital grant program to provide farms with economic incentives to 
fully capture the benefits of value-added agriculture with particular reference to feedlots, 
slaughter houses and irrigation projects. 
 

I look forward to the Minister of Agriculture’s explaining this program in this debate or in the estimates 
later this year. 
 
Here is another, from page 11 of Pocket Politics: 
 

A PC government will create a rural community development program designed to revitalize 
Saskatchewan towns and villages by giving unconditional capital grants to local governments and 
tax incentives to rural, industrial, and service sectors. 
 

The minister should explain to us if that is the heavier version of a promise made in the province-wide 
leaflet “Commitment,” which says they would create a rural community development program to 
revitalize commerce and small business in rural areas. If, indeed, it is the same promise, he should tell us 
where the unconditional capital grants for local governments are and where the tax incentives to rural, 
industrial, and service sectors disappeared to. Did he hope no one would notice? Does he think no one 
else would care? I will be looking forward to the Minister of Agriculture or the Minister of Finance 
telling us, in this debate or in the estimates, the details of this goody. 
 
Another program, outlined on page 11, is one to develop a provincial water management policy, 
cognizant of the need to preserve the natural environment as a whole. We will be in touch with people 
like the wildlife federation and the natural history society people to se how you do with this one. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
217 

You also promise to substantially increase funding to educational and research institutions working in 
the area of agriculture and veterinary medicine and, somewhere else in the same section, to establish a 
major agricultural research institute. The minister should indicate the amount of substantial increase. He 
should tell us if he thinks the promise I quoted suggests that there would be any problem finding the 
money. Tell us now if the second part (and I would like you to listen to this) spells the end of the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute at Humboldt. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Never. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — It doesn’t. Good. They promised, in their province-wide leaflet, “Commitment”: 
 

A new PC government will ensure that adequate social services and health facilities, including 
special-care units for senior citizens, are available in all rural areas. 

 
I want to point out to the Minister of Finance that the dictionary defines “ensure” this way: to make sure 
of or certain of. It defines “adequate” as satisfying the requirements. We will expect you to make certain 
that all the requirements are met. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also promised in Pocket Politics, page 10, to encourage industrial use of grain, such as 
ethanol production. Perhaps the Minister of Agriculture can explain what the hold-up is at the plant 
which is set to go at Coronach. Perhaps this last promise, as compared to their performance to date, 
foreshadows things to come. Here is this project, set to go. It matches all the promises made by your 
people opposite, but the project is one hold. That means lost jobs – an engineer told me the other night 
that 20 jobs were lost in his company because of this project – lost opportunities, lost hopes. It is an 
inability to act, to make decisions about anything more complex than firing some bureaucrats who dare 
display an NDP sign. Or is it more serious? 
 
They made a lot of expensive promises – to cut oil royalties (lost revenue to the province), to cut the gas 
tax (lost revenue to the province), and to provide welfare payments to people with incomes of $80,000 if 
they have mortgages. Now, they are discovering that there is no vault in the basement of this building. 
What did you call it earlier today – Mother Hubbard’s cupboard? Well, the former leader of the 
opposition, when he was tearing around the country, called it the Blakeney bank. There is no vault. 
There is an end to the capacity of the treasury to dole out all these goodies. But the people opposite are 
on the hook. Soon enough they will find some lasting traditions in this province. Some say that Tommy 
Douglas, Woodrow Lloyd and their governments where in the mould of the populist politicians. Some 
pundits have been casting the view that this new government may be in the same mould, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what kept the governments of Tommy Douglas and Woodrow Lloyd and, yes, even Allan 
Blakeney, in the mould of populist political parties? What was it these people kept? They kept all their 
election promises. I think the pundits may soon be recasting their views of the regime opposite. It is 
obvious, Mr. Speaker, that I will not be supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is an Honor for me to rise and join in the debate on 
the Speech from the Throne. I would like you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to extend my congratulations to Mr. 
Speaker on his election to that prestigious office. There are a  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
218 

number of us in this House who have witnessed his actions as an MLA for the past number of years. It is 
indeed fair to say that he is held in high esteem by persons of all political persuasions for his outstanding 
record of service to his constituents and to the people of Saskatchewan. I, for one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
have supreme confidence in his ability to be an impartial officer of this House. I would hope that all 
members will be guided by his very, very true wisdom. 
 
I would also like to congratulate my colleague, the member for Melfort, for his excellent remarks in 
moving the address in reply, and the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, who so ably seconded the 
motion, I would also like to congratulate all members of this House on their election and re-election. I 
would say to the new members that you are embarking on a wonderful experience. The next four years 
will prove informative and extremely educational. I would like you to always bear in mind that the 
decisions we make in this House can affect upwards of one billion people, and as members we should 
always be cognizant of that great responsibility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a great Honor for me to have the privilege of representing the Maple Creek 
constituency for a second term. At this time, I would like to thank the hundreds of workers who 
campaigned on my behalf and those who supported me in the election, I can assure all my constituents 
that I will continue to serve their interests with great fervour. 
 
I would also like to thank Premier Grant Devine for inviting me to be a member of this very first 
Progressive Conservative cabinet. I can assure the Premier that I am very, very proud to have the 
opportunity to serve as the first female cabinet minister ever named in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I might add, sir, that my constituents are very proud of that fact too. To me, 
it is an Honor and a great responsibility and one I hope I will be able to pursue honestly and with great 
integrity. 
 
My constituency has, within its boundaries, two of Canada’s greatest geological phenomena. One is the 
Great Sand Hills, Canada’s only true desert area. The other is the Cypress Hills, the highest point in 
Canada between the Laurentian Mountains in the East and the Rockies in the West. In fact, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the elevation at Lookout Point in the Cypress Hills is the same as at Banff, Alberta. Both of 
these are ecologically fragile areas, and are a great source of pride to the people of my constituency. 
 
My constituency is a rural area which has as its resources grain farming, ranching, gas, oil and some 
minerals. But I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the greatest resource of my constituency is its people. 
they are sincere and genuine people who not only know the importance of freedom and independence, 
but also know that they are wiling to help each other when help is needed. 
 
On April 26 the people of Saskatchewan decisively turned out a government bereft of ideas and policies. 
They turfed out a government that was stagnating and had lost touch with the people, and everyone knew 
it. The voters of this province replaced the NDP government with a new Progressive Conservative 
government led by a young and very able Premier, Grant Devine. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
219 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The electors chose to have in power a party which demonstrated, and which 
will continue to demonstrate for many more years, that it cares about their problems. 
 
The former premier, on an open line show yesterday, said that in hindsight he should perhaps have held 
the election in June. Surely with the same hindsight, the hon. member should realize that if he had 
listened to the concerns of the voters rather than closeting himself with his multitude of political 
advisers, he might not be sitting across the way with such a pathetically small and ineffective group now. 
 
Mr. Deputy speaker, I also listened with great interest to the remarks made by the former premier on 
Friday last, and this past Monday. He chastised us for the changes we have made in the public service. 
Well, I can say with great confidence, as our Premier did today and as my colleague the Minister of 
Mineral Resources said on Monday in his speech, that the criteria for filling a civil service position in 
this province will now be based on professionalism. I listened to the Leader of the Opposition speak with 
great interest because I feel that there is no one in this House more qualified to speak on the subject of 
demoralizing the civil service than he, himself. He had 11 years in which to inflict his politics and his 
philosophies on the civil service. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can tell you who is the happiest with the change 
of government. It is the true career civil servant. He or she will now be judged solely on his or her merits 
and not on party affiliation. I think that is what the people of Saskatchewan expect a true career civil 
service to be. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition also spoke at length on the priorities of this government. He almost had 
himself convinced that this government is insensitive and uncaring. Nothing could be further from the 
truth. Every member of this government is sensitive to the needs of the people of our province, because, 
as I remind the member opposite, we did the listening for the past four or five years and not them. 
 
I can say that as each cabinet minister sorts out the mess left behind by the NDP, priority items will be 
dealt with responsibly and quickly. I feel that this Progressive Conservative government has already 
responded to some of the needs of the people. within seconds of taking office we implemented the 
largest tax cut in the history of this province. We eliminated the 20 per cent road tax on fuel. This will 
put money back into the pockets of all people – not just a particular class of people, but all people. I 
think that it is fair to say that this is one area where we as a party and the members opposite differ 
philosophically. We feel that if people are able to have more money in their pickets they will go out and 
spend that money. That in itself will generate jobs and economic activity in our province. 
 
We are also going to give assistance to home-owners through our mortgage interest reduction plan in 
order to allow them to cope with high interest rates. People from all walks of life have been faced with 
the prospect of losing their homes, or have been unable to get into the housing market. This program will 
provide all our citizens with real help, not only the rich citizens as we indicated by the former premier 
yesterday. This program will cost an estimated $56 million by the end of this fiscal year, and it is on this 
type of program that we feel a government should be spending its money. We feel that if the previous 
administration could make interest-free loans in the hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of millions of 
dollars to the family of crown corporations (and, I might add, thus depleting our heritage fund almost 
completely), then we as a government feel it is our responsibility to put priorities where priorities should 
be  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
220 

placed and that is with the actual oxygen-breathing people of this province. 
 
But when the ember opposite criticizes our program, there are a few things that he doesn’t mention. He 
doesn’t care to mention that in the first year of the program, benefits will be going to some 38,000 
home-owners across this province and that by the end of June 1985, at the termination of the program, 
some 105,000 families in Saskatchewan will have received benefits from this very, very innovative plan. 
One might ask: where was his government when people began facing the prospect of losing their homes? 
they were very long on rhetoric, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but very short on actual cash. I can tell you where 
members opposite were; they were out building copper-coloured skyscrapers and monuments to 
themselves. 
 
I would like to take a few minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to describe the role of government as I see it. I 
feel very strongly that government exists to make sure that powerful monopolies, whether union or 
industry, don’t hold the rest of the people of the province to ransom. I feel that it is the responsibility of 
government to create the conditions for firms and families, for unions and individuals to be able to 
pursue prosperity without damaging one another. 
 
There is no such thing today as total security. No job can be guaranteed forever. No business can be 
guaranteed forever. And no government can free the people from all material worries. But government 
can and must help those who through no fault of their own cannot help themselves. I feel that this 
government will provide the conditions which favour those efforts and endeavours that bring prosperity 
to all the people of Saskatchewan. We as a government can be competitive while being compassionate. 
 
One of the themes of the Leader of the Opposition’s speech was a standard NDP class argument. He 
tried to decry the salary being paid to our new cabinet secretary. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
particular gentleman has well over 20 years of intergovernmental experience and is highly respected by 
parliamentarians right across Canada. He has worked under four premiers: Duff Roblin, Walter Weir, Ed 
Schreyer and Sterling Lyon. But while the member opposite is decrying the wages paid to this particular 
civil servant, he fails to mention the salary that his administration had been paying to the head of the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we were on the other side of the House, we continually attempted to find out that particular 
gentleman’s salary and the NDP would not give the public that information. The standard pat answer 
was that it was not in the public’s good to know. And do you know why, sir? Because they were paying 
him $140,000 a year plus expenses. And what did the head of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
tell the people of the province late last year? He estimated that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
was going to be in receipt of revenues totalling $150 million, approximately, in the 1982-83 fiscal year. 
But the story is quite different now. Now this highly paid expert tells us that perhaps they overestimated 
the revenues that would be generated by PCS. It has dropped from near $150 million to something less 
than $10 million, I believe. But I will have to give the gentleman credit. He is being consistent with the 
previous administration. They have all been overestimating revenues for many, many years. 
 
You know, the former premier chastised us for paying the top civil servant of the province his salary, but 
he conveniently forgot to mention the moneys being paid to people they brought in. The Leader of the 
Opposition went on to try to demonstrate that  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
221 

our programs would be paid for on the backs of the little guys. That attempt to antagonize one group of 
people against another just won’t wash anymore. The people of Saskatchewan are too smart for that 19 
 
 century approach. The people of Saskatchewan demonstrated that on April 26. they demonstrated that 
they wanted a government that could and would be competitive and compassionate. This government 
has already demonstrated these qualities, and we will continue to do so over the course of the next four 
years. 
 
I must say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am both honored and delighted to support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BOUTIN: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Premier Devine and hon. members, I would like to 
take this opportunity to thank the people of Kinistino for electing me as their representative in the 
legislature. It is with pleasure and Honor that I sit here today on their behalf. 
 
The people of the Kinistino riding believe that they can be the number one riding in all of Saskatchewan, 
because we have the potential to create and acquire and hold secondary industry. We hold some of the 
most highly assessed farmland in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the main concerns in our riding is the land bank. The people of Kinistino believe that a farmer 
who owns and operates his own land is more efficient that the farmer who is only a tenant of the 
government. We believe that farmers should be given the chance to purchase land bank land at a defined 
low interest rate, as promised by the Progressive Conservative Party during the election campaign. 
 
The existing land bank should be thoroughly examined and thoroughly reviewed. For example, a farmer 
having sold his land to the land bank invests his money in the bank, turns around and rents the land back 
from the government at only a portion of his daily interest received from the bank. I would like to see 
this revised, not because I don’t farm land bank land, but because our Progressive Conservative party 
will lend money to farmers buying from their fathers or grandfathers, giving them an opportunity to 
make a start. This would be highly beneficial to all the young farmers of our community. 
 
As Mr. Berntson said, this program is going to be developed now and details will be given out this fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also in the area of health and social services – a committee which I am on – some 
communities in our riding require expansion. There is also a great need in some communities for 
special-care units for our senior citizens. As there is an increasing number of elderly people living alone, 
I feel they should have better accommodation for living safely, yet independently. There should be more 
units built where senior citizens can live alone, yet have the opportunity to mingle and receive assistance 
when required. There is something that we should all realize; it is true that it was the Hon. T.C. Douglas 
who initiated the program of Medicare. But we have to realize that it was the late Hon. John Diefenbaker 
who nationalized this program in 1958. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
222 

MR. BOUTIN: — This we have to remember. Our nursing home situation has been looked into. Birch 
Hills, for example, has a population that is 25 per cent senior citizens. These are the people who have 
built our society, who have created incentive for the promotion of growth. They opened the land and 
worked hard to develop our good country. 
 
In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to reassure the people of Kinistino thank I, Ben Boutin, 
their MLA, will represent them to the best of my ability and will bring forth their problems and needs to 
the legislature. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Congratulations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish, too, to congratulate Mr. Speaker on his 
election as Speaker of this House, in addition to the many congratulations that have already been 
extended. I can only repeat what has been said many times, that as a new member of this legislature I 
will always try to do my best to abide by the rules of the House and be faithful to your decisions. I know 
that in your roles in these high offices as Speakers of the House you will be more than fair and just in 
your decisions. Further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to congratulate all of the new members, 
including our Premier and the five new cabinet ministers, as well as our re-elected members who once 
again will serve the people, but in a more positive manner as government members of this legislature. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, this side of the House has been added to in overflowing numbers because 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan chose to elect what will prove to be earnest, diligent, 
hard-working new members to augment the work that was begun in opposition. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — The re-elected sitting members on this side were rewarded by 100 per cent re-election 
for their past efforts. You can see, Mr. Speaker, the side now opposite and to our left was totally 
humiliated by the people of this province, and deservedly so. Nonetheless, they are also to be 
congratulated. If they pay attention, they will learn how responsible government will respond to the 
needs of the people. 
 
This province has tremendous potential. We have thousands of hardworking people. we have great 
untapped natural resources, and the dead hand of socialism had to be removed if we were to enjoy the 
benefits of this potential. The socialist had broken faith with the people who elected them and now they 
sit in disgrace as their disregard for the people of this province has been proven. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my constituents in Regina North for giving me the privilege 
of representing them in this legislature. I will certainly do my best to represent them well, and I can 
assure you, Mr. Speaker, that I am prepared to work extremely hard on their behalf to achieve this end. I 
am prepared to fully earn the confidence that they placed in me on April 26, and to make myself worthy 
of the trust they placed in me. 
 
Regina North is a new seat. They elected a new member. And now we form a new government. We will 
not let them down. We plan on representing them for a long, long time. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
223 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Our urban riding of Regina North, Mr. Speaker, is rather unique in that it embraces an 
extremely broad cross section of the electorate. It embraces two major neighbourhoods of young, 
growing families in the residential areas of Uplands and Argyle Park – young families just starting to 
wend their long journeys through life, enjoying the privilege of owning their own homes, living in new 
communities and watching their children grow. 
 
Regina North also embraces families whose children have outgrown the grade school bracket and which 
now have young teen-agers in their families. This is shown by the fact that we have three high schools in 
our riding. These residential neighbourhoods, Mr. Speaker, are slightly older, perhaps in the 10- to 
20-year age group. 
 
Again, man of our residents also live in apartment buildings. The riding of Regina North has distinct 
areas of densely populated apartment dwellings. A recent announcement indicates our government’s 
concern and help for these citizens who are also caught up in severe cost increases. 
 
Then, too, Mr. Speaker, we have a couple of older, established neighbourhoods with homes upward of 
20 years of age. And, finally, Mr. Speaker, we also enjoy the residency of our senior citizens in our 
Eventide Home. 
 
All these good people, Mr. Speaker, spoke out on April 26 and said, “Enough.” The past government 
had displayed total disregard to their needs and their wants for far too long. The people wanted a change; 
they demanded a change. And that’s witnessed here right now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Added to this residential population, we have an extremely broad spectrum of 
commercial activity, beginning with small confectionary stores and ending with perhaps Regina’s most 
successful major retail shopping centre, the Northgate Mall. And I might add that that mall was 
promoted and financed by private enterprise. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Our people, Mr. Speaker, also come from many walks of life and, once again, cover a 
total spectrum. We enjoy the benefit of representing labourers, trades people, professionals, sales 
representatives, blue-collar employees, white-collar workers, students, clerks, business people, and, yes, 
even some farmers live this urban area of Regina North. 
 
When we set about the task of organizing this uniquely integrated riding, it was more than obvious from 
the outset that we required a government that would really care about people and be truly representative 
of all people. The throne speech we listened to earlier indicates that our government can, and will be, a 
government truly representative of the needs of all the people, a government that can be reliable without 
being remote. 
 
It did not take our government very long to implement one of our major promises when  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
224 

we repealed the gasoline. Our government decided to put some immediate money back into the hands of 
young people, the people with growing families, and our older citizens. There is no question, Mr. 
Speaker, that this immediate, extra little income that they now have to spend each week, or every time 
they fill up their cars with gasoline, was an immediate measure to help combat increased costs and 
inflation, which have been plaguing our people for the last six years (most certainly the last three or four 
years). Obviously, the members opposite were not listening, or else they did not really care about the 
needs of our people and our families. 
 
This one act, as pointed out, provides an immediate measure of relief from the increasingly heavy burden 
of taxation that our citizens live with today. And this act alone represents the largest single tax cut in the 
history of our province. 
 
As we have heard, Mr. Speaker, it is our government’s intention to implement this mortgage interest 
reduction plan. It is difficult to assess how overwhelmingly successful this piece of legislation will be in 
providing not only the people of Regina North, but all the people in this province of Saskatchewan, with 
the further necessary relief they require if we truly desire our citizens to be able to own their own homes. 
Indeed, this legislation is the envy of other provinces, even our neighbours immediately east of us, and 
will probably become the model for many more. 
 
The ever-increasing and spiralling inflation rate is making the dream of owning one’s own home not a 
dream, but a nightmare. The devastating interest rates are not only eating up monthly grocery and utility 
bills, and entertainment budgets to which every family is certainly entitled, but also, Mr. Speaker, in ever 
more increasing incidence, driving people out of their homes – homes they can no longer afford to pay 
for. Dreams are being shattered daily. 
 
We propose with this legislation, Mr. Speaker, to provide our people no longer with a dream, but now 
with a reality. The ripple effect of this program will also be welcome news to tradesmen who have had to 
be laid off because of the sad economy we were left with, and will bring a sign of relief to contractors 
and home builders, as well as to the entire business community, as the financial burdens of our families 
are eased. 
 
As time progresses through this legislature, Mr. Speaker, our government will be bound and determined 
to be a government of the people, truly representative of the needs of all of our people. it is indeed most 
unfortunate that only nine members remain in opposition to account for the cardinal errors that they 
committed in this legislature in the last decade. 
 
We will attempt to uncover and correct these errors. We will prove to the people of Saskatchewan how 
responsible government should, and will, conduct itself. Resource revenues are for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We will not squander huge sums of money on prolific crown families but, rather, return 
these sums to our real families where they rightfully belong, through plans such as the public utilities 
review commission. We will not hide and be ashamed of facts and figures but, rather, openly disclose 
the, and we will listen to our people so that we can truly and efficiently operate utilities on behalf of our 
shareholders, the people of Saskatchewan, by providing the greatest service for the least possible cost. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — I must admit, Mr. Speaker (and I’m sorry that he is not here right now) that  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
225 

the Leader of the Opposition truly amazed me when he indicated that our throne speech contained 
nothing, or very little, for our people. I guess he wasn’t really listening to the throne speech, but then I 
suspect that he hasn’t been listening at all for the last few years. And that’s exactly why he finds himself 
in the role that he plays, Leader of the Opposition. He should also be delighted with the fact that his 
constituency, at least, decided to give him, for the time being, one more chance. 
 
It amazes me further, Mr. Speaker, that he is making such a big hue and cry over the personnel changes 
that our government felt were required recently. They all are; they all stand up and complain abut it. 
How times change! On October 27, 1971, the hon. member told a press conference, and this is a quote, 
“Changes in the civil service will continue as long as the NDP government is in office.” Then, if that 
statement wasn’t clear enough, on November 8, 1971, the then minister of natural resources, Mr. 
Kramer, speaking on behalf of the government, stated in North Battleford, and again I quote, “We have 
not fired nearly enough.” And then again later this same minister was quoted: “There is no way we can 
put up with the incompetence we find in some departments. Some departments are loaded with people 
who are grossly incompetent.” And then, Mr. Speaker, I understand that the civil service ranks were 
totally demoralized when, in December 1971, the NDP convention backed up its leader, Mr. Blakeney, 
be passing a resolution which called for yet more firings and, in effect, placed every position in the civil 
service on the firing line. 
 
In fairness, Mr. Speaker, I ask you: how can the hon. members opposite now have a total and complete 
about-face, when our government’s only intention is to improve the ranks of our civil service by 
encouraging true professionalism to allow for security and progression through these ranks without 
political interference and without the placing of political hacks? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, I am humbled by the responsibility and duty to my electorate but I am 
proud to live in a country where I, as an ordinary citizen, can see public office and serve my fellow man. 
In so serving, I will not break the faith my grandfather, a poor Polish immigrant, had when he adopted 
his homeland of Saskatchewan. 
 
I stand before this House very proudly as I make my maiden speech, and somehow feel that it’s almost 
like delivering an address in our caucus. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — The members opposite (and I suppose I probably must try to understand their position) 
are very, very busy and seem to have to leave this Assembly, Perhaps when they come back they hold 
their caucus there. If they don’t pay more attention, after the next election they might be able to caucus in 
a phone booth. I might point out, too, that I understand (and I hope they’re paying attention) we may 
have to add another desk on this side, right over there in the corner. Won’t that be ice to have another 
one here! 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — When the throne speech was first read and moved, we were treated to an excellent 
maiden speech by our young member for Melfort. 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
226 

He not only delivered his speech very well, but the content was good and provided a lot of information 
for members opposite. Our young member for Saskatoon Riversdale in seconding the motion again 
showed the type of people that the people of Saskatchewan truly, wanted here in this house. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Then the other night, again, we were treated to an excellent speech by a new young 
member for Melville. For a young fellow members opposite tried to cut down, I think he did a pretty fine 
job of handling himself. 
 
I now, too, refer to an article in the paper from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. Part of this article: 
 

“The NDP government of the past 11 years left the province in good financial shape,” he said 
(they were quoting Mr. Blakeney), adding that if resource revenues are included in the 
calculation the NDP produced a surplus budget in each year. 

 
This is a long article. I could read the whole thing. It doesn’t refer to any particular year, and I don’t 
know to what particular surplus. 
 
Our government has been working, or attempting to work, with these resource revenues. We have tried 
to analyse them. The revenues may be there, Mr. Speaker, if you choose to count all the bins full of 
potash, if you choose to count all the other investments they made in this family of crown corporations 
that have not been paying off. I suppose you could consider there are some revenues there. But there is 
no money. How are we supposed t run this government without money? Now, after being in office for 
about six or seven weeks they have the audacity to ask us what we have been doing. We didn’t put 
ourselves in this position. You people put us here. But, we’ll straighten it out; don’t worry about that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Again, we are being criticized for reviewing, for studying and analysing, and other 
comical phrases that are used in this Assembly. You bet we have to review. We have 11 years of 
mismanagement to review. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KLEIN: — We couldn’t possibly study in six weeks all the errors which you people have 
committed in the last four years, let alone in the last 11. 
 
It was mentioned earlier by our Premier that our population is still only one million or less but one 
million young people have left this province. Not only are we not growing, not only will this set our 
province back, but it also breaks up our families, our young people. For instance, in Regina North where 
we have these two residential neighbourhoods with families growing up – I don’t think they are raising 
their kids with the idea of sending them to Alberta or British Columbia or Ontario or someplace else to 
live. I believe they are raising them to live right here in Saskatchewan. That’s why they elected us. They 
want their families to stay here. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
227 

We are trying, and we will in the future more than try, to give you some real action. It won’t take us 11 
years. It will take more than six or seven weeks, but it sure won’t take us 11 years. 
 
I have here another article from the Regina Leader-Post, Saturday, May 8. Again, all the hon. members 
opposite are really crying about all of our terminations. Here’s the headline, “NDP Terminates 69 
Employees.” Mr. Blakeney said, “All those released had been appointed by cabinet and their termination 
opens the door for the new PC government to appoint its own people to the same positions.” 
 
So what’s the big deal? That’s all we’re doing. We’re just reappointing and we haven’t even reappointed 
probably the 69 which you people fired. The same article goes on to state: 
 

The terminated employees will receive ten weeks severance pay, slightly more than the 
compensation of six to eight weeks pay received by terminated employees of the former Tory 
government of Sterling Lyon in Manitoba. 

 
I almost consider the use of the word “slightly” out of order here, where it says, “compensation of six to 
eight weeks,” rather than ten weeks. In the case of six weeks, it’s almost double – a far cry from slightly. 
 
We were asked yesterday, in question period, about the status of GWG. Well, if the NDP wore more 
blue jeans instead of three-piece suits, perhaps GWG would still be in business . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’m sorry, I didn’t hear you; I’d probably be able to handle that one. 
 
Tourism – what did the last administration do about tourism? Advertise like crazy, I suppose. If you 
don’t think that this cheap gas that we have now is going to bring tourists in, boy, you’re wrong. We 
have a lot of fishing in this province of ours and we have parks. We have history, all kinds of historic 
spots, museums, places for people to go and visit. How do they get there? Probably they will have to 
drive, and if their cars work the same as mine, they are going to have to buy gas. And boy, when they can 
buy that gas as cheaply as they can here in Saskatchewan now, don’t tell me that this gas tax was a good 
thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot overemphasize the total support that I must give to the motion by the member for 
Melfort, Mr. Hodgins, to accept this Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last evening as the clock came to 10 p.m. I took my 
place so we could adjourn from the evening. I see I have a few minutes left this afternoon to finish the 
comments I wish to make. 
 
Let’s start on a high note. I was pleased to day when the Attorney General rose to speak about the gift to 
the new prince. The gift of toys was handmade in my constituency by an artist who resides there; he is a 
Canadian citizen by naturalization. Also, these products are available to other people in this province and 
are made in the handicapped workshop centres. The former minister of social services and I were in 
Rosthern to present a cheque to assist them in the construction of the building where these products will 
be produced which are going to the new prince. I’m proud to say that we in our constituency are proud to 
have one of our artists chosen for the job. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
228 

Mr. Speaker, talking about Rosthern makes me think of Sask Housing and a comment that I received this 
weekend while I was home. A young lady informed me that her family has had a Sask Housing home for 
six years, and they still don’t have title because they haven’t straightened to all the paperwork in the 
department. That indicates that there really must be something wrong in Sask Housing. 
 
That being so, I started checking to see if there were any more projects of this type that were in that 
situation. I discovered that in Laird the same problem exists. There are caveats on homes that are almost 
that old, and people still cannot have their titles. What was Sask Housing doing? But on that one I’ve 
been able to learn that since the new minister has taken over he has been working very diligently and it 
looks like, within the next couple of weeks, they will get their titles. I thank the new minister responsible 
for Sask Housing for acting so speedily in this department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last evening, as I adjourned debate so I could come back and speak again today on the 
motion, I listened to a speech by a member from the North. I’m glad to see the former minister of the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan sitting in his chair. I have my niece in Regina with me this week, 
as school is not on. She used to live in La Ronge. She commented to me last evening, after listening to 
that speech, “He doesn’t know what he’s talking about. It isn’t the way he says it is.” That’s from a 
young person who has her summer cottage in that area and who was raised in that area in a fishing lodge 
for many years. As well, her father worked for DNS for many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we heard rhetoric from that member, it’s unfortunate we didn’t hear facts as well. Some 
of the things he mentioned I won’t disagree with. I remember, when I first was elected in 1975, part of 
the liberal campaign. In that campaign they talked about a shoebox full of money. They indicated that 
the shoebox full of money that was found was not properly invoiced and not properly accounted for. 
 
After being elected I was placed on public accounts. One thing was guaranteed every year in public 
accounts; we would hear the horror stories of the accounting systems in DNS. We were also guaranteed 
to see things disappear with no accounting of them. Cows, by the herd, must have been picked up by the 
flies and carried away. That was the only explanation we seemed to get. No common business practices 
were used. I can understand apart of that thinking because it takes a while to learn new traditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the last couple of days we have had the cry from members opposite about nothing 
happening. But it takes time to make studies, to do things for long-term benefit. Short-term benefit is not 
always what you look for, but you look for long-term benefit for the betterment of the people of the 
province. There’s an old saying that only fools rush in where wise men fear to tread. And that’s what 
we’re doing. We’re being wise by moving in slowly, carefully and methodically to make sure that 
everything is done for the best so we don’t have to do something over again as we see happening with 
the federal budget. They’re going to change it again on Monday. 
 
Earlier in question period today, we had questions to the Minister of Agriculture about rebates. I sat in 
this House, Mr. Speaker, and watched the former government remove the farmers’ benefit on the purple 
gas. But when it came near election time, it was ready to put it back on again. A policy for election is 
what I sort of called it. And then shortly  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
229 

after the election was over it removed it again. Now that we are government, they are demanding it be 
put back in again. As the Minister of Agriculture said today, we are assisting them with a 20 per cent tax 
reduction on road fuel. Every product must be delivered by truck, in most cases, to farmers. With the 
fuel costs down, the cost to the farmer will be down or at least will not rise for a longer period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the dairy industry in this province has some problems that were caused by a government 
that was so busy pushing people into the industry when the industry could not sustain many more 
shippers. Moderation and steady growth is always the answer rather than rushing in and causing an 
abundance of the product and causing problems with the market. It’s unbelievable that 50 per cent of a 
man’s quota could be surplus, but that is what has happened in that industry because of pushing so many 
people into the industry on the cream side. 
 
The government that we used to have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Moosomin once 
again pitches in to give me a side comment. He says, “Hardly a government.” Well, it was a government, 
Mr. Member for Moosomin, as you will remember, that was interested in one thing only – not the people 
of the province, but itself as government and the growth of that government. We kept seeing crown 
corporations grow and more crown corporations develop, and more staff. 
 
Talking about staff, the member for Regina a few moments ago indicated about 69 civil servants had 
been released. As I keep my ears to the ground and listen, I hear of ministers having had four and more 
EAs, but they buried them in the department as something else. The former government had EAs all over 
the place. If it took 20 people to do the job and now it only takes one, that’s efficiency. And you 
complain about Mr. Bedson over there. How many people has he replaced? How many fewer people are 
we paying? How many fewer fringe benefits, office space, heating, typewriters and secretaries? He’s a 
bargain for what we’re paying for him. He is an expert in efficiency and considered that all across the 
country. But you don’t know that. You only know heap on more bodies, not efficiency and value for 
your money well spent. 
 
We had the fastest growing civil service that I am aware of and yet when we came to estimates we fond 
contract employees. They don’t show up on the list, so we don’t know if you had them as employees or 
not. But they were buried in your budget that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard the former government members talk about the $52,000 for Kamsack. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, the last day of the House before the election was called, there was a member called the 
Attorney General who sat in that chair. If I remember correctly, he gave us a demonstration like this, like 
that, looking all over for the “invisible man.” Do you remember? He looked under the chair, under this 
chair and that chair, looked up in the galleries. But now where is that invisible man? Where is Roy? I 
don’t see him under his desk. I don’t see him over there. What put him out of this House was your 
policies . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
If the member for Regina has something to say, make it a little louder so that I can reply to it. “He will 
be back before this legislature ends!” Would you like to put your seat on that? Would you be interested 
in putting your seat up on that one? Are you going to resign to give him the opportunity? Is that what 
you are suggesting, Mr. Member? You know, Mrs. Caswell last evening said, “You have no safe seats.” 
Even the former premier’s percentages went considerably down when he ran again. Now, we can talk 
about all the Conservative seats that have grown in population, and the growth factor. 
 



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
230 

You know, once again the member for Assiniboia comes with his brilliant statements. He says that 
Sterling Lyon says talk is cheap. But all that your government ever delivered in 11 years was talk. 
Action? Only when it benefited your government. Not always when it benefited people. There are two 
policies. The first is the gas tax reduction. It benefited every citizen in Saskatchewan when it was put in. 
it will benefit everybody who travels where, given them extra money to spend in Saskatchewan and 
cause the tourist industry to grow. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — The member wants me to call in 5 o’clock, but, Mr. Member, I’m not going to 
allow you the privilege of getting out of the House before I’m done scolding, because I’ve just started. 
And I want to tell you about some things the people tell me. During the last election you fellows had a 
bit of a problem with the candidate who was running against me for your party. So what did you do? 
You got down before a snake’s belly and thought of another trick. What was it? To get the vice-president 
to run as an independent and to throw mud. That is what you did. You know, you got below the snake’s 
belly again. You guys must like it there, because you are always getting down there. 
 
You know, the other day there were two snakes talking and one looked at the other and said, “What have 
you got those scars and bumps on your belly for?” He said, “I just went pas the NDP caucus and there 
were so many of them down there that I had to go over all the stones.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, well, now we can’t resist a statement like that. 
The only thing I would say to that comment is: when you refer to the size of a man and his proportions, 
you must also judge him by his beliefs. And there’s one thing that all of us must remember. My good 
friend, Mr. Diefenbaker, used to say that when we all get to this House we wonder how we made it, and 
after a while we realize. But we all must remember one thing, that we are not the ultimate and the 
answer to all questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is one thing that we must remember: we are not ultimate. There is a Maker and a 
Creator, and that we must respect in all ways in this House. No matter what our faith, we start our day 
with prayer for guidance and wisdom, and that is what we are here for – the betterment of the province. 
Occasionally we will have our little bickers, but that is the way it goes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prior to the election, and in that fancy budget for which I’m not quite sure the figures 
would work out, we heard an announcement about a gas system for rural Saskatchewan. Now why did 
we hear it at that time? Was it because the Conservatives had been asking for it for three years and the 
NDP knew they were in trouble if they didn’t do something about it? That must have been the reason, 
Mr. Speaker, because all of a sudden there was a fancy announcement. Now they cry as they sit in 
opposition, “What are you doing about it?” well, a little patchwork system like you were attempting was 
not half of what we say is needed; a total system is what we’ve suggested and in due course it will be 
delivered. We made a promise on the gas tax; we delivered. We suggested we were going to do 
something about the interest rate, and we are about to make that law. The 13.25 per cent rate, as the 
Premier announced yesterday, will be  



 
June 23, 1982 

 

 
231 

effective July 1. We promised; a promise is a promise, and we have delivered. 
 
We will deliver on our promises, because we believe that we are here to listen to the people, to represent 
the people, to give them what they want and what is best for them. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:01 p.m. 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	REPORTS OF COMMITTEES
	Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills
	NOTICE OF MOTIONS
	HON. MR. LANE: — I give notice that I shall, on Friday next, move first reading of a bill, An Act t amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act.
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Closure of GWG Ltd.; Small Business Loans
	Beef Stabilization Program
	Cost of Farm Fuel
	Farm Purchase Program
	Terminated Land Bank Applications
	Ethanol Plant at Canora
	Representation to Ottawa on Budget
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	INTRODUCTION OF BILLS
	MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS

	Gift for Newly Born Son of the Prince and Princess of Wales
	HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like, on behalf of the government, to announce that the province of Saskatchewan is sending a gift to Their Royal Highnesses, the Prince and Princess of Wales for their newly born son. Fortunately, we have had som...
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	SPECIAL ORDER
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	Address in Reply
	Not just a practical network (under the headline “Commitment”) – natural gas to every farm in Saskatchewan in four years.


