






















































Hansard: June 22, 1982


(112) 113 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 22, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Special Committee to Prepare Lists of Members 
 
ASSISTANT CLERK (PROCEDURAL): — Mr. Martens, from the special committee appointed to 
prepare lists of members to compose the standing committees of the Assembly, presented the second 
report of the said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee recommends that the members whose names will appear on the appended list to the 
Votes this evening compose the standing committees of the Assembly under rule 86. 

 
MR. MARTENS: — It has been moved by Harold Martens, Morse constituency, seconded by the 
member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake: 
 

That the second report of the special committee appointed to prepare lists of members to compose 
the standing committees of the Assembly be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 

 
NOTICE OF MOTION 

 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that on Thursday, June 24, 1982, I shall move first 
reading of a bill, An Act to amend the Statute Law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I further give notice that I shall, on Thursday next, move first reading of a bill, An Act to 
amend The Legal Profession Act. 
 
These are primarily housekeeping bills that were left from the last session. 
 
I give notice that I shall, on Thursday next, move first reading of a bill, An Act to amend The Provincial 
Court Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall, on Thursday next, move first reading of a bill, An Act to amend The Reciprocal 
Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act. 
 
Finally, I give notice that I shall, on Thursday next, move first reading of a bill, An Act to amend The 
Regulations Act. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw your attention and the attention of fellow 
members to a group from the Humboldt constituency, from Bruno. This is a  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
114 

grade 7 class accompanied by teachers Marianne Gerwing and Bernadette White. They have been 
touring the hall of fame and the Museum of Natural History this morning, plus the Legislative Building. 
This afternoon they will be meeting with me at 2:30 p.m. and they will be going to the RCMP museum. 
Again, I would like to welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague it is my pleasure to introduce to the 
Assembly 26 students from the W.C. How School in the constituency of the Hon. Paul Rousseau, 
Minister of Industry and Commerce. Mr. Rousseau is not here today; he is in Ottawa and I guess is 
having some success convincing the Minister of Finance to bring in a new budget. 
 
They are accompanied by their teach, Carol Hart. I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them 
to the Assembly, I hope their day is interesting and informative and ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Closure of GWG Ltd. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce, but in his absence I will director it to the Deputy Premier. It concerns a report in today’s 
Leader-Post indicating that GWG Ltd. Of Saskatoon had announced that its plant will close, and I gather 
from the announcement, permanently, resulting in the termination of about 150 employees and that this 
closure will come about promptly. I wonder if the Deputy Premier or one of his colleagues can indicate 
what steps have been taken to assist the company to stay in business and retain these 150 jobs. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that there were no inquiries made to 
this government by that particular company. However, I am prepared to take notice of the question on 
behalf of the Minister of Industry and Commerce and bring back to this House information as to whether 
in fact there were inquires made and requests for assistance. I remind the Leader of the Opposition that 
the consumer price index just published recorded no change in Saskatoon, and a marginal 0.1 per cent 
increase in Regina; it showed a level of 9.3 per cent over the year in Saskatchewan as opposed to 11.8 
per cent across Canada. I would suggest to the Leader of the Opposition that in fact since the 26th of last 
month, when we brought in a significant tax cut in the form of elimination of road tax, there has been 
quite a bit done for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I fail to follow the logic of the member for 
Souris-Cannington in relating that particular answer to the question of the 150 employees of GWG. I am 
sure they will be very comforted when they go on unemployment insurance to know that their gasoline 
will cost them less. I am sure that will be a comfort to them, as it will be to the Ipsco employees who are 
on unemployment insurance, and to all the other employees who are on unemployment insurance . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . They are being strict now, I suppose, Mr. Speaker. I will ask a supplementary 
then. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 
115 

When the hon. member takes the issue I raised to the Minister of Industry and Commerce and asks him 
for a report, would he also indicate whether or not the government is prepared to offer any assistance and 
to get in touch with GWG to see whether any steps by this government might save those 150 jobs? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — While I am taking notice of the first question, I will also take notice of 
this question, and the answer is yes, the Minister of Industry and Commerce will bring the information 
back to this House. 
 

Summer Employment for Students 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. Given the fact 
that fewer than one-third of students registering at study employment offices across Saskatchewan are 
being placed, and in view of the fact that a great majority of the registrants applying for jobs live in 
urban centres and are seeking employment there, would the minister outline to the House any program 
he has in place in the Department of Urban Affairs to assist urban municipalities to employ students for 
the summer months? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. Member obviously raises a very difficult 
question as far as the economic situation in the province is concerned. There is no question that students 
are having a great deal of difficulty finding jobs. However, I would like to suggest to the hon. Member 
that that is only one of the many areas which has been left to us to clean up. It will take some time. We 
are working very hard on that, and when we have the programs ready we will certainly bring them to this 
House and inform him of the answer. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — The summer is rapidly going to come to a close. As far as students are 
concerned, there is not a great deal of time left, and they are seeking employment now. High school 
students will soon be joining university and institute students in seeking employment. Would the 
minister indicate whether he has any plans to meet with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities’ 
Association), or some other form of municipal governments to deal with at least this area of increasing 
unemployment in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, as was indicated by the interjections, summer started 
yesterday. I don’t believe it’s that near to an end. However, in answer to the question, we are meeting 
with SUMA on a regular basis. I would assume that at least once a week I have had meetings with their 
executive, or attended their regional meetings, or portions of them. The topic has arisen; we are dealing 
with it on an ongoing basis. We are in the process of formulating some plans and, as I indicated, we will 
bring them to the House in due course. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — A supplementary to the minister. Can the minister indicate to this House 
and to the students in Saskatchewan when he will be bringing forward specific plans? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — As I’m sure the Hon. Member is aware, there are many considerations 
in dealing with this question. One of them that obviously has arisen today is the fact that a new federal 
budget will be coming down on Monday. This is an example of the type of thing that we want to take 
into consideration, and we will bring this program on stream and do what we can for these people, and 
we will announce it 



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
116 

when it is in place. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, we had a speech in this House yesterday indicating that this 
was not a government that would wait on Ottawa, and this was not a government that would blame its 
problems and its difficulties on Ottawa. Would the minister indicate what steps the Government of 
Saskatchewan is prepared to take to act in this matter? 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that I have had one question and three 
supplementaries that are all identical, I will repeat an identical answer. We are working on that situation. 
We realize it is grave, and we will bring it in in due course when it is ready. 
 

Small Business Loans 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address a question to the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce, but in his absence to the Deputy Premier. During the election campaign your party pledged 
to provide loans to small businesses at the rate of 9.625 per cent interest. I want to say also that if you 
look closely at the ad, there is a picture of the Tory candidate for Quill Lakes with a very worried look 
on his face because he knew he couldn’t defeat me. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, a promise has been made to the business community that loans would be 
brought in at 9.625 per cent. I have a clipping here headlined “Small Business Loans Plan Studies.” It 
says that: 
 

Paul Rousseau, the minister responsible for the crown investments corporation, says the plan is not top 
priority for the new government and will take some time to implement. 

 
In view of the difficulty that small businesses are encountering, will the Deputy Premier indicate why he 
has placed this program as not a high priority? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Of course, Mr. Speaker, they are all very high priority. It’s a matter of 
degree, but they’re all lumped very close together at the top of the list. Mr. Speaker, I would just point 
out to the hon. Member that we have, in fact, acted very quickly on the gas tax removal which, to a large 
extent, affects small business. We have acted very quickly, as you will see later today, on the mortgage 
interest reduction program. We have been in power one month and two weeks and I think that if the 
member is just a little patient he will see that all of our campaign promises will be, in fact, fulfilled in 
due course. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the basic indecision of this government to 
provide assistance to the small businessmen as promised, will the Deputy Premier assure this House that 
the loans which we have proposed through Sedco (Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation) 
– up to $25,000 at subsidized interest rates – be made available to the small business community? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I just want to point out to the House, Mr. Speaker, that this economic 
crisis didn’t begin on the 26th of last month. It’s been through 11 years of  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
117 

dastardly planning by the members opposite, along with their cohorts in Ottawa. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, 
I would point out that we are under no obligation to honor the commitments of the previous government. 
Some may be honored; some may not. Relative to that I’ll take notice of the question and pass it on to 
the minister responsible. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Again, Mr. Speaker, in view of the indecision of this government to assist and keep 
its pledges to the small business community, I would like to ask the Deputy Premier: can he assure the 
House and the business community that the interest abatement program and the increases which we 
proposed will, in fact, be put into place to assist a business community demanding assistance? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, in fact, Saskatchewan is open for business. 
 
It’s funny – when I was walking around downtown this morning, I caught just about every businessman 
on the street smiling. They’re just thrilled to death that we’re here. And, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the 
question, I’ll give he member no assurance about anything, but I will take notice and take it up with the 
minister. 
 

Student Employment 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Highways. In light of the large 
number of students who are now seeking employment, could the minister tell this House how many 
contracts he has awarded recently which would assist these students in finding some employment? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, contracts awarded by this administration as of April 26 total 
$3,459,103. we hear the administration from the previous government stating that this government is 
under review. The only people who are under review in this province of Saskatchewan are the NDPers 
with their incompetence and thoughtlessness as to what they would do for the people of Saskatchewan in 
1982. the decision was brought down then, and that is the answer . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I 
hear the hon. Member’s offer. 
 
Regarding student employment, Conservacheck has been implemented by this government, and we have 
hired students to fill those positions. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the Minister of Highways. He hardly answered any 
part of the question I asked him. I did ask the minister how many contracts he had awarded recently. The 
answer I wanted is not $3 million, which could amount to one small highway somewhere. I wanted to 
know how many contracts on the various highways in the province he has awarded which would assist 
these students in getting jobs, and how many students he anticipates these contracts would provide work 
for. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Six contacts have been awarded since April 26, and I don’t tell the 
contractors whom to hire for their employees. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. At least the minister did say that he awarded six 
contracts, which I can’t say is too many contracts, nor can I agree with him that this is a sufficient 
number of contracts for this time of year. It is true that the contractors do decide on how many students 
are hired, but the more contracts that are  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
118 

out there, the more possibility there is for these students to get hired. 
 
Since he says six contracts have been awarded, could he tell me just how many contracts or tenders, at 
this time, have been awarded by the department or have been let by this department for further contracts? 
How many tenders have been called on other construction projects in this province, and how many 
projects has he cancelled at this time? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — well, it’s a little hard to understand the question the member has put. I think 
the information the member is looking for is this. Under tenders currently being advertised, we have six 
for a total cost in excess of $5 million. Tenders that will be advertised between June 21 and July 14 
come to another $6 million, for a grand total, under this administration, of contracts either being awarded 
or tendered or to be tendered of $14.5 million – work for the contractors in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister is telling us that they have awarded about 
one-tenth of what the previous administration’s budget usually was in highways. That I don’t consider to 
be a great undertaking by the Department of Highways at this time. Highway 37 south of Shaunavon has 
been cancelled at this time. Could the minister tell me how many other highways on the project array 
have been cancelled? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the Hon. Member’s question, the one contract 
down there has been cancelled. To my knowledge, to date that is the only one cancelled. The reason for 
it is that this government is putting its priorities on traffic flow instead of playing politics with the roads 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Improvement of Highway 13 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I have a question for the Minister of Highways. I am not sure that the people along 
Highway 13 picked a suitable name for that association to improve Highway 13 – the length between 
Winnipeg and Lethbridge. They called it the Redcoat Trail. Maybe they should have called it a blue 
jacket trail or something like that. When is the minister prepared to do the surfacing from Lafleche west 
that was tendered, that was let early in April? You say there was only one cancelled. Was that contract 
cancelled or wasn’t it? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, the whole project array is under review by this administration. 
The reason it is under review, as I have stated previously, is that the previous administration had been 
playing politics with the roads instead of constructing roads where roads needed to be built. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the minister consider a link across southern 
Saskatchewan a political road. Is the Redcoat Trail a political road? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — No, I don’t consider that trail, the Redcoat Trail, or the Trans-Canada, a 
political road. It has to do with priorities. Where are the roads needed? I will enlighten the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, and I have referred t this before. It is out west of Webb, on Highway No. 1. the 
previous administration was not concerned  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
119 

about the 22 people who were killed in an accident out there. They were coming up to within one mile of 
where that very dangerous accident took place. This new administration had the foresight to see the 
problem out there and talked with the people out there. They were concerned. The new administration 
has now announced (and I announced it previously) that we are going one more mile on the 
Trans-Canada to hopefully prevent a serious accident like that from taking place again. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would like to question the Minister of Highways. Does 
he not agree that building up the Redcoat Trail, an east-west route across southern Saskatchewan, will 
take pressure off No. 1 Highways and divert traffic around it? Are you building a trail to get a person 
from Regina out of Saskatchewan in 4.5 or 5 hours or do you intend to have a route available where 
people can see southern Saskatchewan, and where they can visit parks like Cypress Hills, which are 
tourist attractions? Would the minister reconsider and put emphasis on the Redcoat Trail and go ahead 
with surfacing of the section, which is very bad, west of Lafleche? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, for the member’s information the Trans-Canada is a two-way 
road. One way is for the people to come back from Alberta to the province of Saskatchewan to live and 
work. The other way is for the defeated NDP MLAs to leave the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Further additional information for the member opposite: the Redcoat Trail is 
not the only artery we have from border to border in the province of Saskatchewan. We also have the 
Yellowhead Route, which is a very important route with a very high traffic flow. It is one of the 
priorities of this government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Hospital Construction 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Deputy Premier in the absence of the 
Minister of Health. I have received rumours and complaints about the fact that several projects in the 
area of hospital construction are not going ahead at the present time. Would he inform the Assembly 
whether the project at Lloydminster and the project at Maidstone, which had had letters of approval 
given to them, are going ahead? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Minister of Health, I will take notice of 
the question and he will answer it the next sitting day. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — In light of the fact that the many hospital projects which were to be built 
this year are not going ahead, and because of the lack of jobs being created, will the array of projects be 
announced this week or next week? When will the total array be announced and when will the review be 
finished? When will the on-the-job training end and when will we get down to doing some work in 
constructing nursing homes and hospitals? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — If we were to build all the nursing homes that this former government 
promised during the election campaign we would have to build about  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
120 

260,000 beds, and I don’t think any public purse can afford that kind of cost. Naturally we are going to 
review the promises made by the former administration. As it relates to the array of hospitals promised 
by the former administration, the Minister of Health will be making that announcement in due course. 
The hon. Member opposite is making a lot of assumptions. He has absolutely no knowledge of what 
might be going on in the ingenious minds on this side of the House and I would point out to the hon. 
Member that he would be well-advised to check his sources before speculating on what he called 
“rumours floating about.” 
 

INTRODUCTION OB BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 – An Act to establish a Mortgage Reduction Plan 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to establish a mortgage interest 
reduction plan, Bill No. 1. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 2 – The Income Tax Amendment Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Income Tax Act 
by eliminating the mortgage interest tax credit as a consequence of the establishment of the mortgage 
interest reduction plan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Member’s Birthday 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, before the orders of the day, I wonder if I might point out that we are 
celebrating a special day today. An elder member on our side of this House but seated opposite, 
fortunately to our right, truly representative of our maturing government members, is celebrating his 
35th birthday today, and as he graduates into middle age I feel that this House should extend a happy 
birthday to the member for Regina Rosemont, Mr. Dirks. 
 
MR. DIRKS: — It will be the first of many birthdays that I shall celebrate in this House. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Congratulations to Royal Family on Royal Birth 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to put the following motion: 
 

That a humble message of congratulations be sent to Their Royal Highnesses, the Prince and Princess 
of Wales in the following words: 
 
To Their Royal highnesses, the Prince and Princess of Wales: We, the members of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan, in session assembled, acknowledging the birth of a son to Their Royal 
Highnesses, the Prince and Princess of Wales, congratulate Their Royal Highnesses and the  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
121 

members of the royal family on this birth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Premier and members of the government, I suggest that this motion only 
partially expresses the sentiments which this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan feel on this 
momentous occasion. We in Saskatchewan have always felt a special warmth toward the royal family. 
This warmth has been amply displayed on numerous occasions, particularly in 1978 which Her Majesty, 
Queen Elizabeth II, visited Saskatchewan and in 1980 when Princess Margaret was here. It will be 
displayed again this summer when Princess Anne will join us in celebrating the centennials of Saskatoon 
and Regina. The royal family is obviously important to Saskatchewanians. The Queen of Canada is a 
link with our history and with our heritage. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we are many peoples from many different lands, but we’re also one people bound 
together by the monarchy, undivided in our loyalty to, and respect for, the monarchy. Thus we are most 
pleased to welcome into this world a new baby, a new heir. We wish the child every happiness. We wish 
his parents, the Prince and Princess of Wales, every joy in their new lives as parents. Of course, we wish 
Her Majesty, the Queen, Prince Philip and the Queen Mother every happiness on this joyous occasion. I 
know I speak for this House and for all of Saskatchewan when I congratulate the royal family on this 
birth. Mr. Speaker, I therefore move the above motion, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Blakeney, the member for Regina Elphinstone. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a word in support of the motion. What 
the Attorney General has said, I think, will be agreed with by all members of this House. I think the 
monarchy has a special place in our form of government. Our form of government is one wherein those 
who are our leaders are political leaders and, accordingly, controversial. There may be people who feel 
that Prime Minister Trudeau ought not to be Prime Minister of Canada. There may even be people who 
feel that Premier Devine ought not to be Premier of Saskatchewan. The political head of our country and 
our province will always be a controversial figure and always must be, but there are many things about 
government about which we all agree. 
 
As a symbol of those things which unite us, in support of the system of democratic responsible 
government which we have, we have the monarchy, represented in our province by the 
Lieutenant-Governor, and in our country by the Governor General, and across the whole Commonwealth 
by the monarch. 
 
The Commonwealth itself is an interesting institution uniting many, many dozens of countries in a form 
of union because of an affiliation with the crown. I think this is valuable in our world. I think the symbol 
of the monarchy is valuable in our country. It by no means indicates that we have a special connection 
with Great Britain. We do in a sense, but the monarchy is much more than that. It is something that all 
Canadians share whether or not their origins are in the United Kingdom. 
 
We here in Saskatchewan have developed a particular association with the royal family as the member 
for Qu’Appelle, the Attorney General, has mentioned. The Queen and Prince Philip were here in 1978 
for the 100th anniversary of the RCMP. Prince Philip was here in 1977 in his capacity as the president of 
the Royal Agricultural Society of the Commonwealth, and attended Agribition. In 1978, there was a 
royal visit by the Queen and the Prince, and in 1980, Princess Margaret visited. Through all of these 
visits (and we will have another one this year), a warm and relatively informal association developed 
between many Saskatchewan people and members of the royal  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
122 

family. 
 
I think, on that account, we feel some special affection for the Queen and Prince Philip and for their new 
grandchild. I would join with all others in extending our warmest best wishes to the undoubtedly proud 
parents and other members of the family, who, I am sure, are enjoying the same sort of pleasure as we 
enjoy when a new arrival arrives in our families. 
 
I join with the others in endorsing the motion moved by the Attorney General. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I have the formal motion of transmittal of 
the message. I am asking for leave of the Assembly to put the following motion: 
 

That the message contained in the humble message to the Prince and Princess of Wales passed this day 
by this House be transmitted to their Royal Highnesses by the Speaker in an appropriate manner. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of day, as a result of the concurrence in the 
report of the select standing committee on committees, or whatever that was that happened earlier today, 
there are a few routine motions that should be put, and leave will be required. 
 

Retention and Disposal Schedules 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I move, seconded by the Attorney General, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the retention and disposal schedules approved by the public documents committee, and tabled as 
sessional paper no. 90 of 1981-82, be referred to the standing committee on communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Report of Legislative Librarian 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Education, by leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

That the report of the Legislative Librarian, tabled as sessional paper no. 3 of 1981-82, be referred to 
the standing committee on communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Report of Provincial Auditor 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Highways, by leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

That the report of the provincial auditor for the fiscal year ended March 31,  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
123 

1981, tabled as sessional paper no. 91 of 1981-82, be referred to the standing committee on public 
accounts. 

 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I wonder if any member on the other side can give us any indication of 
whether it is thought that any of the committees referred to, but more particularly the public accounts 
committee, would be convened in the immediate future at what I am calling the short session, or is it 
assumed that these committees to which the matters are being referred will be convened when we next 
come together, my assumption being in October, November, or later. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — In response to the Leader of the Opposition, I think the formal mechanism of 
convening the public accounts committee is to convene it through the chairman and the chairman is an 
opposition member. From there the committee determines when they will sit and how they will sit. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Public Accounts 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan for the fiscal year ended March 31, 1981, 
tabled as sessional paper no. 9 of 1981-82, be referred to the standing committee on public accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Crown Corporation Statements 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the annual reports and financial statements of the various crown corporations and related 
agencies, as were tabled at the fourth session of the 19th legislature, plus the annual reports and 
financial statements as tabled in the present session, be referred to the standing committee on crown 
corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

Address in Reply 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Mr. Hodgins. 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, and hon. members, it is with great pride that I  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
124 

address this Assembly for the first time. I am in awe of the historic decisions that have been made in this 
Chamber over the years. The responsibility placed on me and all MLAs of this province hangs heavy as 
we get this session under way. Every decision we make must be made in the best interests of the people 
of Saskatchewan. I will represent the best interests of all people of this province in this House and 
particularly the people of the Saskatoon Centre constituency. 
 
Saskatoon Centre constituency is diverse in that its people cover the whole spectrum – young and old, 
professionals, trades people, labourers and business people. I intend to hear them all and represent them 
all in this House. 
 
The many senior citizens have specific concerns regarding rents and Medicare, housing facilities, etc. I 
assure them that I will represent their concerns. 
 
The many persons in rental accommodations can be assured that their rights will be protected under rent 
control legislation. 
 
The result of the April 26 election was a team victory in Saskatoon Centre. I sincerely thank all those 
who worked so hard for what they felt was a badly needed change, and I thank all of those who 
supported me at the polls. We will continue to work as a team. My door will always be open. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be a Saskatonian. It is a great city, a good place to live and work and raise 
your children. I am also proud that this is the Century Saskatchewan year, celebrating its 100th birthday. 
Many organizations are taking part with celebrations throughout the year in the city. It is noted that the 
colony trek took off from Moose Jaw in their wagon trains on Monday morning. I say good luck to them 
in their historic venture as they continue on their way to Saskatoon this week and next. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have great confidence in our Premier and this government. We are responding to the 
needs of the people of this province by removal of the burdensome gasoline road tax. That is evidenced 
by the announcement of the consumer price index this morning, indicating that the cost of living did not 
rise one iota in May in Saskatoon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — The mortgage interest reduction plan will make home ownership available 
to many people in this province and allow present mortgage holders to pay at a more reasonable 13.25 
per cent. We will exercise fiscal responsibility in this province. Every dollar will be accounted for. There 
will be no more waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our present liquor licensing legislation will come under review at some time in the future. 
If changes are deemed necessary by the majority of the people, they will be made. 
 
I would like now to make some remarks on the role and direction of the Saskatchewan Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs, in my capacity as minister of that department. The Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs is a relatively new department and it is, in fact, a combination of 
various government services. The department combines services previously offered separately by the 
former department of consumer affairs, the provincial mediation board, the office of the rentalsman, the  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
125 

rent appeal commission and the securities commission. In addition, the department assumed the 
corporations branch and insurance and real estate branch functions of the Department of the Provincial 
Secretary, and the film classification board, which was formerly with the Department of Culture and 
Youth. 
 
The services of my department to consumers are varied and they include complaint investigation and 
resolution, product information, education and awareness resources and programs, landlord-tenant 
relations and money management services. Activities in the commercial area include incorporation of 
profit and non-profit organizations, licensing in the retail sector and registration of businesses and 
homes. the department’s general mandate is to promote fairness and integrity in Saskatchewan’s market 
place. Essentially this means encouraging and promoting co-operation between businesses and 
consumers, and creating an environment where goods and services can be confidently exchanged. 
 
Our objectives are to promote consumer and business awareness: knowledge of their own rights and 
responsibilities, and knowledge of and respect for the rights and responsibilities of others. Our goal is to 
promote and develop consumer competency in the exchange of goods and services and to ensure basic 
standards of conduct in the market place. 
 
These objectives are achieved through a number of different means. My department administers 42 
diverse pieces of legislation, ranging from laws governing the sale of goods and services, credit and 
corporations, to landlord-tenant relations. There is no clear or obvious distinction to be made between 
consumer protection laws and laws which regulate business. That is a basic reason for combining 
consumer and business services in one government department. 
 
The experience in other jurisdictions where consumer and corporate responsibilities are combined, such 
as Ontario and Alberta, is positive. The Saskatchewan department has already seen improved access for 
both consumers and business people, and better communication between consumers (inaudible). It is my 
feeling that this combination of services also lends itself to a more balanced, informed and consistent 
view of the market place by government. 
 
We are presently reviewing and assessing the legislation, how it is administered and the services that 
stem from it, to ensure that it appropriately reflect the realities of the Saskatchewan market place in 
1982. If changes are required in these laws or in their administration, they will be made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know, we are living in difficult economic times. Many Saskatchewan residents 
are facing serious financial problems not of their own making. The federal government’s economic 
policies are contributing to a situation characterized by high interest rates, the erosion of personal 
income by inflationary pressure and the decline of the Canadian dollar. All of us, consumers and 
businesses alike, are being hurt by this situation. It is my view that in the next decade my department 
will have an expanded role to play in the face of these difficult and uncertain economic times. 
 
This is true, particularly, in the area of consumer education. A chief function of the Saskatchewan 
Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs must be to help people make the best use of their 
financial resources and to help people to help themselves. Both buyers and sellers need to be informed to 
be able to exercise the basic right to choose intelligently and responsibly. We spend many years teaching 
our  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
126 

children how to earn a living, but we spend comparatively little time teaching people basic market place 
survival skills from either the buyer’s or the seller’s perspective. I look to increased awareness and 
improved understanding as the best means of ensuring competency and fairness in the market place. 
 
I would like to emphasize, in conclusion, that my department, consumer and commercial affairs, will 
continue to work to fulfil the needs of business and consumers and ensure that the realities of the market 
place in the ‘80s are reflected in our programs and legislation. 
 
I would like now to make a few remarks about my other area of responsibility, the Department of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development. I am very pleased to have been appointed to this portfolio, 
as I have spent a few years working in the co-op system. I am pleased to be able to continue this 
relationship. 
 
Co-operatives, of course, play a very major role in the Saskatchewan economy. Our 230 credit unions 
handle almost 50 per cent of the financial transactions in this province. They employ 2,600 people, with 
a yearly pay roll of over $32 million, and their membership is 600,000-plus. The 200 retail co-ops here 
in Saskatchewan handle about 15 per cent of the retail market. Total sales for 1980 were almost $544 
million. Thirty-three per cent of the population are members of retail co-ops. Some 4,300 people, with a 
pay roll of $37 million, are employed by the retail system. 
 
These figures only cover two of the major groups of co-ops in Saskatchewan, namely, credit unions and 
retail co-ops. In addition to these, there are many smaller co-ops that people have formed to build 
houses, to start day care centres or play schools, to provide transportation or recreational facilities to 
their communities, to market goods they have produced, or to share expensive farm equipment with their 
neighbours. These smaller groups also contribute to our economy. 
 
Almost everyone in Saskatchewan has head of the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, United Grain Growers, 
Federated Co-operatives Limited, the Co-op Refinery, or the Dairy Producers’ Co-op. Each of these 
large co-ops play a major role in our economy, both as employers and in their business sales. As we 
know, co-ops are a significant part of the economy and of the lives of Saskatchewan people. My 
government is committed to keeping the co-op sector a strong and vibrant part of our province. One of 
the ways we see to accomplish this is by having a department that is responsive to the needs of the co-op 
sector. The department has good potential in this area, but we still see room for improvement. Steps have 
already been taken to strengthen the relationship with the co-op sector and more will be done. 
 
I have already met with the leadership of the central co-ops and, during the next few weeks, my deputy 
minister and some of the department’s branch directors will be meeting with a variety of co-op people to 
hear their views on how the department can best assist them in working out solutions to their difficulties. 
 
For example, some co-ops require assistance in organizing the financial management of their co-ops. 
This kind of advice and assistance is provided by both the development services branch and by the 
examination services branch. For others it may mean being able to convey their concerns through the 
department to the government and to the cabinet. Through the co-operative relations branch, the 
department is joined with some of the major co-op organizations to promote a better understanding of 
co-ops.  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
127 

We will also be completing a review of the legislation affecting co-ops and a new co-operatives act will 
be introduced within the next year. These projects are in addition to the regular functions of the 
department and include assistance to groups wishing to form a co-op in all stages of development and 
incorporation. 
 
It includes a central registry; advisory and examination services for co-ops and credit unions; provision 
of information about department policies, programs, and services, provision of co-operative education 
material and training in the co-operative learning model; research and development on department 
policies and programs to better meet the needs of the co-op system; and provision of a management 
consulting program for co-ops. These functions are handled by the various branches of the department. A 
thorough review will be made of the structure of the department in the near future to ensure the most 
efficient arrangement of duties possible. These are just some of the initiatives this government will be 
taking to ensure that the co-op sector in this province stays strong and viable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is evident that a majority of the people in the co-operative sector opted for a change in 
government on April 26. it is with pride that I stand as minister of this department and I assure the co-op 
people of this province that I will work with them for their continued growth. 
 
Last, but not least, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate you on your appointment. I know you will do a fine job 
and do it with dignity. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PETERSEN: — Mr. Speaker, and fellow members, in rising to speak for the first time in this 
Chamber as a member for the constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, my mind is flooded with memories 
of the first time I was in this Legislative Building. That was over 23 years ago, when on a school tour 
from a little country school called Pipestone Creek, I was allowed to go along. I was in grade 1, I 
remember being very much in awe of remember going up to the very top of this building and looking out 
across the city and being very impressed. I feel that these early impressions have had a great effect upon 
me and my consequent involvement in politics. 
 
I am very proud of my constituency and wish, at this time, to extend my heartfelt appreciation for the 
trust put in me and the work that was done to lift the oppressive burden of 11 years of 
Saskatchewan-typed socialism, the definition of which is said to be as follows: all shortages to be shared 
equally among the peasants. 
 
I would like to congratulate the members on both sides of the House on winning their respective seats. 
On this occasion, I extend my best wishes to all members. Now that the election is over and most of the 
dust has settled, I would like to state for the record that it is my intention to represent everyone in my 
constituency to the very best of my ability. 
 
In the constituency of Kelvington-Wadena, agriculture is king. From Rose Valley in the north, where I 
live, to Kelliher, which is 90 miles in the south, the one thing common to all is agriculture. Most of the 
areas are of the mixed farming style. The small farmer on three or four quarters of land, with a few cows, 
a few hogs, a few chickens, is still the most common. We have a few specialized farming operations, 
though to a lesser degree. These include such things as straight grain farmers, dairies, beef operations,  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
128 

hog barns, and poultry producers. We have no other industry. Everything revolves around agriculture. 
Everything depends upon agriculture. As the farm economy goes, so goes that of the grocery stores, the 
clothing stores, and the machinery dealers. 
 
I feel that because I am actively involved in agriculture, I can understand the needs of my constituency, 
and can handle the job of representing my constituents in this House properly. Many people ask me why 
I would consider getting into public life at this time. Despite my bald head, I am a young farmer who has 
enjoyed some degree of success. I have a young family, and my father who farms with me is planning to 
retire in the not too distant future. I told them it was quite simple. I had to get involved. I saw farmland 
that my grandparents and my neighbours’ grandparents had sweated over and fought to hold onto all 
their lives being bought up by a government hell-bent on owning everything and everyone in this 
province. 
 
I saw the erosion of a way that our forefathers had come to this country to establish. They left the old 
country to come here because of the promise that in this country they had the right to own land. They had 
the right to be free men. They did not have to take off their hats to government officials. They would not 
have to be sharecroppers. I’m a free man and I’m proud of it. I saw my friends going elsewhere for jobs. 
They left this province by the thousands. They didn’t want to be spoon-fed for the rest of their lives. 
They wanted to work. They wanted to make it on their own, but they couldn’t find employment. No new 
companies would establish businesses in Saskatchewan. They left. Everywhere I looked people were 
afraid of the helping hand of the former administration, reaching out to tax them to death or expropriate 
them all in the name of what was good for the state. I saw regulation after regulation interfere in my 
daily life. I saw bureaucracy run amuck in a sea of red tape and regulation. I saw real families getting 
less and less for their tax dollars. I saw an administration that insisted on buying up what was already 
here for us to use by mortgaging our children’s future. I had no other alternative but to stand up for what 
I believe. 
 
When I’m asked to describe myself I usually say that I am a mechanic by trade, a farmer by choice, and a 
politician by necessity. This, Mr. Speaker, is why I’m very pleased with the measures put forth in the 
throne speech. As I have stressed on a number of occasions, agriculture is the backbone of my 
constituency and, indeed, of this province. The preservation of the family farm, owned and operated by 
the family, can now expect the recognition it has so long been denied. The Saskatchewan Family Farm 
Purchase Program will have a definite, positive effect toward this end. The changing of the petroleum 
fuel tax act is another measure that is also of significant benefit to my constituents and all the people of 
Saskatchewan. I am especially pleased to see this tax removed as it was an insidious form of indirect 
taxation imposed on the people of this province by the former administration. The mortgage interest 
reduction plan announced today, and promised during the election, will be welcomed by all, I’m sure. It 
will do much to stimulate the housing industry which, in turn, will have a spin-off effect on related 
industries and labour. It will produce many new jobs and encourage the growth of our business 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I should like to state for the record that I am here to do a job, and I fully intend to 
do it. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the throne speech. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. RYBCHUK: — Mr. Speaker, fellow members of the Legislative Assembly, it is with a  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
129 

real sense of honor that I rise to participate in this historic debate on the Speech from the Throne. This is 
my first opportunity to speak as the new member for Regina Victoria, and I am very pleased and proud 
to be part of the new Progressive Conservative administration. April 26 was a milestone in the history of 
this great province we call Saskatchewan. On that day the voting men and women trekked to the polls 
and put an end to 11 long years of socialist experiment. The people were in a house cleaning mood, Mr. 
Speaker, and they saw a leader with vision, a leader with integrity, and leader which we all can be proud 
of in our new Premier, Grant Devine. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. RYBCHUK: — Mr. Speaker, our Premier symbolizes a new generation of leadership. Premier 
Devine is in the great tradition of prairie populism and it is an honor to be part of this caucus. Mr. 
Speaker, I am sure that all members would agree with me that Premier Devine will make Saskatchewan 
a truly great province. 
 
I would like to offer you my most heartfelt congratulations on your election as Mr. Speaker of this 
Assembly. You are indeed a most worthy and respected person to reside in this House and I, for one, 
assure you that you will be held in high regard and esteem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne heralds a new beginning for Saskatchewan. It offers new 
horizons and opportunities for all. Later on in my remarks, sir, I would like to discuss some of the new 
directions of the Progressive Conservative government. 
 
At this time I would like to say how thankful I am to the people of Regina Victoria constituency for the 
trust they have put in me. I want to put on record my appreciation to all the people who worked so hard 
so that I might be here today. As long as I live I shall never forget the hard work and dedication of all 
those who worked for me in Regina Victoria. On the night of April 26, after all the votes had been 
counted, I fully realized the trust the voters of Regina Victoria had bestowed on me. It is a sacred one 
and one which I shall never forget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to take the opportunity to congratulate my fellow rookies. We have 
a great task ahead of us – to build a new Saskatchewan – and I would like to extend my best wishes as 
together we embark on our new adventures. 
 
The constituency of Regina Victoria has a long tradition of being represented by a professional 
politician. In 1982, they decided they wanted a younger, local citizen and businessman to speak for them 
in this House. I must be quite frank and tell this house that politics is a new arena for me. But I felt that 
our leader, the Premier, and the Progressive Conservative Party offered a fresh, new alternative for 
Saskatchewan and that is why I decided on public life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Regina Victoria consists of parts of the business community, as well as 
the older part of the Queen City. The people in my constituency are hard-working people and see 
government as a servant and not as a master. The people of Regina Victoria are concerned and rightfully 
so, about the cost of living, water quality and housing, and they found that the NDP government was no 
longer listening to them. For years water quality was an issue in Regina. The NDP did nothing. 
Suddenly, in 1982, in the middle of an election, they pulled out a promise to improve the quality of 
Regina’s drinking water. For the past two years, housing costs have skyrocketed. The NDP government 
did nothing. The new Progressive Conservative  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
130 

government will make home ownership a realistic goal in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP kept on blaming Ottawa for high taxes, yet they put a 20 per cent sliding tax on 
gasoline. Our Premier, I am proud to say, removed it within moments after taking oath of office. That is 
what I call positive commitment to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I could cite a whole list of sins of the NDP, but I contend that the very fact that there are only nine of 
them in the House is clear proof that the people of Saskatchewan wanted a new, fresh start. Regina 
Victoria will grow and prosper because of the Progressive Conservative government. We will tackle in a 
positive manner the urban problems of our capital city. Mr. Speaker, our government will be one that 
listens and cares. In the field of health care, I am proud of our leader, who said in Regina at one of the 
largest political rallies in the city’s history, that we would have Medicare without premiums. That is 
something I really believe in. 
 
In the area of combating inflation our government has removed the outrageous 20 per cent sliding gas 
tax, and there will be many other practical economic measures to protect Saskatchewan from the bizarre 
economic policies of Pierre Trudeau in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, home ownership is apart of our heritage in Saskatchewan. Over the past two years the NDP 
allowed a housing crisis to develop in this province. I am indeed proud to support the mortgage interest 
reduction plan. It is a commitment which we have made to Saskatchewan people. this is a real help for 
our families. Our commitment is a genuine one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative Party is a party of the common man. John Diefenbaker used 
to describe himself as “an average Canadian.” On this foundation we believe in equality and justice for 
all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the PC government is committed to working with people. We believe that Saskatchewan’s 
future is a bright one. We trust that the people of this province will use their talent, energy and resources 
to ensure their future welfare and that of their children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it makes me feel good to belong to the PC caucus. Our party believes in a fair and lasting 
prosperity for all. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. RYBCHUK: — These are not just words which I felt I should say, that is the way I feel. 
 
Regina Victoria will have a full-time constituency office, which I have opened at 222 Victoria Avenue 
East. I want every person who lives in Regina Victoria to always feel free, to call on me when they have 
a problem, concern or comment dealing with our government. 
 
Their MLA, Mr. Speaker, is a man who believes in keeping very close touch with the ones who elected 
him. Today marks my first speech in the Legislative Assembly. I stand here and I am very excited about 
the future of Saskatchewan. I am fully aware of the great days ahead. There will be setbacks and 
sacrifices, but the positive march has begun. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 
131 

Our Premier has surrounded himself with cabinet ministers of high calibre and integrity, men who will 
govern wisely. Mr. Speaker, I know Regina Victoria constituency will benefit because of this 
government. 
 
There will be other opportunities for me to speak, but for today I want to tell you that the hundreds of 
people whom I met in going door-to-door in Regina Victoria told me they were yearning for a change. 
And what a change it was – the greatest political victory in the province’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today, on behalf of my constituents, I want you to know that I am a team player, part of the 
PC team to work for our province. We have the raw materials, the resources and, most importantly, the 
people. in the words of our Premier, “There is so much more we can be.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that I will be supporting the motion in support of the Speech from the 
Throne. I look forward to representing Regina Victoria in many more debates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be able to take part in this debate. First of all, I 
would like to thank the people of Pelly for sending me back to the legislature as their representative. I 
really appreciate what they did for me, and I will continue to work for the people of Pelly constituency as 
I have in the past. It may be a little more difficult in opposition, but that will not deter me from my job. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the throne speech. I wish them well in 
their term of office in the legislature . . . (inaudible interjection) . . .The members say, “terms of office.” I 
think I will let the public decide that. At this time I know they will be here for one term so I will 
congratulate them and wish them well for that one term at least. 
 
I have to say that I am very proud to have been part of the previous administration, the administration 
which brought many accomplishments to this province. It brought in many programs which benefited the 
people, programs which led to a high level of prosperity in this province – a level of prosperity that had 
never been reached before. People had never had such a level of prosperity before, I am very pleased to 
have been part of that administration. 
 
It was an administration which took measures to diversify and develop our economy, and it succeeded in 
achieving many, many of the things it set out to do, and many of the things the people wanted it to do. I 
think that is a very impressive record and a very awesome legacy which this government inherits. 
 
Saskatchewan people will now be waiting and watching. They will be waiting and watching to see what 
the new government will do. They will be waiting to see how many of the promises this government 
intends to fulfil. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — All of them. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — The members opposite say, “All of them.” One thing which I intend to do in the next 
four years is to keep reminding them of the many promises they have made, and every promise that is 
going to be of benefit to the public, I intend to work on  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
132 

and pressure them to implement. 
 
I have to say that I was somewhat disappointed in the throne speech last week. I was disappointed 
because generally you see a throne speech which gives direction and lets the people know what the 
government intends to do and which way it is heading. This throne speech did none of that. It mentioned 
nothing about the economy. It mentioned nothing about what this government is going to do throughout 
the year of 1982. it mentioned only a couple of the programs which it intends to implement. That would 
indicate to the people that it will be doing very little in this session or the remainder of 1982. 
 
It appears to be a throne speech of a government which is heading in the direction of no action – no 
action on many of the projects that are out there. The Nipawin hydro-electric project – there is no action 
on that one. There is no action on awarding highway projects. There is no action on the proposed ethanol 
plant for Canora, something that I would think the member for Canora would pressure the government 
for. But there is no action on that. 
 
The members keep brining up the Kamsack issue and the fact that they will be paying (they said) some 
$52,000 to the town of Kamsack. If we went back we would remember that they said they would pay the 
total cost of the Kamsack inquiry. “There is no way that the people of Kamsack should be responsible 
for any costs for that inquiry.” That has been stated by their Premier and it has been said by the current 
Attorney General. It has been said time and time again by the Deputy Premier. What are they saying 
today? They are saying that they are going to pay part of it. The government now is going to pay part of 
it. They are going to pay $52,000. 
 
Now that is no different from what the previous government said it would do – not through the Attorney 
General’s office, but through the Department of Urban Affairs. So the town of Kamsack really didn’t 
benefit in any way by this government’s coming in now. 
 
I say that if this government were serious in what it was saying, and if it were committed to what it was 
saying, it should be covering (either through the Attorney General’s office or through the Department of 
Urban Affairs) the total cost of that inquiry and should not burden the people with any amount of that 
inquiry. 
 
The members are saying that I do not want that money. No, I want $72,000 for the town of Kamsack, not 
$52,000. I want $72,000 and I would like to make that very clear to the members and to the government. 
But they are saying no, they are only going to pay a portion of it. They are not going to pay it all, but 
that, I suppose, is not something that you wouldn’t expect from the government. They make a lot of 
promises but they keep very few of them. 
 
We would have to say that the present government is not taking any action on the things it should be. 
They sit there and they review and they study and they defer and everybody in this province is sitting and 
waiting to see when this economy will improve. It is true that Saskatchewan may be affected somewhat 
by the national and international recession, but I think this government could protect people. They could 
protect Saskatchewan people from that recession. They could assist them by providing jobs. They could 
assist them by going ahead with some of the projects that were ready to go before. If they did that, that 
would improve the economic activity of this province. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 
133 

Mr. Speaker, because of studying, reviewing, dilly-dallying, and I suppose just about anything else you 
can put on that. I think the inaction of the government opposite has brought our economic situation from 
bad to worse. It appears that it’s going to continue to go that way because there is nothing in the throne 
speech, there is nothing in what they have said, that makes it appear that things are going to improve. It 
appears that everything is going to get worse. 
 
After weeks of delay, this government has finally come out with the levels of the property improvement 
grant and senior citizens’ school tax rebate that it is going to provide. It took them two months to decide 
what it was going to do with that during this delay, many of the people were waiting to see what was 
going to happen. The towns were suffering because the taxes were not being paid; people were holding 
back. They were holding back because they didn’t know what the program was going to give them. 
There were no forms in the town offices. 
 
While the government was sitting around and dilly-dallying, it was costing every community in this 
province a lot of money in interest. Finally, it has come down with the levels that they are going to be 
paying . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I think the opposition is in a little bit of trouble. They’re starting 
to heckle from the other side . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I will have to start that one over again. I would have to say that the government is in trouble. It seems a 
little odd that we are on this side, but I think in time we’ll get used to that idea. We won’t continue to 
refer to that government as an opposition although maybe that’s what it should be. But it isn’t, so we’ll 
have to keep referring to it as the government. 
 
The deputy whip from across the House was saying that the senior citizens in my area don’t want school 
tax rebates or the home-owners don’t want this property improvement grant. I am saying to them that the 
previous government had indicated that they would be increasing the property improvement grant and 
the school tax rebate. And I think that’s what the people are expecting out there. But what they got is 
something a little less than what they were expecting. I guess many of us were quite certain that that was 
going to happen. I think the municipalities, especially the rural ones, at this point are wondering what is 
going to happen to that rural development fund – the $12 million that was promised to them in the rural 
development fund. The previous government said that it would provide the rural municipalities with a 
rural development fund to assist them to improve the rural community. I am not aware of this 
government indicating whether that program is going to be going ahead or whether that is going to be 
one of the programs to be cut, because they are going to have to find money somewhere. 
 
I think they are also concerned about revenue sharing, as was mentioned by some of the members. The 
government did say that this year it is going to maintain the same level of revenue sharing as was 
promised by the previous administration. I say that the municipalities have reason to be concerned about 
what is going to happen in the future, since there was that much delay in this government’s deciding 
whether they were going to go ahead with the same level, whether they were going to drop it or increase 
it. Since they didn’t increase it, it would only suggest that what they are looking at is a decrease, rather 
than an increase. 
 
Since the fuel tax (as somebody across there mentioned) is a component of revenue  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
134 

sharing. I am wondering how the government is going to calculate the amount of revenue sharing for 
next year. I think that is probably the same concern the rural municipalities have. I think they are 
wondering if that will be one of the cutbacks or one of the candidates for cutting back of the present 
government. 
 
I have mentioned that this government is promising a lot of programs which we don’t know whether 
they are going to keep or not. I think I would like to bring up one (it’s too bad the Minister of Highways 
is not in at this time), and that is the four-laning of the Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead. I want to 
make it very clear that I am not against the four-laning of the Trans-Canada or the Yellowhead, but I do 
question the minister putting a top priority on the four-laning of these two highways. A top priority 
means he feels that somehow the Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead are more important than the 
numerous other highways in this province are; he feels somehow that some accidents occurring on the 
Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead are more important or worthy of more consideration than accidents 
which may occur on some of the other highways in the province. 
 
As far as I am concerned, it doesn’t matter if there is a bad highway in eastern, western or northern 
Saskatchewan. If there is the possibility of someone having an accident because of the poor condition of 
these roads, then the lives of the people out there are just as important and worthy of as much 
consideration as the lives of people on the Yellowhead and Trans-Canada highways. 
 
They talk about four-laning the Trans-Canada and the Yellowhead – and I would agree with them. If 
they would go to the federal government and say, “These are interprovincial highways,” and if they 
would get some assurance that the federal government would provide a certain amount of funding to do 
that four-laning, then I think something like that could be considered. But it appears that there is no 
assurance that the federal government is going to assist in that. In fact, all indications are that the federal 
government reuses to provide any funding for four-laning the Yellowhead or the Trans-Canada. So that 
would mean that the people of Saskatchewan have to four-lane a highway that is interprovincial, and 
more of the people using that highway are probably from out of the province than within the province. 
And this government is saying that the top priority should be four-laning those two highways at the 
expense of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
They are proposing this kind of project, Mr. Speaker, after they have given up about $140 million of 
revenue in the gasoline road tax. They are going to build these same roads with the revenue that is no 
longer there. So, Mr. Speaker, that would only indicate that somehow that money is going to have to 
come from other programs. It is going to have to come from programs that I think the people are 
expecting to have. But I’m sure that is something that we’ll find out in the near future. 
 
There was one other promise that the Conservative Party made during the election, and that was to 
provide free telephones for senior citizens. What I’d like to say is that the people of my constituency, all 
the senior citizens in my constituency, would like to see this government make the move to provide 
those free telephones for them. And that is one other promise that I intend to continue to make the 
opposition keep. I have been in total agreement with it since they promised they would do it, although I 
would have to agree that it’s going to have some impact on the revenue of Sask Tel. And because it’s 
going to have an impact on the revenue of Sask Tel, I can only say that that will more than likely mean 
that telephone rates will go up. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 
135 

They talk about putting in a public utilities review commission – a commission that somehow is 
supposed to look at rates and keep them down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not aware of any public utility review commission that has been able to keep rates 
down in this country. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — California is an example. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Somebody has mentioned California as an example. It seems we even have some 
separatists on the government benches. I would say that commission is going to be nothing more than a 
bureaucratic nightmare, Mr. Speaker. That commission will be a costly program. That commission is 
likely to increase costs before it brings them down. It will increase them. It will not bring the rates down. 
We will not see that commission bring down the rates of our utilities as this government has predicted. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How can you be so sure? 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — The member says, “How can you be so sure?” I think in time we will find out just 
what will happen, just how many of the power, telephone or insurance rates through SGI will go down. 
All that commission will do is provide work for lawyers and accountants. It will provide work for the 
people who don’t really need it, because they have plenty of that right now. It will be a very expensive 
study for this government. It will cost the people of this province a lot of money to have a commission to 
tell the people of this province that what they have to do is pay a little more for their utilities. 
 
I think I am hitting a bit of a sore sport on the other side of the House, especially for the member for 
Moosomin, who for some reason or other isn’t a member of the cabinet. I really can’t understand why. I 
think he is one of the longest-sitting members on that side of the House. But it appears that somehow the 
Premier didn’t feel he should be a member of the cabinet, or Speaker of the House or even Deputy 
Speaker of the House. But I guess that is a decision of the Premier. He makes a very good speech from 
his seat; I have to agree that much. 
 
I expect, Mr. Speaker, that in the future we will continue to see the same kind of increases in the rates as 
has been predicted by the minister in charge of Saskatchewan Government Insurance. He said that if 
insurance rates go up by 6 per cent, somehow the people should feel that that is a decrease, even though 
they will pay 6 per cent more. I say that will probably happen in all the other utilities. They will say, “We 
will provide about a 6 per cent increase,” and what we will be paying is more and more. The big 
decrease they are talking about will never come about no matter how many public review commissions 
they have. 
 
I think the same individual who calculated the rate of the fuel tax and the savings that the people were 
going to have said that the public was going to get a 40-cents-per gallon decrease in gasoline. They got 
30 cents per gallons, or 29 cents per gallons, and the government is saying, “Well, we gave you a 
decrease. It may not have been 40 cents, but what’s the difference? We tried to get as close as we could. 
Our promises don’t really mean that much. We never did intend to keep them.” They are saying the same 
thing about utility rates. That is the kind of Tory logic we see on that side of the House. 
 
I can only say that the people of this province are waiting and they’re watching, and it  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
136 

appears that they are going to have to continue to wait to see what is really going to happen and where 
all the benefits that have been predicted are going to come from and how many of them they are going to 
get. Mr. Speaker, I can say that I will be waiting and watching also, and I will be waiting and watching to 
see how many of those promises the government puts in, because we on the opposition side are going to 
remind them of those promises and we will ask them to implement every promise that will benefit the 
people of this province. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that it has been a real pleasure to have the opportunity to 
address this house today. I think it is quite clear that I will not be supporting the motion. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MS. ZAZELENCHUK: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all members of the Assembly I would like to 
welcome about 23 visitors from Boughton School in Saskatoon. I’ll be meeting with tem later and would 
like everyone to wish them a pleasant and informative visit. 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise with great pleasure to take part in the 
throne speech debate. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Did you say you were standing? 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t like to heckle one of my own party. I would like to assure 
him I certainly am standing and the only height worth measuring is the height from here to here, and 
based on that criterion I would suggest that the hon. Member and this group here are midgets. And next 
time I won’t let him off quite so easily, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve been described as the only member in 
the House who speaks neither of the official languages. I wasn’t born in this country, Mr. Speaker, but 
like my colleagues on both sides of the House, my heart is in Saskatchewan. I arrived in Saskatchewan 
in 1966. The years since then have been very good to me. My earnest wish is that I may contribute to the 
province, and repay in some way the bounties I have reaped. 
 
I realize that in Canada, when people hear the Scottish accent, they immediately associate it with the 
trade union movement. Well, I have to confess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that my father was the national 
president of his union for two years and is now the immediate past president, and I’m very proud of that. 
Through him, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and through my own job experiences, I have respect for the unions. 
 
I would like to give my warmest congratulations to Mr. Speaker, who isn’t in the Chair just now, on his 
election to the distinguished office he holds. His well-known reputation for scrupulous fairness has 
resulted in the richly deserved honor accorded to him. 
 
I’m proud to be a Progressive Conservative, and I’m thrilled to have been given the privilege of 
representing the people of the Turtleford constituency in the Legislative Assembly. I thank my 
constituents for their support, and I repeat the pledge I gave to them during the election campaign. No 
longer will they be virtually unrepresented in this Assembly, and I intend to give the people of the 
Turtleford constituency a strong voice in this legislature. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 
137 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Turtleford constituency is part of the great Northwest – a Conservative 
Northwest. I may add. I am happy to say that the neighbouring constituencies of Redberry, The 
Battlefords, Meadow Lake, Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and Shellbrook-Torch River displayed the same 
sound judgment in electing Conservative members and condemning the NDP to the wilderness of a 
miniscule opposition. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — We are a real agrarian constituency composed mainly of that element of our 
society which forms the backbone of Saskatchewan – farmers. The rest of our economic foundation lies 
with activity related to our abundant natural resources – timber, trapping, fishing and the concomitant 
service industries. Mr. Speaker, blessed as we are with natural resources and minerals, we cannot forget 
that much of our mineral wealth is finite, whereas the land, if treated with respect, will always provide 
our economic base. 
 
The economic hardships of our times are felt no more keenly than by our farmers, and Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this government will not choose to ignore the problems of rural Saskatchewan as our 
predecessors chose to do. This government will listen to the people of Saskatchewan. The member for 
Melville, in a fine address last night, mentioned that he did not want to cast the first stone, although he 
felt a certain amount of security and protection in the distance between himself and the opposition. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not enjoy the same degree of safety of distance, but I do believe in retaliating 
before someone does something to me. I would like to paraphrase an old saying: hell hath no fury like 
the NDP scorned. 
 
I came today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, wearing this particular pocket handkerchief to show I felt no 
prejudice, and no animosity toward my colleagues who are sitting to my immediate right. However, I 
must say I am losing my objectivity. 
 
We saw on April 26, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the people of this province thought of a government that 
did not listen, one that had become complacent and arrogant. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see the 
tattered remnants of that government sitting to your immediate left – a shattered party, antediluvian in 
thinking, personified by the creation of DNS, which was a blot on the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — DNS, which had economic and social ramifications for my constituency under 
the previous administration, was the epitome of inefficiency. This government will address the inherited 
problems of DNS and restore sanity and common sense to government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good people of the Turtleford constituency look forward with optimism to the next four 
years, despite the problems we have inherited due to the previous government’s mismanagement. The 
people of Saskatchewan cannot help but be impressed by the leadership shown by our new Premier, 
Grant Devine, who moved so quickly to deliver on the two main promises made in the election 
campaign – the elimination of the petroleum fuel tax and the mortgage reduction program. Mr. Speaker, 
they can look ahead to receiving the benefits of the other programs outlined in  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
138 

the throne speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in casting back to the election of 1978, which I’m sure the members to my right would 
prefer to forget all about right now, we find in that particular session they couldn’t even call the 
legislature back, despite an election in October, until the following March. And they have the audacity to 
accuse us of dallying and dithering and delaying. Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t even get back to work. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — In this House last night, the member for Regina Centre accused the Conservatives 
of being self-congratulatory. Well, I would just like to remind the members in opposition, we won; you 
lost. And Mr. Speaker, I just have to make mention for the opposition’s penchant for indulging in 
self-pity during this session – self-pity brought on by the embarrassment and the humiliation heaped 
upon them by the voters of this very province in the last election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — Now, I can see that some of my remarks are just a little profound for the 
members sitting to my right. We noticed that exemplified by their inability to raise questions in question 
period, instead coming up with asinine questions. However, the exception to this is the Hon. Leader of 
the Opposition who, unfortunately, isn’t here this afternoon. He has my sympathy as he faces along, 
lonely, four-year journey through political oblivion, shadowed by eight anachronisms. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly feel for the Hon. Leader of the Opposition because he leads an opposition 
for whom mediocrity is going to be the pinnacle of achievement. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — Mr. Speaker, his A team, the big team – the former members for Saskatoon 
Riversdale, Regina North East, Regina Lakeview, Saskatoon South – aren’t here. The A team went down 
to defeat in the election. Now, Mr. Speaker, he is stuck with the B team of have-beens and would-be’s. 
Mr. Speaker, I have to confess, I took this seat that I currently occupy with some apprehension at being 
placed adjacent to the members on my right and being placed beside the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, 
not because of his deservedly formidable reputation, but because, Mr. Speaker, I would be absolutely 
devastated, totally crushed, to have visitors in these galleries associate or confuse me with the rag-tag 
and bobtail outfit to my right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have enjoyed thoroughly the opportunity to participate in this debate. I is with great pride 
and delight that I support the motion. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you on 
your election as Speaker of this House, and to congratulate the member for Shellbrook-Torch River on 
his election as Deputy Speaker of the legislature. I would also like to congratulate the various hon. 
Members on their appointments to cabinet positions. To all the newly elected and re-elected members on 
both sides of this house, I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate you and say that it is an 
honor for me to be a member of the legislature. I am eagerly looking  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
139 

forward to doing the best job we can for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have had the privilege to represent our province in numerous national sporting events. On 
each of these occasions, I was very proud to wear our provincial colours and always endeavoured to 
represent Saskatchewan to the best of my ability. I would like to promise, on this occasion, that I will 
represent the Saskatoon University constituency as effectively as I am able as their MLA. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FOLK: — I would like to thank the people of Saskatoon University for their support and 
confidence in electing me as the first ever MLA for their constituency. To the volunteer supporters who 
donated so much time and energy in the recent campaign I owe a tremendous debt of gratitude. I offer 
my services to all of the residents of Saskatoon University, recognizing that people may need assistance 
in many areas of government work. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, Saskatoon University is a brand-new constituency. It also has a very unique 
flavour. Within our boundaries we have the University of Saskatchewan, with the student residences, 
high-rises and apartments. We have a senior citizens’ home with well over 200 residents. The residential 
district itself can be described as mature, ranging from some of the original homes built in Saskatoon to 
areas that are approximately 10 years old. As I travelled through the constituency, knocking on almost 
every door, I had numerous in-depth conversations as well as brief comments. The key word at almost 
every door seemed to be “change”. Our province, our country, and indeed the whole world is undergoing 
changes. Adverse economic conditions are affecting all Saskatchewan residents and they are asking for 
help. 
 
On April 26, a tremendous vote of confidence was given to the Progressive Conservative Party to change 
government direction in Saskatchewan. Two of our major election promises, the elimination of the 
provincial road tax on gasoline and the mortgage interest reduction plan, are measures instituted to ease 
the burden of everyday inflationary pressures. By assisting Saskatchewan residents in these direct ways 
we are passing to them some return from our province’s wealth, helping the families that count most. 
 
I hope to observe that measures such as these will restore faith in government and that the result of this 
faith will be inroads to a new economic climate where the people will view the role of government as 
that of a referee and not a player. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small business in Saskatchewan is another area which is suffering because of our 
inflationary times. Help for small business is not increasing the E&H tax (education and health tax) 
commission from 5 per cent to 7 per cent on the first $300 collected — $6 does not help our retailers. 
 
In this day and age when high interest rates are more or less dictating lower inventory levels and 
increased emphasis on cash-flow management, the need is present for management experience and 
expertise. In this regard, if management counsellors were made available directly to firms requesting 
advice – either for initiating a new venture or continuing an existing one – to pass on their knowledge 
and practical applications, benefits could be reaped. These counsellors, I would suggest, would consist of 
retired businessmen, as well as those presently active and successful, who would be willing to  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
140 

contribute their knowledge to those in need. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, the University of Saskatchewan is an integral part of my constituency. As I spoke 
with numerous students they expressed a desire to remain in the province where they were raised and 
educated. I don’t believe this feeling just came about in the last couple of months. Was the previous 
administration’s view that we educated these people only to export them? Let’s keep our people here in 
Saskatchewan by changing the economic climate so that new businesses and industries will be 
encouraged to open up in our province. Let us discontinue the closed-door approach and try to eliminate 
the fear of government takeover and dominance in the market place which has been prevalent in the past. 
Then graduates will have the opportunity to pursue their careers here and help build a new 
Saskatchewan. Also, let us not be afraid or unwilling to listen to their ideas and suggestions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we sit here today, as the government, because we listened to the needs and the concerns of 
people. Our election promises were formulated by communication with the people of Saskatchewan. We 
will deliver on these promises, as is already evident, despite the fact that the province’s financial 
situation is not what it was reported to be. We will continue to govern our province with our ears open 
and our policies sensitive to the needs of Saskatchewan. We are not here to build up a government 
empire in Saskatchewan; we are here to represent the constituencies which elected us and provide for 
them legislation for their benefit and on their behalf. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank, once again, the constituents of Saskatoon University 
for their confidence in electing me as their MLA. I will represent them to the best of my ability. 
 
And to Premier Devine: congratulations. You’re the people’s choice to lead a new Saskatchewan. I’ve 
been involved with curling for a number of years, and my team mates have made a lot of fun of the way I 
sweep. But I think I ca offer my bending of the broom, as well as that of 54 others, to help Premier 
Devine and the Saskatchewan government in the next four years. Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TUSA: — Mr. Speaker, before I begin my address this afternoon, I would like to take this 
opportunity to thank the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood for giving me this opportunity to serve 
them for the next four years. I would like also to assure them, Mr. Speaker, that, having given me this 
responsibility, I will be listening to their concerns, staying in touch with their needs and working with 
my colleagues to provide good government. Indeed, as a new member, I feel it is a real privilege to stand 
here before this Assembly and given what is commonly referred to as my maiden speech. 
 
I should like also to congratulate all new members on their election. I’m certain that the people who 
elected them did so because they had great faith in their abilities. 
 
And you, Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate in a special way for being elected as the Speaker of this 
house. I know that your sense of justice and fair play will be evident in all the deliberations which take 
place. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 
141 

Let me say again, Mr. Speaker, how pleased I am to be given the opportunity to represent the 
constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood, for this constituency, as much as any other, was a 
microcosm of the desperation exhibited by the former government. Here the campaigning of the 
NDP-appointed political hacks was clearly and openly evident. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood are very, very tolerant people, and they had 
become accustomed in the last three provincial elections to having political hacks working throughout 
the elections. But unfortunately this time their tolerance was stretched to the breaking point, for from the 
outset of the election legions of hacks were present, working desperately to achieve an NDP victory and, 
by so doing, save their political jobs. And when that didn’t seem to be working, Mr. Speaker, a sudden 
influx of Manitoba canvassers appeared and they, too, worked valiantly to bail out the sinking NDP ship. 
However, the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood were not amused by these nefarious and 
unscrupulous tactics. They made their feelings abundantly clear on April 26. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TUSA: — that should not be surprising, Mr. Speaker, since the constituency which I represent has 
had a long association with Progressive Conservative ideals, indeed, the greatest Canadian of our times, 
John Diefenbaker, was first elected in Lake Centre, and Lake Centre encompassed part of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. Now, John Diefenbaker was well-known for his sense of fairness. It was this 
sense of fairness which moved the people in my constituency to reject the NDP tactics. 
 
Last Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. Speaker, is an all-rural constituency. It is not surprising then that the 
major industry is agriculture. The type of farming varies, but it is mainly mixed farming and grain 
farming. I am proud to be an active farmer myself, so I too, feel the burden of high production costs and 
low prices for the products. 
 
There are also many small businessmen in the town s and villages of my constituency. Unfortunately, 
their outlook until April 26 was bleak. It was indeed disheartening to campaigning in these centres and 
see so many small businesses closed or closing with nobody to take their place. However, our 
government will take all possible measures to alleviate the plight of these people and help make rural 
Saskatchewan vibrant, alive and the land of opportunity. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. TUSA: — In short then, Last Mountain-Touchwood is truly representative of a cross section of 
rural Saskatchewan. It was with this vital part of our province that the former government, because of its 
arrogance and single-minded dedication to socialist principles, lost touch. This lack of understanding of 
the real needs of people was clearly evident in its misguided agricultural policies. 
 
For example, they introduced a beef stabilization program which ignored 85 per cent of the beef 
producers, a plan which seemed to benefit about 15 per cent of the producers, but which left more then 
85 per cent out in the cold. While this was serious enough in itself, their major colossal blunder was one 
which ignored the reason for the existence of Saskatchewan as we know it. They forgot that the people 
who settled in rural Saskatchewan were people who arrived here seeking opportunity and the right to 
own their own land. 



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
142 

The NDP paid no attention to our historic roots and traditions. Instead, it clung fast to the beliefs of the 
Fabian socialists. It was the Fabian socialists, Mr. Speaker, who applauded the collectivisation of the 
peasants in the U.S.S.R. it was the Fabian socialists who believed in the state ownership of land. It is the 
NDP that believes in the Fabian socialists. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, the NDP, under the pretence of helping to pass land from generation to 
generation, in 1972 introduced the infamous land bank legislation. It did not take long for the people of 
this province to realize the real intent of the land bank. As the state purchases more and more land and 
sold very little, the people became more and more aware that the NDP’s real intent was to own the land. 
 
The people did not applaud the unfolding of this event. Indeed, the very people that the land bank 
purported to help, the lessees, did not applaud. That is why, on April 26, the people massively rejected 
the concept of the state ownership of land. That is a lesson, Mr. Speaker, which I trust the hon. members 
opposite will not soon forget. 
 
The wishes of the people will be responded to by this government. That is why our government will 
introduce the farm purchases program – legislation which will provide a lower interest rate for farmers 
so that they, and not the state, will be the owners of the land. This will enable us to maintain our heritage 
of independence, hope, dignity and pride of ownership. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move on to a comment on the shabby way in which the NDP has 
treated the senior citizens in this province. We are well aware of how they have made a great pretence of 
their concern for them. They made a big issue for years about how they were the sole believers in 
Medicare and how everybody else would destroy it. So they made a special effort to fill the hearts of our 
senior citizens with fear and anxiety in order to try to get their votes. As this scene unfolded over the 
years, it was interesting to note how the NDPers beat their breasts and took all the credit for introducing 
Medicare to this province. Never once would they acknowledge the essential role played by John 
Diefenbaker when he was the prime minister. They also carefully avoided admitting that under the NDP 
rule Saskatchewan had slipped to eighth in Canada in per capita expenditures on health care. 
 
Before I move on, Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention a gentleman who was a key person in the 
introduction of Medicare, not only in Saskatchewan, but anywhere in North America. That man, the late 
Mathew Anderson, resided in my constituency. His two sons still live there, one in Bulyea and one in 
Strasbourg. I am hopeful that in due course this man will receive the recognition which he so richly 
deserves. 
 
Home-owners were another crucial group of people which the former government neglected. Here, too, 
the former government showed their lack of understanding for the hardships being faced by this group. 
Interest rates of 18 to 22 per cent were of no concern to them. What did concern them was building 
golden tower builders, buying uranium mines, peat moss plans, shopping centres and so on. They were 
also more interested in trying to convince people of all the money they had in the heritage fund than in 
using some of it to shield our citizens from the ravaging effects of inflation and ruinously high interest 
rates. 
 
The rest of the NDP errors and omissions, Mr. Speaker, are legion. However, I will not  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
143 

belabour the point, for the former government had to pay the price. But there was one party – the 
Progressive Conservative Party – which was listening to and feeling the needs of the people. the people 
of Saskatchewan were indeed fortunate that the leader of that party understood Saskatchewan and its 
people. That leader took time to visit every corner of the province, and most importantly, when the 
leader came to a community he came to listen, not to tell. That is why on April 26 the people of 
Saskatchewan displayed their unprecedented and unparalleled wisdom when they elected a Progressive 
Conservative government. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that they won’t be disappointed. 
 
Before I close, with your permission, Mr. Speaker, I would like to make one or two comments. In 
preparation for this speech I took it upon myself to read the addresses of some of the former members in 
1971. Yesterday afternoon the member for Regina Centre alluded to the fact that he thought members on 
this side of this House were gloating over their victory. Well, Mr. Speaker, if he had taken the time to 
read the speeches made by members of his party in 1971 he might have gotten the same impression. 
 
But let’s say that we on this side of the House are just overly enthusiastic at being the government. And 
no doubt that’s the way they felt in 1971. They took great delight, in those speeches in ’71, in lecturing 
the House on how they had relegated the previous government to oblivion. Indeed, the former member 
for Last Mountain-Touchwood even gave the score of the election in 1971. he said the score was 45 to 
10. And now, Mr. Speaker, in keeping with the tradition established by the former member for my 
constituency, may I take this opportunity to update the score. The latest score, established in the election 
of April 26, 1982, Mr. Speaker, is 55 to 0. The winners and the losers are obvious. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, may I thank you for the privilege of speaking in the House this afternoon, and 
may I thank all the hon. members for their courtesy and attention. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that I 
will be supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PARKER: — Mr. Speaker, as I rise to speak in this debate, I am deeply honored and gratified to 
stand as a new member on the government side of this House. I would like to take this opportunity to 
thank all the people of Moose Jaw North who assisted me in the election. By entrusting me to be their 
representative voice in this Legislative Assembly they have afforded me an opportunity of a lifetime, and 
one which I will never forget. I would like to assure all of the citizens of Moose Jaw that both of their 
MLAs are prepared to work on their behalf regardless of the political affiliation of those respective 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just as the government must never forget from where they came, and those they were 
elected to represent, I too would like to reflect with sincere gratitude upon those individuals and groups 
who may my term in this 20th legislature of the province of Saskatchewan possible. 
 
Our leader showed during the campaign that he has the qualities that people look for when choosing a 
Premier. His tireless efforts and encouragement assisted members from all parts of the province and 
proved to be a significant factor in the history-making outcome on April 26. 



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
144 

As in any election campaign, a consistent and effective platform must be established, implemented and 
then adhered to. To this end, Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the members from the former 
government who gave us so many areas to choose from. More importantly, Mr. Speaker, I thank the 
people of Saskatchewan for selecting the ones they felt were most important to them during these 
troubled times. No clearer example can be given of a government willing to listen to the people and then 
respond in a responsible manner. The results of this type of co-operation can be most rewarding to 
everyone concerned. To ignore the people can, at the same time, be very costly. 
 
It is this attitude of honesty and openness which makes me look forward with enthusiasm to the 
challenges that lie ahead. Given the problems that were inherited combined with national economic 
conditions and international conditions, and with the anticipated skeletons which pop out of the closet 
from time to time after having been forgotten or simply put aside. I’m confident that the people of 
Saskatchewan will respond to this fresh new approach by an open government and will participate in 
setting the course for a new direction – a direction based on co-operation and hard work, realistic 
approaches to problem areas, and a direction filled with hope for all segments of our Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
I am proud to say, Mr. Speaker, that having been born and raised in the city of Moose Jaw, and now 
being fortunate enough to carry the voice of the many friends and neighbours I grew up with. I speak for 
every citizen, every businessman and every councillor when I say that, contrary to the belief of the 
former government, Moose Jaw is not opposed to growth. The city offers an excellent complement of 
facilities and looks forward to working with the province in whatever capacity it can to assist in the 
overall development of Saskatchewan. 
 
Moose Jaw has shown its capabilities in terms of hosting national as well as international events, such as 
the recent world junior curling championships. Our housing facilities and room for business 
development are second to none. We offer an excellent geographic location with a population base of 
approximately 35,000, and ample room to expand. The city has a very good long-term water supply from 
Lake Diefenbaker via Buffalo Pound Lake. We are situated on the Trans-Canada Highway and we are 
situated on the CPR main line, about 40 miles west of Regina as the crow flies. 
 
One will find, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Moose Jaw are not only deep in tradition and pride but 
they are also very enthusiastic and most co-operative with respect to welcoming new residents and 
businesses to the city. Never was this enthusiasm more evident than on the morning of April 27. I speak 
for all residents of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker, when I thank the Premier and his well-chosen cabinet for 
acting so promptly on such an important issue of direct benefit to so many people. I speak, of course, of 
the removal of the gasoline tax. 
 
This responsible gesture has shown the people, not only from my constituency but indeed from 
throughout the entire province, that they finally have a government that is prepared not only to make 
promises but to act diligently toward their implementation. The grateful reaction of people to the 
swiftness with which this government is acting to fulfil its policies will once again be evident with the 
mortgage assistance program for home-owners. 
 
Citizens of this province are not accustomed to receiving major campaign commitments so early in the 
first year of a new term of office, particularly ones which are of  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
145 

benefit to the people. Had this policy been adopted by the former government in the early ’70s we may 
well have a complete comprehensive dental plan in effect right now in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to touch on another issue, Mr. Speaker, concerning the word ‘commitment’ and the previous 
NDP government, and just what it stood for in the eyes of the people of Moose Jaw North and how they 
related to it. 
 
Just prior to the 1978 election an announcement was made by the former NDP MLA for Moose jaw 
North of a substantial addition which was approved for the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, which is 
located in Moose Jaw North. This wasn’t under review. This was a commitment that was made and it 
was greeted with enthusiasm. There were going to be new jobs created through the construction phase. 
There were going to be permanent jobs created as a result of the additional fixture. There was going to 
be an influx of new students from throughout the province, which was welcomed with enthusiasm by the 
business community in Moose Jaw. 
 
After the election, the NDP was re-elected. The member for Moose Jaw North was once again elected 
with a slim majority. How did this NDP government respond to the people of Moose Jaw North 
concerning this commitment they made just prior to the election? They did absolutely nothing. They did 
absolutely nothing for at least three years. Then there was a token offering: a visit by the then premier. 
This prompted a ridiculous expenditure of $20,000 for carpeting, painting and fact-lifting the area of the 
building that he was to tour. Well, by now everyone at the school had an idea of what was going on, and, 
of course, they realized that another election was coming this past spring, because just prior to the formal 
announcement a construction crew showed up at the school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in rising today for the first time in this house, it is with a great deal of pleasure that I 
congratulate you in your new position as Speaker of this House. As a new member, I will do my utmost 
to oblige your decisions. 
 
I would like to congratulate the mover and the seconder of the Speech from the Throne, I would also 
take this opportunity to congratulate all other newly elected members to this legislature, as well as those 
who are returning after having sat in previous years. 
 
I sincerely congratulate the various cabinet ministers, Mr. Speaker, for their dedicated efforts deemed 
necessary in preparing us for the early proceedings of this 20th legislature. I congratulate the Leader of 
the Opposition and the members opposite who were elected in their various constituencies. I would like 
to thank the clerks of the Assembly for their assistance and indulgence toward this large number of new 
members. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the constituency of Moose Jaw North, I not only congratulate but 
gratefully thank our very capable Premier, Mr. Grant Devine, for showing us all that there really is some 
much more we can be. 
 
I stand to support the motion as read. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GERICH: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate you on your election to this  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
146 

legislature and also congratulate the member for Shellbrook-Torch River on his election as Deputy 
Speaker of this Assembly. I would like to extend congratulations to all the members elected to the 
legislature and say that I look forward to working with all of you over the next four years. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the people of the Redberry constituency who worked so 
hard to help get me elected. The tireless work of the Progressive Conservative members of our party is 
quite evident in this 20th legislature. For those people. I am pleased to be here today, and would like to 
offer my services to the people in my constituency, regardless of their political affiliations. 
 
My constituency of Redberry is in the northwest part of Saskatchewan. It lies immediately north of the 
south boundary of the North Saskatchewan River and stretches on the east side along the river to 
Shellbrook, along the west side to Vawn, excluding the city of North Battleford. The 49th township line 
is the northern boundary from Shellbrook over to Vawn. 
 
This constituency is largely an agricultural area, dealing with grain and livestock. It is one of the major 
areas in Saskatchewan for the production of rapeseed, a commodity which helped in the past few years 
to stabilize the farming industry. Over 10 million bushels of assorted grains are produced each year in 
the Redberry farming districts. These crops range from wheat, oats and barley to the specialty crops of 
canary seed, lentils, rapeseed and peas. 
 
The farmers of the Redberry constituency are known for their efficiency and productivity. Mr. Speaker, 
although efficiency and productivity are high, the cost of input is exceeding the profit return in this 
industry. Farmers will be suffering financially until the markets and economy turn around and start 
showing an upsurge. The livestock industry is quite predominant in the northern pat of the riding, 
making good use of marginal land located there. But the cow herds, calves and feeder animals have 
dropped in numbers on farms, due to poor marketing conditions. Many of the surviving livestock 
producers are hanging on, with the idea that someday the market will go up. Mr. Speaker, the producers, 
marketing agencies and the newly-elected government will have to work together generating new ideas 
to ensure that our food industry survives. 
 
The population of my constituency is evenly spread throughout the countryside. The towns of Hafford 
and Blaine Lake are the two largest, with Leask running a third. The areas are served by Highways 12, 
16, 40 and 378, with numerous provincial parks and excellent fishing lakes. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
bring to the attention of the members two major concerns in Redberry constituency, the first being the 
Borden Bridge. We feel it is a necessity. A new bridge would eliminate the narrow, low-level, dangerous 
problem existing at present. A new and wider bridge would mean a smoother flow of traffic, safer 
driving conditions and making the movement of wide machinery, new pre-built homes and oil rigs 
across the North Saskatchewan River much easier and much safer. Mr. Speaker, as a representative of 
my constituency, I will work with the Minister of Highways in planning a bridge at Borden. 
 
My second concern is the farmland being transferred from father to son. The purchase plan will enable 
young farmers to purchase their fathers’ farmland at a low rate of interest. The farm would be theirs, 
giving them pride of ownership, something to work for and something to cherish. I will assist the 
Minister of Agriculture in developing such a plan. 



 
June 22, 1982 

 
147 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we talk about Saskatchewan and how rich we are in resources. Our richest resource 
is the Saskatchewan people. Saskatchewan people are known for their independence, fighting instincts 
and their courage to tackle problems. Mr. Speaker, in the past few weeks I have realized that the 
population of Saskatchewan can be broken down into three groups or categories. The first group is 
people who are inventive, intelligent and hard-working. They roll with the punches and are sure-footed, 
side-stepping pitfalls, working toward the betterment of themselves and mankind. These are people who 
make things happen. The second group is complacent. They will go along with the system and take life 
easy, careful not to rock the board. Their attitude is, to let the government look after them. These people 
watch things happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was noted that the member for Regina Centre was appalled at the termination of some 
civil servants. He brought to the attention of the House, the human rights act. I would like to bring to his 
attention that maybe the electorate of Saskatchewan should be notified of the human rights ramifications. 
Why? Because they, the electorate, laid off a number of NDP MLAs on April 26. These members fall 
under the third group. These are people who wondered what happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people and ideas will emerge, putting their dreams and ambitions to work, creating new 
businesses and new jobs, and strengthening Saskatchewan. They will put character into Saskatchewan. 
Through good government, people involvement and grass-roots politics, Saskatchewan will become one 
of the most outstanding provinces in Canada. I support the motion. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: — Mr. Speaker, I am deeply honored and gratified to speak in this Assembly. It is an 
honor for me to present the constituency of Humboldt. At this time, I would like to congratulate the 
Premier on his election in Estevan and on his choice of members of cabinet. I think he has made an 
excellent choice, I would also like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, and the Deputy Speaker on the 
positions which you hold in this office. 
 
I would like to thank all the supporters who helped me in my campaign in the Humboldt constituency. 
They did a lot of work and it was only through their assistance that we were able to succeed, and I would 
like to especially thank them. 
 
I would also like to mention some very hon. members who have served the Humboldt area which I 
represent. I refer to Otto Lang who represented the Humboldt constituency, and to Reynold Rapp who 
used to represent Humboldt-Melfort (a Progressive Conservative by the way). Other members who have 
come from that area are: Judge Mary Batten, Mat Breker from Humboldt, and Percy Schmeiser, who was 
an MLA for Bruno. So I am blessed with some advice and some help which I can get from these 
previous MLAs. Even though they may not be from the PC Party, they are of the free enterprise ideal. 
 
I would like to refer to a couple of the comments from members opposite. They were saying they would 
be watching us fulfil the promises which we made in our campaign. They must be very concerned 
because we have already carried out some of our promises. That is what I think bothers the members 
opposite so much. They see that this government is living up to its promises, and that it is going to 
reaffirm the electorate’s confidence in the electoral process. 



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
148 

I noted that the Leader of the Opposition referred to farmers and to the Canadian Wheat Board. You 
would almost think it was the NDP which instigated the wheat board. I would remind them that that was 
done during the ’30s and under a Conservative administration, and it was continued under a Liberal 
administration. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: — The Humboldt constituency is an area consisting of a very diversified agricultural 
and industrial base. This areas was settled by pioneers who were able and willing to sacrifice their time 
in hard work in order to give their children and ourselves the benefits so dear today. These pioneers 
came from various parts of Europe and Asia and show a mosaic of different cultures and nationalities. 
They left their homelands for freedom and in the last few years they have seen some of these freedoms 
being taken away. 
 
In various communities these pioneers have senior citizen housing and halls where they are able to meet 
and have some entertainment. They deserve this leisure time after all the hard work they contributed to 
this province. They left their homelands for the freedom to strive and work and to be rewarded for their 
efforts. During the last 10 years we have seen this freedom being quickly eroded by the previous 
administration through the steady purchase of farmland, industries, and through interference in our lives 
from every government and department level. 
 
Today we have an agricultural base consisting of grain farming and mixed farming. We have many 
young farmers attempting to purchase farms. They want to purchase farms, not rent land from the land 
bank. I noticed in the throne speech that something will be brought forward in respect to the land bank as 
time proceeds, and also with respect to the farm purchase program. 
 
The other day I noticed that the figure of 1,500 was used to describe the number of farmers lost during 
the past few years. I remind the members opposite that it was during their administration that these 
farmers were lost. 
 
Not only is agriculture important to the consumers who depend on farmers for their food supply, but the 
towns in the area still depend heavily on the farmer trade. The farmers’ purchases in the stores in the 
communities in which they live greatly benefit businesses, large or small. All the agricultural implement 
dealers in the area feel it when farmers are not purchasing. This is why it is imperative that the 
agricultural industry be given top priority, as our government intends to do. By having a viable and 
health agricultural economy our province will be seconded to none in its growth. During the last while 
we saw farmers hesitate. Why? Because of socialism. 
 
Auction marts also play an important role for farmers in the disposal of their livestock. Lately, in the last 
while, we saw assembly yards being gathered – big government getting into the business of having 
assembly yards, where they picked up hogs and delivered them to their own stockyards. The purpose had 
changed to a central selling agency, and the result was a total reduction in other meat packing plans 
because they were afraid to come in and compete in the market. They might be taken over. With this 
reduction the result is that smaller towns have lost trade because people who used to come to market 
their animals at auction marts would end up having to take it to the assembly yard. The result is that 
small retail stores ended up noticing the effect. It is  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
149 

refreshing to see that since the election there is a new optimism of freedom and enterprise being kindled 
in these small towns. 
 
Agriculture is the base of the communities in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, but there are also potash 
mines in the area. These mines are important, for they, Mr. Speaker, provide not only Saskatchewan with 
additional revenue but Canada with a better balance of trade, thereby strengthening the value of the 
dollar as well as contributing to the aspirations of working individuals by providing them with 
opportunities for jobs. This can be seen in towns such as Watrous, Young, Colonsay, Plunkett, 
Guernsey, Humboldt, and Viscount. These people can live in their own districts and commute just a few 
miles to work and still enjoy small town life. Any problems that the mines now face have been partly 
due to the previous administration’s purchases of these mines without regard for the free enterprise 
market place. 
 
In my constituency, there are also recreational facilities for those who need them at Waldsea Lake 
Regional Park, Stony Lake, and Manitou beach at Watrous. Many people come to Manitou Beach, for 
this resort at Watrous not only has recreational facilities but also provides medicinal opportunities 
because of its mineral water. This Manitou Beach resort is also the location of Camp Easter Seal, which 
is sponsored by the Saskatchewan council for Crippled Children and Adults. The people in these districts 
should be given credit for their efforts in working at these facilities. It is only this kind of effort than can 
provide opportunities for people, young and old, in the recreation area. More needs to be done. As an 
example, the beach at Manitou needs a permanent fresh-water supply, which could provide facilities for 
a health spa and could bring in more tourist trade, thereby helping the economy – not only the businesses 
in the immediate area but it could also provide added revenue to the province. 
 
At this point, I would like to mention again that the members opposite have castigated us about our 
promises. Well, let me remind them that in the previous two elections promises were made about a 
permanent water system, but they weren’t carried out. 
 
The town of Humboldt, which is the largest town in Saskatchewan, has modern facilities and has shown 
excellent foresight in working to develop the uniplex, which is a modern facility that houses a new 
curling rink, two halls, and a new ice rink. These facilities will be used winter and summer. Not only are 
these available for recreation, but there are also golf courses located at Humboldt, Bruno, and Watrous. 
Many facilities, too numerous to mention here, exist in other communities. 
 
The towns in the area which have machinery dealers serve a large area. These dealers serve an important 
function not only in providing farmers with implements but also in providing employment for the people 
in the area. Service is an important aspect of any business, and these people are able to provide help in 
this area. There is too much taxation. This would be reduced. Obviously, we noticed that a lot of the 
businesses were going out because of the increase in taxes, and that was being brought about by the 
previous administration. 
 
I believe a word of appreciation should be in order for these people who have the pioneer spirit in taking 
the risk of being able to take the cyclical curves that are so apparent in any business venture, even though 
the government at previous times liked to interfere with them, especially by giving them too much 
paperwork. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also manufacturing firms located in such towns as Humboldt, Watrous, Vonda 
and Colonsay. They manufacture anything from truck boxes to rock  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
150 

pickers, cabinets for housing to pens for hog producers. As you can see, there’s a good variety of 
manufacturing also being done. These firms are directly related to the agricultural industry and provide a 
service directly in the constituency. The potash corporations and Rock-O-Matic Industries all see their 
products to other provinces and also trade with the United Stated. 
 
We have flour mills – the Viscount and Humboldt flour mills. We see flour within Saskatchewan. I 
might also add that the Humboldt flour mill deals in international trade with respect to mustard contracts 
that also help our trade balance. 
 
Now, the a new government with fresh ideas, I would note that there will be new enterprises developing, 
because the people have a new initiative and a new sense of freedom. Mr. Speaker, this is the type of 
action we need, because along with new industries it means more employment, more jobs, and an 
opportunity for our young people to remain in rural Saskatchewan and work near home. This can only be 
a benefit, because having more people in the industry near home will provide opportunities for other 
businesses. 
 
Service industries can develop, which should affect the revitalization of small-town Saskatchewan. 
These service industries can vary from manufacturing and welding materials needed for potash mines to 
additional retail stores in the communities. This is important, Mr. Speaker, because over the years we 
saw small towns losing their populations. With a new and revitalized economy these small towns will 
grow to become prosperous centres of trade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have referred to the diversified agricultural industry and to the small business sectors of 
our economy. Reference has also been made to recreation and senior citizens. Along with these, Mr. 
Speaker, we cannot forget health care. Our concern has been with improving health care. It is of utmost 
urgency that some action be taken to prevent the erosion of our Medicare system. The previous 
administration almost prided itself, and tried to credit itself, with how it implemented Medicare against 
all odds. 
 
We know the concept of Medicare is a good concept and, in its initiation, some achievements were 
made. However, over the years these medical achievements having disappeared and now we have long 
waiting lists. Surely when a cataract operation that one of my constituents required had to be delayed for 
seven months because of a lack of bed space, we cannot be well in the Medicare system. I’m glad to see 
that one of the government’s concerns is to improve health care and make it, again, first in Canada. This 
credits the government with imagination and foresight in its objectives. 
 
Preventive medicine, of course, is also important. During the last years we also saw a reduction of 
service in local hospitals. This resulted in a concentration of operations in the major cities. This can be 
alleviated, Mr. Speaker, with the show of leadership that we know will be forthcoming from this 
administration. 
 
Labour relations have been allowed to deteriorate over the years. The previous government had 
portrayed itself as a leader in this field. It portrayed itself as a labour party, concerned about the average 
individual’s earnings and income. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have inherited some of the problems of the 
previous administration’s short-sightedness. It is sheer folly to conclude that the majority of the labour 
people supported the previous government. They saw what was happening; they saw their freedoms 
being eroded. They saw that as the previous government had intended to  



 
June 22, 1982 

 
151 

allow raises on the one hand, they were quick to take them away on the other hand. 
 
How is this accomplished? Very simple. It was quickly accomplished by increasing power and telephone 
rates, income tax, gas tax, government insurance tax and any other tax that it might decide to come up 
with. Might I add that this government quickly carried out its promises in eliminating the provincial gas 
tax, putting a freeze on utility rates and introducing legislation on house mortgage rates. This is placing 
money back in the hands of the working people and senior citizens, where it belongs. Now I ask: who is 
on the side of labour? 
 
It is not only large increases in salary that cause inflation and, in the long run, reduce the value of the 
dollar. It is the amount of net return, in dollars left in the individual’s pocket, that has purchasing power 
that counts. The only gainer is government, when inflation abounds, but the loser is the average person. 
As we noted today, the inflation rate is already dropping. We can see the loss to the average person and 
increased inflation on the federal level, where they have forgotten what thrift and hard work are. Why? 
Because we have a playboy in charge of the federal government whose main concerns and his personal 
conquests, overriding the problems that are facing the economy and the common individual. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: — Now, I would like to refer to the educational system in our province. It had one of 
the best recognized standards in comparison to other provinces. Teachers have been a dedicated group 
working to provide a good educational system which I am sure we can all appreciate. Funding by the 
previous government had been reduced, with the result that the tax burden shifted to the rural and urban 
municipalities which, in turn, had to increase the mill rate to the individuals who are already well taxed. 
The result: a reduction in programs. 
 
Relating to education in my constituency, we have the Carlton Trail Community College with its head 
office in Humboldt and another office in Watrous. Emphasis in this education has been turning toward 
providing more technical training with respect to welding courses for training people in industry and 
providing course in hydraulics, welding and bookkeeping for farmers. This, I might add, is a step in the 
right direction. 
 
Research has always been an important aspect of improving quality in various areas. In Humboldt, we 
have the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute which provides updates on the comparisons of different 
machinery manufacturers’ equipment. A farmer can thus make the comparisons and decided which piece 
of equipment is most suitable to his operation. With research and development at this level and at the 
university level, many changes for the better can be initiated. Initiative and creativity can be created if 
imagination is used, provided government withholds interference. Some of the accomplishments we 
have seen develop in Saskatchewan took place despite discouragement of the free enterprise approach by 
our predecessors. 
 
Now I would like to share with you, my enthusiasm for a new Saskatchewan, a reawakened 
Saskatchewan, a revitalized Saskatchewan. Let’s compare it to a sleeping giant. With the new 
anticipation and the fact that Saskatchewan is now open for business, a new climate has developed. Or 
future lies with bold new initiatives. The calibre and quality of my fellow colleagues sow that we’re 
definitely in a new era; a fresh approach with new ideas. It means not being afraid to tackle problems but 
proceeding ahead with confidence, not arrogance; with vision, not hindsight; with  



 
June 22, 1982 
 

 
152 

frankness, not slyness. We’ll make this province first and foremost in the fields of agriculture, resource 
development, health care, research and many more too numerous to mention. The future is ours and we 
now have the capability, technology and the freedom to do it. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would like to also support the motion before the House and thank you for 
allowing me to give you this address today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	REPORTS OF COMMITTEES
	Special Committee to Prepare Lists of Members
	NOTICE OF MOTION
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	QUESTIONS
	Summer Employment for Students
	Small Business Loans
	Student Employment

	Improvement of Highway 13
	Hospital Construction
	INTRODUCTION OB BILLS
	Bill No. 1 – An Act to establish a Mortgage Reduction Plan
	Bill No. 2 – The Income Tax Amendment Act
	ANNOUNCEMENTS
	Member’s Birthday
	MOTIONS
	Congratulations to Royal Family on Royal Birth
	Retention and Disposal Schedules
	Report of Legislative Librarian
	Report of Provincial Auditor
	Public Accounts
	Crown Corporation Statements
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	SPECIAL ORDER
	ADJOURNED DEBATE
	Address in Reply

	WELCOME TO STUDENTS

