


























































Hansard: July 15, 1982


797 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
July 15, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Dismantling of DNS 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the minister responsible for DNS (Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan). Is the time frame for the dismantling of DNS still three or four years, as announced by the 
minister responsible for DNS several times publicly? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, the so-called announcements to which the member refers of a 
three or four-year time frame (and I think I’ve made this very clear in the media since) were words that 
were put into my mouth by one particular reporter. He knows that now; we have talked about it since. 
But, in any case, the question that was asked of me by that reporter at that time was, “Would it be fair 
to say that the dismantling of DNS would be within one term of office?” I said it would probably be fair 
to say it would be within that time frame. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question. Is it not true that later this week or early next 
week the government will be announcing that all but two or three branches will be transferred out 
of the department and that the department will be dismantled? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — It sounds like speculation to me, Mr. Speaker. I can’t really say that there is 
or there isn’t. There will be announcements in due course, once we have determined just what we will be 
doing with DNS. When that happens we’ll be making announcements and the member will hear. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I understand the government is planning to cut back 
the budget by $40 million next year. Which programs, which services and which projects has the 
government decided to cut? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member says he understands this or he speculates 
about that. I am not prepared to enter into commenting on speculation that’s brought to the House by 
the hon. member, so I won’t comment on that. If there is any cut in budget it will certainly be only a cut 
in terms of the extra fat in the department. In terms of service to people, there will be no cuts in that 
area. 
 
MR. YEW: — If, in fact, the announcement that has been proposed is true, Mr. Minister, how many 
jobs will be eliminated in La Ronge as a result of the announcement, should it come next week? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — As I said before, Mr. Speaker, what the member is saying is purely 
speculation. Should the announcement come, at whatever stage, it would be best to listen to it at that 
time. 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

MR. YEW: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In terms of this transition, Mr. Minister, can you 
name five out of the 55 local governments and band councils in the North that you have consulted 
regarding this major backward step that you will be announcing later in the week, or next week? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Just to clarify it once again, I haven’t said when I will be announcing it, as 
he continues to suggest. I haven’t said if, when or any of those sorts of things. In terms of his suggestion 
that any movement in changing the structure of DNS would be a backward step, that is certainly an 
opinion that has been expressed by a very small group within this Assembly. I believe the people of 
Saskatchewan took a very forward step on April 26, and I think they believe more strongly than they did 
then that that step was very forward looking. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — A new question to the minister. The minister very carefully skated around 
the question. I ask it again: if five is too many, how many local governments can you name, and how 
many Indian band councils in the northern administration district, which also, admittedly is a very small 
group of people (a minority group) — how many of the elected councils representing those people have 
you consulted with regarding this proposed change? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Clearly, as I said to you, Mr. Speaker, when I was answering the question of 
the hon. member’s colleague, what they are bringing to the House is purely speculation today. What more 
can I say? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — A supplementary. Will the minister tell the House how many local 
government councils, and how many Indian band councils in the northern administration district has he 
met with since May 8 regarding his government’s northern development plan? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I met with representatives of every LCA in the North since then. 
I have met with the councils of all of three major communities in the North, namely, La Ronge, Creighton 
and Uranium City since that time. Mr. Speaker, I have met with other representative groups of the North 
as well since that time. It is my intention to meet with many more of them, if we ever get out of this 
House — with all the stuff that is going on — and going up into the North . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has met with 12 out of 55. Is he committed to 
meet with the other 43 before he announces any major changes in the northern development plan? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, once again, I haven’t said anything about an announcement. What 
I have said to the member, and what I will repeat once more, is that it is my intention, as it is the intention 
of this government (as I pointed out to that same hon. member yesterday), to have open, 
consultative government with the people of this province at whatever corner of the province they live in. 
Certainly we will be meeting with as many as possible. Let me reiterate once again; it will be much 
easier for me to go out into the northern part of the province and consult with people when we are out of 
this House and if I am able to do that this summer, I will be doing it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
  



799 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Final supplementary. The minister knows that what we are proposing is 
an adjournment of this session, and the government can adjourn it at any time. It’s not a prorogation. So 
that’s skating around the issue. 
 
You still have not answered the question: will you commit yourself to meeting with every local 
government and every band council in the North before you implement any major changes to the 
delivery of programs and services to the people they represent? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, with the organizations with which I have met, the LCAs, 
the organizations and the communities, and northern people that I have talked with over a long period of 
time . . . The hon. member should not forget that he is not the only member of this House who knows 
people, individual cases, names of people in every community in the North. I know a great number of 
people in northern Saskatchewan as well. Among those people with whom I have talked, including the 
representatives of local governments that he referred to earlier, when I did talk in general terms about our 
proposals or our suggestions that there was a chance of a restructuring of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, I was greeted with a great deal of . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Love! 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I don’t know if love would be the right word, but certainly acceptance. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the minister in charge of the 
public service commission. Can the minister inform the Assembly, and tell me, how many people are 
presently employed at the temporary office of the public service commission which has been set up at La 
Ronge at the present time? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would take notice of that question, Mr. Speaker. It is somewhat of a 
difficult piece of information to keep in one’s mind, and I would certainly bring that back. Traditionally 
those types of questions are normally asked in estimates. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I suppose that getting an exact number 
of employees of a new office that is just being set up is difficult to keep absolutely on top of, but can 
the minister inform me whether or not a temporary office has been set up at La Ronge over the past 
month? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I do not have any idea whether one has or has not. I will find 
that information and bring it back to the House tomorrow. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — New question to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. Since any 
major changes in the approach to northern development will have an impact on the city of Prince Albert, 
can the minister tell the House how many meetings he has held with the Prince Albert City Council 
regarding this matter, and regarding any possible impacts on the city of Prince Albert? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I can only say that any possible impacts on the city of Prince 
Albert and any parts of northern Saskatchewan will be very positive impacts. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — I repeat the question, Mr. Speaker. The question is not on the  
  



 
July 15, 1982 

quality of the impact. The question was: how many meetings has he held with the Prince Albert City 
Council on this matter? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I have not met with Prince Albert City Council regarding this matter or any other, 
to this point. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Supplementary. Will the minister undertake to meet with the Prince Albert 
City Council prior to making any announcements with regard to changes in the approach to 
northern development in this province? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I’ll take your suggestion under advisement. We’ll take it into 
consideration certainly. A few moments ago that same hon. member was talking about the 
impact on northern Saskatchewan as it is defined, that is, as it was defined and is defined by your 
party, and by your former government — the northern administration district. My information is, and 
my knowledge is, that Prince Albert is not within that district. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s knowledge of geography is admirable. If 
his knowledge of the rules was as good he would recognize that he should not be entering into debate 
. . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! Each day I get comments like this from both sides, and I think that if 
all members would assist the Chair we wouldn’t have that kind of a problem. If your questions are 
concise the answers will likely be the same. Would the member proceed on that basis. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Excellent point, Mr. Speaker. I give you my assurances that in the questions 
we will refrain from matters that might give rise to debate. I trust the answer will be the same. 
 
My question to the minister is: when is the minister going to table in this legislature, at a time other than oral 
question period, the northern development plan of the government opposite? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be tabling that in the House in due course, once it’s 
all established. The member can have assurance that he will hear about it as soon as anyone else in 
the province. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister confirming that, in fact, 
there is no plan? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I seem to recall, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member’s colleague said, in fact, 
there was a plan. Now this member says that there is no plan. I’m saying to you that we’re in the process. 
All hon. members in the House from both sides, the public, and especially the people of northern 
Saskatchewan who are most affected by this, will know about it as soon as we’re able to put anything 
together in terms of the way we look at the structuring of northern Saskatchewan. 
 

Public Service Compensation Package 
  



801 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, members of the House will be familiar with the series 
of questions which I have directed to the Deputy Premier concerning the public sector compensation 
package. Members will recall that the Deputy Premier indicated that it was on the cabinet agenda last week 
and would be on the cabinet agenda for the meeting scheduled for yesterday. My question to the 
Premier (in the absence of the Deputy Premier) is: has a public sector compensation package for 
persons whose employment was discontinued been arrived at? Have any offers been made to 
employees whose services 
were so discontinued? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I believe, if my recollection is correct, that the Deputy Premier 
said that he would try to have an answer back to the Assembly within about 10 days from when the 
question was asked. First, we discussed several other matters in cabinet yesterday and didn’t really reach 
conclusions in that regard. Second, the Deputy Premier is quite intimately involved in the transition 
process. Because he’s not here but at a conference in Halifax, we just haven’t addressed it. I expect it 
will come up very quickly. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the Premier could give us 
his assurance that the matter will be dealt with expeditiously and that the employees whose employment 
was severed will receive from the government, in a short number of days, the proposal of the 
government for settling any claims they might have? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we’d like to have it resolved as soon as possible, so I can give 
the member assurance that we will move on it as quickly as it can be done, and we can be confident that 
it is done right. 
 

Reviving Construction Industry in Province 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Labor. The minister will 
be familiar with the many press stories indicating business bankruptcies. I refer to one in today’s 
Leader-Post. There are no exact figures on how many businesses have gone under, but it is at least 
double the number of official bankruptcy figures. Those are the figures for Canada, not the figures 
for Saskatchewan, Mr. Minister. There are further indications that Regina construction is sharply 
down this year by about $20 million. The city official who is quoted feels pessimistic about whether this 
construction is going to revive. It is noted that the decline is not only in business construction, but also in 
residential construction where the construction strike would not have any material effect. 
 
Can the minister indicate whether his government proposes to take steps to revive construction in 
Regina and in Saskatchewan in order to provide very badly needed employment? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite aware of the construction area in the province at 
the present time. The construction strike has had a tremendous impact on it, and we are monitoring it 
on a weekly basis, or almost a day-to-day basis. I want to confirm, however, that I want the collective 
bargaining process to take place. Our conciliators are working very hard in that area, and we hope we can 
have it settled shortly. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the Minister of Labor. I do not  
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

wish this to be construed as any suggestion that we would want legislation to be introduced; that’s not 
our position. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can advise me whether it is appropriate now, after these 
many weeks of strikes, that you take a personal role in bringing the parties to the bargaining table to 
bring about a settlement? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, my stand, right t the moment, is that I will not interfere as long 
as there are talks going on. I understand that some of the trades have reached tentative agreements; some 
have reached agreements. As long as that continues I am going to let the bargaining process take its 
course. 
 

Construction of Archives Building 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A question to the Minister of Government Services. This concerns 
the construction climate and construction activity in Saskatchewan, and what it will be when the 
Minister of Labor brings about a settlement of the construction strike. My question is this: has the 
government given approval to proceed with the archives building and, if so, have tenders been called? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, our government has reviewed the major capital projects 
announced in the proposed NDP budget of March 1982. I am sure the member is quite aware that the 
archives building at this stage is not a heavy labor intensive project. It is in the very early drawing 
stages. The member is probably also aware that final siting for the proposed archives building has not 
been settled by the people involved. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. With respect to the siting of the 
archives building, is not that the decision with the Government of Saskatchewan, and has it made a 
decision? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The siting is not up to us. In the final decision-making process, there is 
a committee struck of various people from the city. They are looking at the siting of it. Several sites have 
been proposed but a final site has not been decided on. 
 

Addition to Courthouse 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — It hasn’t been decided upon by the government opposite. We are familiar 
with that. I will not be tempted, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Minister of Government 
Services: with respect to the proposed major addition to the courthouse, has the present government 
given approval to proceed, and have tenders been called? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — With regard to the courthouse situation here in Regina and in Saskatoon, 
we have reviewed it. We recognize the need for a courthouse, yet officials of my department have been 
asking very pertinent questions which must be answered before final approval is given. Tenders have 
not been called. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister advise whether a site has 
been located for the addition to the courthouse in Regina? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think the site of the addition in Saskatoon will be onto the present 
courthouse and in Regina, I think, will be in the proximity of the present courthouse. 
  



803 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Surveys to Determine Problems of Small Businessmen in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address a question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. 
A recent report, that the minister may be aware of, “Bankruptcies Soar — Disaster Comment Heard” 
indicates that bankruptcies soared to 5,383 in the first half of the year. “We’re looking at a disaster out 
there,” said a partner of Clarkson Co. Ltd. “I’ve been in the business for 12 years,” he indicates, “and I 
have never seen anywhere near as bad.” 
 
What is happening across Canada is an increasingly large number of bankruptcies taking place and I want to 
say that here in Saskatchewan, the condition is becoming very serious for the business community and 
its employees. 
 
Has the minister established a survey or a monitoring mechanism to determine the magnitude of the 
problems confronting the small businessmen and the employees here in the province? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I have had several discussions with my officials of industry 
and commerce with respect to that concern. If you’re asking for a comprehensive survey to be made on a 
basis of knowing how many are going under or how many are being established — not at this point in time. 
However, I have asked for preliminary basic figures to see how it is going at this point in time. Very 
frankly, we’re attempting as best as possible to monitor the situation. 
 
The hon. member, Mr. Speaker, has indicated certain figures that do not apply to the province 
of Saskatchewan. They apply to the Dominion of Canada and there is no doubt and no question that . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s coming. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — That’s right, it could be coming to Saskatchewan. That’s absolutely 
right. There’s no doubt, no question, that the economy of Canada is in a depressed state brought 
about, Mr. Speaker, by the federal Liberal government that we have in Ottawa which was put into 
office by the members opposite. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — The hon. minister has indicated that he is in fact doing some monitoring. I wonder if 
the minister could indicate to this House the number of layoffs and dismissals because of plant closures 
and plant shut-downs since April 8, 1982? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, no, I cannot indicate to the House the number of layoffs. I 
might refer the hon. member to an article in the paper this morning, in the Star-Phoenix, indicating a 
recall of 80 employees in a company that is struggling to stay on 
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

its feet and to stay in business and to keep viable. Mr. Speaker, they are not all going under, and certainly 
it is a time of difficulty for the business people of this province, as it is anywhere else, and the situation 
is not about to change for the next little while. However, we hope for, and we are acting on the basis of, 
improvement in a very short period of time. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Purchase of Norcanair 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government announced last fall that the 
crown investments corporation had agreed to purchase the shares of Norcanair, subject to certain 
preconditions. These included the approval of the federal cabinet, the Canadian Transport Commission, 
and the decision of the provincial cabinet authorizing CIC to acquire the shares. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce today that the Government of Saskatchewan has decided not to 
authorize CIC to acquire the shares of Norcanair. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Therefore, in accordance with our previous assurances to the people 
of Saskatchewan, the government will not acquire the shares of Norcanair, and will not own and 
operate Norcanair. 
 
It is my understanding that the current Norcanair shareholders wish to retire from the air line 
business. However, I am informed that there are a number of Saskatchewan-based parties in the private 
sector who are interested in owning and operating the scheduled air service in the province. I believe 
that satisfactory arrangements can be worked out between these prospective groups and the current 
shareholders, so that the service will continue to be operated by the private sector. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we, on this side, welcome the guarded assurance by the 
minister that the service will continue. Our interest is, and always has been, in the continuance of high 
quality service between Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert and into the North . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Mr. Speaker, I thought I had the floor. I thought the member for Wilkie had enough courtesy to give 
me an opportunity to express my point of view, but I see I was mistaken. May I continue? 
 
Our position is, and always has been, that the first concern of the Government of Saskatchewan should 
be for the quality of service between Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert and into the North. We, 
throughout the years, took the view that if this could be provided by the private sector we would 
welcome it and, indeed, that continued from 1971 until 1981, when it appeared that this might be at risk. 
Even after arrangements were made with existing shareholders of Norcanair, strenuous efforts were 
made to find a purchaser in the private sector and those efforts continued. I urge the government 
opposite to continue the same efforts to find someone who will operate that service so that the key 
question for the people of Saskatchewan will be answered and answered in the affirmative. That question 
is: will high quality air service be available to the people of Saskatchewan from Regina and Saskatoon 
and Prince Albert 
  



805 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

into the North? 
 
Only in this way can we see that the people of Saskatchewan will obtain the greatest possible 
economic benefits from the activity which is happening in northern Saskatchewan — the mining and other 
activity. To see that that produces the greatest possible economic impact in Saskatoon and Prince Albert, 
particularly, requires high quality air service. That was the objective of our government; I am sure it’s the 
objective of the government opposite. If they can achieve that by a private sector operator, they will 
certainly hear no complaint from this part of the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
MS. ZAZELENCHUK: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a question of privilege, of which the Hon. Mr. 
Andrew has already given you notice. I believe a very serious contempt has been committed against this 
Assembly which cannot be allowed to go unchallenged. 
 
Yesterday, at approximately 4 p.m., I was attending my duties in this Chamber and I was summoned out 
of the Chamber by a note which read, “Could you step out to the corridor outside of the House for a 
message? Thank you, Legislative Assembly Office.” I did go out into the corridor and was handed a 
petition for a controverted election by a representative of the firm, Mitchell, Taylor and Ching of 
Saskatoon, acting on behalf of a Mr. Arnold Evan Storey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this House has never stood on the question of the serving of civil documents within 
its precincts, and it has become accepted practice. However, arranging for a member to leave the 
Chamber on the basis of a note purporting to be from the Assembly office is quite unacceptable. This 
Assembly cannot permit anyone to come into this building and interfere with the member 
attending to the sitting by pretending to be an official or employee of the House. 
 
I believe this action to be a contempt because it directly interferes with the member and because it is likely 
to interfere with the direct and speedy access to members the Legislative Assembly office ought to have. 
 
The action thus falls under the general category of a contempt as set out in May’s 19th Edition under 
the headings, “Acts Indirectly Tending to Obstruct Officers of Either House in the Performance of Their 
Duty” on page 155, and “Obstructing Members of Either House in the Discharge of Their Duty” at page 
148. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you find that this misrepresentation, impersonation or forgery does involve a prima facie 
case of privilege, I would move, seconded by the hon. member for Kindersley: 
 

That this Assembly deems the representative of the firm Mitchell, Taylor and Ching, Barristers 
and Solicitors, to be guilty of a grave contempt of this Assembly in representing himself as an 
employee of the Legislative Assembly Office. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Are there any others wishing to speak on the question which is before this Assembly? 
If not, I would like to take this matter under advisement. It is a very serious issue. I will bring in a 
ruling. It will take some time because it is a very legal sort  
  



 
July 15, 1982 

of ruling that will be required. I would like to consult before I make my decision. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 16 
— An Act to amend The Interpretation Act be now read a second time, and the proposed 
amendment thereto by Mr. Thompson. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I spoke earlier on this motion and intend to keep my remarks to whether this 
motion should be stood for about a six-month hoist. I didn’t have any intention of speaking on this until 
yesterday morning. I was listening to the CBC news, a CBC radio broadcast that I usually have on, and 
comments by our Attorney General prompted me to get into this debate. The comment that bothered me, Mr. 
Speaker, is that we are prolonging the debate on Bill 16; the Attorney General said that we are stalling the 
passage of this bill to protect some of our political hacks’ salaries or jobs. I can’t for a minute fathom how he 
considers this an opportunity to protect some of our political friends for additional pay when we are talking 
about boards and commissions. I look at the cancer foundation, for example. I see people on that like Dr. 
Jim Blackburn and Dr. R.B. Baltzan. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I referred hon. members to rule 25(2) yesterday, which states that you are not 
allowed to continue tedious repetition. And I believe if the member consults Hansard he will find that the 
board he is now mentioning has been mentioned in this debate over and over and over again; I believe five 
or six times now. So the member should try to avoid repetition. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have consulted. I appreciate your ruling as far as reading the names of 
members of the board. I consulted Hansard fairly closely, and I didn’t find anyone making the point that pay 
was involved, Mr. Speaker, — that we are prolonging the debate on this bill because we are protecting 
political friends’ pay. I am not challenging the rule. The pay of these board members is what I am 
questioning, and if the Speaker is talking about the amount of money that Dr. Blackburn or Dr. Baltzan has 
received as a board member, then I will sit down — if he is saying that area has been discussed before. 
 
The point I am making to the members opposite is that I think it is a serious challenge that the Attorney 
General made. People were being insulted, because I know how much Dr. Baltzan and Dr. Blackburn and 
some of these people receive as members of boards and commissions. I am not going to go through the list 
of all the boards and commissions to point out how many people are serving on them. But the point I want to 
make is they are making a sacrifice serving on this board. 
 
Anyone who is a known specialist in any field gives his time to serve on a board for a pittance. It’s a small 
remuneration that they receive on the board. They might get $100 a day. I guess the maximum any board 
member would receive, considering his mileage and everything else, might be $125 a day. I can assure the 
members opposite that Dr. Baltzan wouldn’t have to be out of his office very long to lose $125 a day. And 
the  
  



807 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

Attorney General charges that we are protecting board members and members here on CBC radio. He 
charged that we were protecting these peoples’ jobs. I think that is an insult to the people who have given 
their time. There are 2,400 or 2,500 people serving on boards at a sacrifice to themselves, doing the province 
a great service. I think that that statement should be retracted or an apology should come from our Attorney 
General because he was insulting people for the good job they have done. 
 
I know that we had a problem in Assiniboia and Dr. Baltzan flew down at his own expense to look at 
the situation as to whether we should have a kidney dialysis machine there or not. We could never 
have compensated him sufficiently for doing that. These people are willing to serve and I think it’s an 
insult that our Attorney General would go on and classify these people who are serving on these boards 
as political hacks. I think it is not called for and I challenge the member for Qu’Appelle-Lumsden to 
retract that kind of statement and reconsider his stance. Give the six-months hoist a chance and support the 
amendment that we have before this House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 8 
 
Blakeney Lingenfelter Shillington 
Koskie Hammersmith Yew 
Engel Lusney  
 

NAYS — 42 
 
Devine Duncan Rybchuk 
Taylor Smith (Swift Current) Caswell 
Andrew Boutin Young 
Lane Hampton Gerich 
Rousseau Weiman Domotor 
Thatcher Bacon Maxwell 
Muirhead Tusa Embury 
Sandberg Hodgins Dirks 
Hardy Sutor Hepworth 
McLeod Sveinson Folk 
McLaren Sauder Myers 
Garner Glauser Zazelenchuk 
Katzman Parker Johnson 
Currie Smith (Moose Jaw South) Baker 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of 
the whole later this day. 
 

YEAS — 42 
 
Devine Duncan Rybchuk 
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

Taylor Smith (Swift Current) Caswell 
Andrew Boutin Young 
Lane Hampton Gerich 
Rousseau Weiman Domotor 
Thatcher Bacon Maxwell 
Muirhead Tusa Embury 
Sandberg Hodgins Dirks 
Hardy Sutor Hepworth 
McLeod Sveinson Folk 
McLaren Sauder Myers 
Garner Glauser Zazelenchuk 
Katzman Parker Johnson 
Currie Smith (Moose Jaw South) Baker 
 

NAYS — 8 
 
Blakeney Lingenfelter Shillington 
Koskie Hammersmith Yew 
Engel Lusney  
 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Interpretation Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I wish to introduce Mr. Ron Hewitt of the program and legislation branch, 
Department of the Attorney General. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, we will have some considerable discussion on this act. I think, 
to put it in context, it should be understood that The Interpretation Act, as it now stands, indicates that 
anybody who is appointed by the government (and I am paraphrasing), or who holds any position with the 
government, is deemed to hold that position at pleasure, which means that he can be dismissed by the 
government unless the legislature has otherwise provided. That is the current law. 
 
In essence, what this bill seeks to say is that where the legislature has otherwise provided, we still wish 
to give the cabinet the power to dismiss anybody at pleasure. That is the nub of what this bill is all 
about. Where the legislature, in a whole series of acts, has decided that people should have an 
appointment for some fixed term, this bill seeks, in effect, to set aside all of those acts. 
 
The argument for it is that a new government should be able to make its own appointments. With respect 
to a very large number of organizations, there can be no quarrel with that; indeed, the legislation provides 
for it. With a smaller number, I suppose it could be argued that a new government ought to be able to 
make its own appointments, even though the legislature thought otherwise when it passed the bill — 
which it clearly did. 
  



809 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

If the legislature decided that the term of a person who served, let us say, on the cancer foundation, 
should be two or three years, the legislature obviously knows that governments change and that there 
would be an overlap. But it didn’t deal with that. It felt that there was no particular problem in these 
people having a measure of security of tenure even though the government changed, because the list is 
short, and it doesn’t include things like crown corporation boards, which do change. 
 
Now the government wishes to change that, and has not indicated to us, in effect, which agencies it 
wishes to change. We are going to attempt, in the course of this committee work, to find out from the 
government which agencies it wishes to change, and for which agencies it wishes to set aside existing 
legislation and say that it wishes the power to change the board, contrary to, or at variance with, the 
current legislation, and I simply wish to advise that we are trying to find that out, and we are going to 
see whether we can find out from the government, for example, whether it proposes to change the 
board of the University of Saskatchewan, or some other agencies of that kind. It will be our 
purpose during the course of this discussion to find out as much information as we can about which acts 
the government wishes to change, in effect, as a practical matter. There is, I think, no question of the fact 
that for the great bulk of the acts where the government appoints boards, there is no need for change 
because it already has the powers that it seeks. For a small number, it does not have the powers that it 
seeks, and I simply do not know which agencies it wishes to deal with — in effect, which acts it wishes 
to change. I will be asking my colleagues and other members to bear with us as we attempt to find out 
what the government has in mind with this omnibus legislation. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I’ll simply respond in general terms to the Leader of the Opposition. We 
have attempted to make it clear. It is our view, first, that any new government should be able to make 
its own appointments. Second, whether or not there are significant public advantages to longer-term 
appointments will be decided on an ad hoc basis by members of this Assembly. When I say 
“longer-term” I mean term beyond the normal term of a government, and we could argue whether that is 
four or five years; or whatever. If there is a public need for that it is our position that those should have the 
approval of this Assembly, and that’s basically the argument. 
 
I can see situations on quasi-judicial bodies where in fact longer-term appointments may be in the 
public interest, in which case those longer-term appointments should have the approval of this Assembly. 
That is our position. 
 
There may be, as well, in terms of a public need to get, say, an expert of great public stature who may 
insist, as a term of service, that he or she would only take it for a long term. In our view, that then in 
turn must have the approval of this Assembly. 
 
It is our view that if we are to restore or maintain confidence in many of these, they should have the 
support of all members of the Assembly. That is the position that we have; it’s the position that we have 
articulated. When the hon. member asked in some degree of some specific examples, I am unable to give 
them to him because we have not made decisions. But if it is our view as government that they should 
be long-term appointments, we will bring them back before this Assembly for the approval of this 
Assembly. If it is our view that they need not be long-term appointments, then it is our view that any 
government should be able to come into office and make the changes. 
 
It is our position that should we not decide that they are long-term appointments, that 
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

they are not needed, or that the public need is not served by long-term appointments, then it is our 
responsibility as to the appointment, as it will be any new government’s responsibility as to their 
appointments, and they will have a free hand. We, frankly, think the whole procedure is good 
government. 
 
It also begins, for the first time, to correct the hodgepodge of appointments that existed in the past where 
some boards had members appointed by the legislative Chamber, but not the chairman (for example, the 
public service commission), and others had the chairman appointed by the Assembly, but not the members, 
and where some are term and some are not term. There could be an argument for that. Of course, that should 
be a decision of the government, in our view. So, we think it simplifies the process. It forces any 
government, if it thinks it of significant public importance to have a long-term appointment, to come back 
before this Assembly and get the approval of the Assembly. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I won’t belabor this except, in our view, the Assembly 
has already done that. It has already turned its mind to the question of whether or not a government 
change should change the board. I noted a great number yesterday and I will note five or six today: the 
cancer foundation, Carlton Trail Community College, Consumers Oil Ltd., co-operative guarantee board, and 
co-op securities board. I will pick those five as the top five starting with the letter C. 
 
With respect to the community college board, the Consumers Oil Ltd. board, and the co-op guarantee board, 
the legislature says they should be at pleasure. And we looked at that. The cancer foundation — that act was 
passed not in the distant past but in 1979. Certainly, many people contemplated the possibility of a change in 
government. I may not have, but certainly other people did who then sat on this side of the House. They 
agreed the appointments should be staggered appointments. 
 
In my judgment, the House has already turned its mind to that question. In the great bulk of the cases, it has 
decided that the board and its members should rise and fall with the government of the day, but that in a few 
cases it should be different. It is the few cases we are dealing with, and it will be those that will try to elicit 
whether our views, which we say are defending the position that the House has already taken, are still shared 
by the government opposite or whether the government opposite feels that all appointments, with the 
exception of a very small handful covered by subsection 2, should rise or fall with the government of the 
day. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Well, I think that the hon. member, in his experience, misses a point about the 
approval of the Legislative Assembly. Generally, the longer-term appointments — and I refer, for example, 
to the ombudsman. In that case, there was very informal consultation between the various parties and the 
legislature, so as to make sure that the particular appointment was acceptable to the members of the 
Assembly so that there would be full confidence and support. I think that is the direction we wish to go, 
particularly with quasi-judicial appointments. I don’t think it is quite correct to say “when the legislature has 
already decided,” because the legislature is, in fact, debating the principle of the bill, not the specific 
appointments or the term. When we can get into a long argument, whether we do this in third reading or in 
committee of the whole, whether these specific things have all agreed . . . I really think debates on specific 
matters are at a very low priority, if I may use that phrase. When we’re debating bills, we’re debating the 
whole principle of the bill — what it is designed to do — and I strongly suggest that the term of 
the appointments is not a significant consideration in most members’ discussion at the time of debating the 
bill. 
  



811 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

Now, we can debate this back and forth again. We happen to think that our direction is a sound one and, 
in fact, will mean good government. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think we’ve made our point and we’ll keep raising it specifically a little 
later. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, clause 4 is the nub of the bill and it provides that it will 
be clear that “. . . notwithstanding anything in this act or any other act or . . . agreement,” where a 
person is named to a board and is a member of that board, when a government changes the term of office is 
deemed to end on the last day for which he was appointed, which would have been the norm, or a day 
designated by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council which, in effect, says that his term can be 
foreshortened. 
 
Subsection 2 doesn’t apply to a person whose appointment is expressly stated in an act to be subject 
to termination by the Legislative Assembly. That will include the auditor, the ombudsman, members of 
the local government board, and possibly the chairman of the workers’ compensation board. The way I 
read it, that’s a very possible interpretation of that. I’m not sure of any others, but I haven’t done a complete 
canvass. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — We’re advised that the position of chairman of the workers’ compensation board 
is protected already by the Legislative Assembly. The local government board and the public 
service commission, except for the chairman, are protected already. The liquor licensing commission, 
for some strange reason, is protected. I would have difficulty justifying that one but it is protected, as is 
the member of the public and private rights board who is, I’m sure, familiar to members opposite. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Is that Mr. Kuziak? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Myron Kuziak. So it’s not a partisan bill, because we could have done it 
somewhat differently if we had decided to make it partisan. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, subsection 2 contains those exceptions. I propose to move 
an amendment. The amendment changes subsection 2 by leaving in effect its current provisions and 
adding thereto: “Who is a member of the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation appointed pursuant to 
The Cancer Foundation Act.” 
 
You will see the nub of that is to exclude The Cancer Foundation Act or at least the 
appointments thereunder. It is an attempt, as I say, to find out whether or not the government objects to the 
member of The Cancer Foundation Act being excluded from the ambit of this act. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I won’t belabor all the arguments; I think we know what they are. In the course of 
my remarks yesterday I talked about the cancer foundation, and the desirability of having it at arm’s length 
from the government, and therefore of the appointments being thought of as not changing when the 
government changed. I think  
  



 
July 15, 1982 

that is desirable theoretically, since I think it is important that this board not be thought of as an agent of 
the government in that sense of the word. I think it is desirable from a practical point of view, and I can’t 
imagine the government opposite taking any objection to any of the members of the cancer foundation 
as it currently exists. I won’t go into the argument, but certainly they are not without friends on the board. 
My point is that I wish to put the proposition that some of these agencies should be one step away from the 
government. You are going to hear from me on the universities as well, and two or three others. I put the 
cancer foundation because it is under “C”, and without belaboring the argument, I move the 
amendment, seconded by my colleague, the member for Quill Lakes, the constituency which I see I forgot to 
put on the motion. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I have an amendment moved by Mr. Blakeney, seconded by Mr. Koskie, that section 
4 of Bill 16 be amended by striking out subsection 15.1(2) of the act as being enacted by section 4 of the 
printed bill, and substitute the following: 
 

(2) Subsection 1 does not apply to a person: (a) whose appointment is expressly stated in an act to be 
subject to termination by the Legislative Assembly; or (b) who is a member of the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Foundation appointed pursuant to The Cancer Foundation Act. 

 
I find the amendment in order. Is the amendment agreed? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, if one accepts our argument at the beginning that the ones that should 
be brought forward need to have the full support of the Assembly, one can ask the hon. members why, when 
they introduced the legislation, they did not do it at that time, if it was of sufficient importance that it needed 
the full support. I can say with regard to the cancer foundation that we had some significant debate and 
questions when we were in opposition with regard to the cancer foundation. I don’t know whether this would 
in fact prejudice the government or not. It is in my view not a quasi-judicial body, where we feel that it 
should have the support, and I would suggest to the hon. members opposite that if it was of sufficient 
importance, if they accept our arguments of the public import, or the need, then it could have been brought 
in in the legislation at the time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — By way of brief reply, it is my submissions that it is in the act now. The act 
permitted the government of the day to appoint people to the cancer foundation and gave them a specific 
term, a fixed term, so as to make clear that they were not agents of the government in the sense that, if they 
did not perform in the manner which the government wished, it didn’t mean they could be removed. They 
were then invited to take a position, not as agents of the government, but as nominees of the government, to 
use their best judgment, whether or not it coincided with the judgment of the government. That is the 
difference. This is a type of arm’s length board. I fully agree with the hon. member that it is not a quasi- 
judicial board. On that he is entirely right. I don’t anchor my argument on that. 
 
My argument is that, for some of these boards, the appointment by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council is by 
way of a selection of a prominent citizen to use his or her best judgment, and not by way of selecting a 
person who is there as an agent of the government, performing his duties by way of following government 
policy. I think the distinction is there; I think it is there with respect to the cancer foundation. I am going to 
suggest it is there with respect to the university boards of governors and two or three other agencies. 
 
  



813 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

In my judgement, that principle which was put in the act at the outset ought to stay. I say it is at least 
partly eroded if we legislate that when there is a change of government the people are subject to 
immediate termination. This leaves the indelible suggestion that they are agents of government policy, 
as opposed to citizens who are nominated to give their best judgment to an area of public concern, but 
not a concern wherein party political considerations are overarching. They are, in fact, not ordinarily 
party political considerations, but considerations of broad public policy. And for that reason, the boards 
which carry them out are best structured as to be, at least partly, at arm’s length from the government. 
That’s the argument, Mr. Chairman. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I would just like to respond to a point, in case I misunderstood the 
member’s argument. It is our general intention to maintain the appointment of those where legislation 
recommends a representative, or the legislation regarding the particular board, agency, commission 
has specific requirements for appointment in terms of an outside advisory appointment. Hopefully, I 
am making my point clear. 
 
I will, and I am prepared to, advise the member privately of a couple of exceptions that come to mind, so 
I say, “generally.” One, primarily because there is a health problem on a significant board, and another 
where the individual, with a very lengthy term, simply has not attended for a very long period of time. I 
don’t think it serves us to give the names here, but I am prepared to give that general assurance. 
 
I think we can go back though to some partisan political arguments. With regard to the operation of 
the cancer clinics (the problems that were there in the past, where the debate went on for some 
considerable period of time) it is certainly in the government’s interest to maintain an arm’s length. In our 
view, the arm’s length, the independence (except in quasi-judicial, which I believe must have the support 
of this Assembly), is maintained by the quality and the public acceptance of the appointments as opposed 
to anything we really say. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 8 
 
Blakeney Lingenfelter Shillington 
Koskie Hammersmith Yew 
Engel Lusney  
 

NAYS — 33 
 
Andrew Weiman Caswell 
Lane Bacon Young 
Muirhead Tusa Gerich 
Hardy Hodgins Maxwell 
McLeod Sutor Embury 
McLaren Sauder Dirks 
Katzman Glauser Hepworth 
Currie Parker Folk 
Smith (Swift Current) Smith (Moose Jaw South) Myers 
Boutin Klein Zazelenchuk 
Hampton Rybchuk Baker 
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, some of the arguments which I advanced in favor of the 
last amendment can be advanced, I think, with even more force, in favor of an amendment which would 
exclude members of the Board of Governors of the University of Saskatchewan, appointed 
pursuant to The University of Saskatchewan Act, and I will accordingly move an amendment in the 
same form as the last one, and the operative addition is: that the operation of the bill is excluded in 
respect of a person who is a member of the Board of Governors of the University of Saskatchewan, 
appointed pursuant to The University of Saskatchewan Act. 
 
Here again, the argument is that the members of the board have not been thought of as agents of 
the government, they have been thought of as citizens who are discharging their duties in the 
interests of university education. They have not, at any time in the past, when the government has changed, 
been subject to change by the incoming government. It has always been the view that to do that would 
heighten the belief that these persons are, in fact, agents of the government. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan board is very carefully balanced so that there are the same number, as 
I recall it, of people on the board who are appointed by the government as are not appointed by 
the government — the president and the chancellor, a student representative and some appointed by the 
alumni make up a number which is equalled by members appointed by the government. 
 
Governments, over the decades (and I would suspect that includes the previous Conservative 
government, and it certainly includes the CCF, Liberal and NDP governments), have been scrupulous in 
attempting to keep the University of Saskatchewan at arm’s length from the government. This does not 
mean to suggest that some persons on the board are not de facto representatives of the government, and, 
indeed, they are. It has been somewhat traditional to have a deputy provincial treasurer, or some 
representative of the financial arm of the government, and a representative of the Department of 
Education or the Department of Continuing Education there. They are acknowledged to be 
representatives of the government, carrying messages from the government, and all the rest. That is the 
link, and that is the co-ordination. 
 
With respect to people who might be appointed to the board of the University of Saskatchewan or 
the University of Regina (and I can’t remember who they are), certainly some of them are known 
New Democrats. There is no question of that. Some of them assuredly are not. Mr. Glenn Flaten of the 
University of Regina — his brother ran for the Liberals. I don’t know what Glenn’s politics are. At any 
rate, certainly there are a fair number of people with various political persuasions. In any case, they 
will be subject to change fairly soon. The point is: what sort of a label are we pinning on those people? 
Are we pinning the label that they’re agents of the government or are we pinning the label that 
they’re citizens who are discharging their responsibility to university education? 
 
I think that because of the great stress which has been laid on the non-interference by the government of 
the day with the operation of the universities, in their day-to-day operations and in the appointment of their 
staff and the like, it would be in the highest degree desirable to include the amendment, which I have 
proposed, to underline, once again, that the government of the day (and now it’s the Progressive 
Conservative government of the day) is not asserting that it should control the university on a day-to- 
  



815 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

day basis, is not saying that the board of governors is its agent, but is saying that university education is 
non-partisan in that sense of the word, and that naturally the government wishes to know how much 
money is being spent and the broad directions of the university, but equally naturally the government 
is not wishing to exercise judgment over the areas which the board ordinarily exercises judgment, thus the 
appointment of staff and the day-to-day internal management of the university. I think this is an 
important principle. 
 
I think the principle will be underlined by the amendment which I have moved. Accordingly, Mr. Chairman, 
the operative words of my motion are: that the act not apply to a person who is a member of the Board 
of Governors of the University of Saskatchewan appointed pursuant to The University of Saskatchewan 
Act. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — We have an amendment moved by the member for Regina Elphinstone, seconded 
by the member for Quill Lakes, that section 4 of Bill 16 be amended by striking out subsection 15.1(2) 
of the act as being enacted by section 4 of the printed bill, and substitute the following: 
 

(2) Subsection 1 does not apply to a person: (a) whose appointment is expressly stated in an act to be 
subject to termination by the Legislative Assembly, or (b) who is a member of the Board of Governors 
of the University of Saskatchewan appointed pursuant to The University of Saskatchewan Act. 

 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Chairman, we will be repeating the arguments over and over again. I would 
hope that the member opposite is not leaving the impression now that because there were some 
appointments not approved by the Legislative Assembly, the university is less than independent. I 
have the view that any government that decided to interfere with the independence of the university or 
academic freedom would be seriously chastised by the public of Saskatchewan, and I think the universities 
both in Saskatoon and Regina have sufficient public stature that that would in fact happen. 
 
The hon. member has admitted that there were some obvious partisan members. I have already given him the 
assurance that where there is a manner of appointment, as to the senate as set out in the legislation, 
by outside agencies, those would be honored with the very minor exceptions that I have already 
indicated to him. That being the case, I again feel that the amendment is not necessary, that in fact 
there is sufficient protection. 
 
If, in fact, it is felt by all hon. members that these appointments should be of a significantly long term, that 
it is necessary to emphasize the argument that the hon. member has articulated, then perhaps that 
is a suggestion that these members be appointed for a sufficiently large period of time. And that would 
probably give a better assurance, in which case, I say probably in which case, it should have the 
approval of all members of the Assembly. I think that that would entail some further discussions as to 
individuals so that all members would have the assurance in that informal process I’ve indicated earlier. 
So I urge all members to defeat the amendment. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I am puzzled by the argument. I don’t mean to prolong this, 
but we have had, as I say, many changes of government. We have always assumed, since the 
University of Saskatchewan was founded in 1915 or thereabouts, that there would be an effort to seek 
out citizens. They would serve on the board, and they would not be agents of the government. They 
would be selected by the  
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

government as good citizens and they would not be changed if the government changed but they would 
serve their terms. And in a couple of years the new government would appoint its persons. The appointments 
are staggered so there is no suggestion that a new government is shut out from control for very long. 
This has operated for the more than 60 years which the University of Saskatchewan has existed. And 
it has operated since the University of Regina has existed. So far as I am aware, it has not caused any 
problems to governments which were Conservative, Liberal, New Democrat or CCF. 
 
I am frankly puzzled why the government opposite wishes to change that, frankly puzzled as to why 
the government feels that it should change the method by which the public, through its legislature, 
has expressed its control over the University of Saskatchewan, and at the same time expressed its lack of 
day-to- day direction of the university by the political arm of government. It is a system which has 
worked, which has underlined the nature of the board of the university, which board has operated, I 
would think without exception, in a way which recognized the belief of the board members that they were 
there representing the public and not the government of the day. 
 
I think it is unwise for us to do anything which prejudices that position of the board which has 
been established for over 60 years, and which is clear in the public mind, and which cannot be other than 
blurred if we pass an act which says that whenever there is a new government you’ve got to have a new 
board. The public simply can’t draw any other conclusion from that except that the board is somehow the 
agent of the government. The current system has caused no problems for 60 years. I’m aware of no 
government of any political stripe that has experienced any difficulty. 
 
The board of the University of Saskatchewan, at least, has attained a stature almost unparalleled in 
Canada in terms of the relationship between the board and the government and the public. I’m not, in 
any way, suggesting that that will not happen with the board of the University of Regina, but 10 or a 
dozen years is not enough time to build that sort of a tradition. 
 
I am saying that we have, through these processes which have worked very effectively, established a 
niche for the board of the University of Saskatchewan which has it as appointees of the government but 
not as agents of the government. It is a niche which has worked remarkably well and better than in 
many other provinces, I may say, and one which I don’t think we should disturb. Bill 16 disturbs it. 
The amendment which I move will preserve the existing status quo and accordingly I will move the 
amendment and invite all members to support it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have a question for the minister. Since the minister wants the power to 
terminate the appointments of members to the university board, he must be able to envision some 
circumstances under which he would want to remove the members. Can you tell us what those 
circumstances are under which you would want to remove members? What fears plague you? You 
have, as the member for Regina Elphinstone said, cast a pall over the independence of this institution. I 
think you owe it to us to let us know what it is you fear and what it is that motivates you to bring in this 
amendment. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I thought I had indicated to the Leader of the Opposition (I don’t know if the 
member was in the Assembly and I am unfortunately in the position of having to repeat the 
argument) that the legislation simply establishes the principle that  
 
  



817 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

any new government will be able to make its own appointments upon acceding to office. As I 
indicated, it is our view (particularly for quasi-judicial appointments or boards or whatever) that 
where there is a public need for long-term appointments, those appointees should, in fact, have that 
informal approval of this Assembly. That happened, for example, with the ombudsman; there was an 
informal consultative process. It is our view that if they need to be long term (that is, beyond the term of a 
normal government), there should be that approval of the Assembly. 
 
Otherwise it’s a bill that simplifies the whole procedure. It removes the hodgepodge that existed before 
and that I explained earlier: some members appointed to term; some with the chairman, not at the 
pleasure of members, at term; some, the chairman at term and not the members; the members at 
pleasure; varying appointment terms. As I say, there’s been no consistent policy. It is our view that it is 
time for a consistent policy which will apply across the board. 
 
I have advised the Leader of the Opposition that on a quasi-judicial board we will be making some 
changes based on health, and one particular member has never attended a meeting of a very important 
board. It serves us no good to debate these names in public. I’m prepared to supply them to the hon. 
members, but it doesn’t serve us any good and we’ve discussed that earlier. So, the general principle 
still stands as it will through all amendments and, as I said, we will not be specific in any of them. We’re 
talking in terms of the general principle that we’ve brought before this Assembly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I heard the member’s answer. I didn’t think that answer, however, answered 
my question. My question was whether or not there are any specific circumstances, which you can name 
for the board, under which you would be removing members. By the member’s failure to list any 
circumstances under which he’d want to remove a member, are you saying there aren’t any? You can’t 
think of any instance under which you’d want to remove a member of the board of governors? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I’ve already indicated two examples on a quasi-independent board. Certainly for 
those appointments that the government makes, or a government makes, it will be in the government’s 
discretion whether it wants to change its appointments or not — its own appointments. As I indicated, 
as well, those appointed by outside agencies, or that otherwise were recommended, depending on 
the statute, will generally be honored. And it is our view, quite simply, that any government should be 
able to make its own appointments. It’s that simple. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I’m more than a little alarmed by some of the earlier 
comments of the minister when he talked about having a consistent policy to remove some of the 
hodgepodge. There is every reason for inconsistency if we’re talking about the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and the University of Saskatchewan. The board of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan and the board of the University of Saskatchewan have little or nothing in common except 
that, with respect to one of them, all of the members are appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, 
and with respect to the other, half of the members are appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. 
They are, in no sense, the sort of thing that ought to be equated. 
 
The board of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan ought to reflect government policy, and there is 
no way that the opposition in a legislature is going to allow the government of the day to say, “This 
was a decision of the board of the potash corporation and that’s not our decision,” because that doesn’t 
make sense. The potash  
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

corporation is an agent of government policy. The board has to be, at least in part, an agent of the 
government. Now, you try to get businessmen with independent judgement — yes, indeed, you do. But, if 
you don’t like what they do, you can impose your will on them, and you ought to be able to impose your 
will on them, as to whom they hire and how much they pay and how they organize their offering. 
 
With respect to the University of Saskatchewan, the government ought not to be able to say whom they hire 
or how much they pay to an individual. I suppose they may have some say about the broad salary ranges and 
schedules, but not as to whether an individual is paid $40,000 or $50,000 or $60,000 a year. Nor is 
the government responsible in any way for the manner in which the programs are offered by the university. 
And I wouldn’t think that it would be proper for me to stand in my place and ask the Minister of 
Continuing Education: how much was paid to the professor of geology at the university, and why 
aren’t his courses better? I don’t know who the professor of geology is. Obviously, that’s a mere 
hypothetical question. He wouldn’t answer it. He would say, “That is not a government agency. I am not 
here to answer for their hiring practices.” He would be right. 
 
Accordingly, there is no reason to have consistency in the manner in which we appoint people to the 
Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan board and the University of Saskatchewan board. Indeed, consistency 
ought to be avoided because we are trying to achieve two very, very different things. In one we are trying 
to create an arm’s length agency which carries out a public function, and is not under the day-to-day 
direction of the government. This we recognize in this House all the time. In another, we are appointing a 
board which is an agent of the government, and which is carrying out government policy. And for that 
reason, I think, the board of a potash corporation ought to be able to be fired by the new government the 
next day. That’s up to it. 
 
But the board of the University of Saskatchewan ought not to be able to be fired by the new government, not 
because it shouldn’t make its own appointments, but because it puts the coloration of agency on them and 
it just can’t be eradicated. If you say that when a new government comes in, the board changes and new 
people go in, or can go in, you are undoubtedly saying that this is a government agency; you are 
undoubtedly saying that these people are there to represent the government in a direct way. That’s what 
we shouldn’t be saying about the university. I am not here to defend the current board of the University of 
Saskatchewan or three or four or five of these other agencies whose names will come up. I am here to say 
that we ought not to politicize those boards. It hasn’t been necessary in the past; we shouldn’t do it now, 
and we should therefore support the amendment. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, the only way to get the minister on his feet seems to be to ask a question. 
At the end of my remarks I will ask one. This is one of the most difficult of all the ones with which we 
will be dealing, I say to the minister. This one involves a question of academic freedom. The minister 
opposite, years ago, before he was an elected official, was closely associated with another government, 
the Thatcher government, which carried on a virtual warfare with the universities. I am not saying that Mr. 
Thatcher was wrong and the universities were right. I am saying that those universities and the board of 
governors have to be free to make their views known, without fear that their ranks would be decimated. 
 
Can the minister give us no assurance whatsoever that the independence of this board will be preserved? 
I know the minister said that he regards semi-judicial bodies as being different, and those in which the 
public has an interest are different, but he refuses to  
 
  



819 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

give us any commitment with respect to any specific board. All we have is assurances in the vaguest 
conceivable fashion that something might be done. I regard that as no assurance at all that the 
independence of the universities will be preserved. Can you not give us any assurance at all that the 
independence of the universities will be preserved? Can you do nothing concrete which will give us 
some assurance? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I have already indicated that not only would we give the assurance that the 
academic freedom would be ensured; it would probably be enhanced under a new government. But 
I find the arguments of the hon. member rather strange because he has just given an argument in favor of 
the proposed legislation, since under the previous system there was an academic war against the 
university and academic freedom was at issue with the previous government. I find it rather a strange 
argument — why would he want to now stand up and defend the previous system that obviously caused 
some problem? 
 
I don’t think any members opposite subscribe to the view that the university commission or the 
universities’ board of governors is in the same position as the judiciary, for example, and that it should 
be completely independent. But you are very close to that argument, because if you are advancing the 
argument that we must guarantee by statute (an absolute guarantee) academic freedom, then you are 
obviously arguing for a completely independent university similar to an independent judiciary. 
 
The hon. members opposite say that they are not going that far. Well the question is: where do you draw 
the line? Let’s face it. Based on the previous system and based on any new system academic freedom is 
going to be determined by the universities themselves. And the universities, in our view, have enough 
public stature that any government, the NDP, Liberal or Conservative, which threatens academic 
freedom, is going to suffer the wrath of the public. And that is the true protector of academic freedom. It 
always is, it always was, and in our view it always will be. That’s really the position. I say to you that 
this bill makes no change in that. As I say, it will probably be enhanced. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 7 
 
Blakeney Lingenfelter Lusney 
Koskie Hammersmith Shillington 
Engel   
 

YEAS — 31 
 
Andrew Boutin Rybchuk 
Lane Hampton Caswell 
Thatcher Bacon Young 
Muirhead Tusa Gerich 
McLeod Hodgins Maxwell 
McLaren Sutor Hepworth 
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

Katzman Sauder Folk 
Currie Glauser Myers 
Duncan Smith (Moose Jaw South) Zazelenchuk 
Schoenhals Klein Johnson 
Smith (Swift Current)   
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, a number of the arguments I have advanced with respect to the 
University of Saskatchewan apply equally with respect to the University of Regina. I am going to move an 
amendment which is: that the act would not apply to a person who is a member of the Board of Governors of 
the University of Regina appointed pursuant to The University of Regina Act. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — The amendment before the committee is moved by the member for Regina 
Elphinstone and seconded by the member for Shaunavon, that section 4 of Bill 16 be amended by striking 
out subsection 15.1(2) of the act as being enacted by section 4 of Bill 16 and substitute the following: 
 

Subsection 1 does not apply to a person (a) whose appointment is expressly stated in an act to be subject 
to termination by the Legislative Assembly; or (b) who is a member of the Board of Governors of the 
University of Regina appointed pursuant to The University of Regina Act. 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I wonder if I could get a clear explanation from the minister. In a very similar 
amendment dealt with just a few minutes ago, you indicated that members opposite were trying to give the 
board the same security of tenure as the judiciary. I don’t think that is a fair summarization of what we are 
saying. I think what we are saying is that you ought not to be allowed to remove them without good reason. 
If you have good reason, you can always deal with them on an individual ad hoc basis. You don’t need these 
sweeping powers. The problem with this section is it gives you the right to remove these people without 
good reason. Why does the minister feel himself so constrained that he cannot use the ordinary procedure for 
removing a member who is not carrying out his responsibility? What is wrong with the mechanism you have 
now for removing members? You can remove them on an individual basis. You just simply cannot remove 
them en masse. Why does that not meet the needs of the minister opposite? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — That’s a rather specious argument in that under the existing system, of course, 
they can be removed without reason at the end of their term. That’s the way the present system operates. 
In fact the reason, supposedly anyway, or one of the reasons for the term appointments, was to try to 
make sure there was continuity. And we are fully cognizant of the need for continuity on a board such as 
this and the one at Saskatoon. We are fully aware of that. Any new government will also be responsive 
to the need or desire for continuity, continuity in my view though — I must say that I am speaking 
personally. 
 
That is the only representation we’ve had with regard to this general piece of legislation — to be aware of 
the need, in some cases, for continuity. Of course it doesn’t apply to governments. When a new 
government comes in it generally comes in in total, and there is no provision for continuities on general 
governments. When I say that I am speaking personally, it is not a strong argument but it is the only 
concern. And I can give the member the assurance that we will be fully cognizant of wishes for 
continuity or concerns about continuity, and we’ll fully take that into account. 
 
  



821 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

Your argument, though, simply was academic freedom. The only way in my view that you could 
attempt, and I’m not even sure that would be successful, to protect absolutely the question of academic 
freedom is to have completely independent universities such as an independent judiciary. I’m not even 
sure that would in fact solve the problem. I don’t think anyone subscribes to that, so I suggest to the hon. 
member that, as I say, his argument was not valid. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m delighted to hear the minister’s philosophical elaboration of his position 
on continuity, but I wouldn’t mind an answer to my question, which the minister avoided entirely. What’s 
wrong with the existing mechanisms? It is true you can remove a member at the end of his term without 
cause, but you can remove him during his term if you have good reason. Why do you need the additional 
power with respect to the University of Regina? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — You are not quite accurate, in that I don’t know about the termination for cause; 
cause would be determined, I suspect, by the public. As to whether an individual — in this case, on the 
University of Regina board — should be terminated, cause would have to be acceptable to the public. I 
suggest to you that the question of academic freedom will ultimately be decided by the public, as well, 
and that’s really where the issue will be determined. It’s that simple. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, does the minister not trust public opinion? Is he not prepared to justify 
his dismissals before public opinion? Are you saying that’s why you need the additional powers — so 
that you won’t have to justify yourself to the public? That’s a strange response in a democracy, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — As a matter of fact, just the opposite occurs under this. If you wanted to take 
the argument that the appointment should be immediately responsive to public opinion — I’m not sure 
that’s a good argument for you to advance — then obviously this is a much better system. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I’ll just ask the minister one more time. What is it about the 
existing mechanism that you feel is unworkable? Why do you need these additional powers? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — We’ve been through this on second reading, and I’m not sure the question is 
really a valid one, given the fact that the debate has been going on for some days. We have given the 
reasons for the legislation, and I’ve stated over and over again the policy that we are implementing with 
the legislation. It has been well debated. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I know your policy is that you want to get rid of all these people. I’m asking 
the minister why he needs it. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I have indicated the basis for the policy which is evidenced in this bill over and 
over and over again, and we believe that any new government should be able to make its own appointments, 
and I don’t think that’s improper. 
 
Secondly, where it is in the public interest, or there is a public need that these appointments need go on for 
a longer period of time, beyond the normal term, the government should have the approval of this 
Assembly. We’ve been through this, I don’t know how many times. 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to ask the minister one question. Does he consider it important that a 
new government have the absolute right to dismiss members of the board of the university, and does he 
feel that that priority is higher than the independence of the board that is established under the present 
legislation? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Keep in mind that there is nothing to stop any new government from making 
term appointments under this legislation. Don’t make that mistake. Any government that wishes to 
make term appointments can continue to do so. For example, we could make an appointment now for a 
term of three years or four years, assuming the election is in four years, the normal term. It would run 
out the day of the election. It’s only if it goes beyond and affects the new government that the 
legislation in fact comes into play. I don’t see why the hon. member has difficulty with that. When you 
talk about the independence of the university, I’ve said before, the only way you are going to assure, and 
I’m not sure it solves the problem . . . 
 
Academic freedom is going to be protected by the public, and, in our view, it doesn’t matter whether 
a government makes its own appointments. It will be judged accordingly. If any government, no matter 
what political stripe, makes appointments that the public objects to or that threaten academic freedom, 
it’s going to pay a very heavy price, no matter who it is. That’s where the court decides academic 
freedom. This, in no way, affects that situation. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to ask the minister one other question. Does he believe that a board for 
which there is a certain term is perceived to be less politically controlled, potentially, than those where 
individuals to the board are automatically controlled and appointed by the government? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I think the perception depends on the actuality of the appointment. I could give 
you five-year term appointments and make them highly partisan and highly visible people, and that 
wouldn’t make it independent. The perception would then be that it was partisan. So I suggest to 
you that the perception is determined by the actuality, that is, by the individuals appointed. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Surely the weakness of the minister’s argument (that public opinion in the 
end result is always the court to which these things must be brought for adjudication) is that this takes place 
right after an election, when governments are least susceptible to public opinion (as we are finding out) and 
are at their most cocky and arrogant. Surely that’s the whole problem with this bill: immediately after the 
election, when you’re subject to the minimum amount of public opinion, is when this takes place. 
Surely that’s a weakness of the minister’s argument that this is always subject to public opinion. I say to the 
minister again: you can always remove people if you can justify it. That’s always been the case. You can 
remove members if you can justify it. This just gives you the opportunity to remove them when you 
can’t. I really wish the minister could be a little more explicit in telling me why he thinks the existing 
legislative machinery so narrowly constricts his room to manoeuvre with respect to the universities. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I suppose you could really question where you would find authority to even 
remove some for cause. I think there’s enough doubt about that in terms of some term 
appointments. It’s a questionable argument. I have difficulty with the argument that immediately after an 
election a government is least susceptible to public opinion; however, for argument’s sake, I will accept 
it. The fact is that you start to lay the groundwork after an election. The hon. members know full well 
that sometimes you can  
 
  



823 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

make appointments early or you can take legislative action early, and it takes a long period of time for 
that to hit home to the public and then cause problems. I don’t think the argument that the hon. member 
gives that a government is less subject to public opinion immediately after an election than it is at a later 
date . . . I don’t think any government should assume that to be the case. Let me put if that way. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to ask the minister another question. Does the minister believe that 
it’s desirable to have a minimum amount of political interference with respect to the appointment of 
boards, and to maximize the arm’s length from government as to potential interference approach with 
respect to the appointment of members to boards? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I think it’s desirable in the overall scheme of things, keeping in mind that, although 
it may wish to have it at arm’s length as much as possible, the government may have significant 
financial expenditures that it must maintain control of. I don’t think hon. members opposite disagree 
with that. I suppose, as an overall goal, that it is desirable, but in fact you have to color it with the need for 
government to protect its finances, which is one of the roles. 
 
Again, I think the hon. member is missing the point. The perception or actuality of independence is what 
the public sees, and that is determined by the individuals appointed, no matter what form it takes and no 
matter for what time. You can’t get away from that. If you want to make partisan appointments over a 
long term, the perception is going to be that it is going to be partisan. If you’re going to make partisan 
appointments over the short term, the perception is that it is partisan. The form of the appointment doesn’t 
matter. It is the individuals appointed who determine it, and that is in no way affected by this legislation. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A further question. The hon. minister indicated that political independence is, in 
fact, desirable. I take from his comments that he indicated that. I want to say that what we have done 
here with respect to the appointments of the boards of governors of the universities is to establish in this 
legislature, a procedure which would maximize not only the perception, but the method and the continuity 
of the board. I want to ask the minister: can he indicate to this House, how, through his method, he is going 
to enhance the political independence over the method that we had previously. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I have indicated to you, and it would apply as a general principle across the 
board, that the only way the perception or the actuality of political independence is going to be perceived 
or seen by the general public is through the individuals appointed. It is not going to depend on the form; 
it is not going to depend on the term; it’s going to depend on the individuals. 
 
This government, or any other government, is going to be judged accordingly. We will be judged by our 
appointments, as in some cases you were judged by yours. I fail to see how this legislation changes 
that because it obviously doesn’t. That’s where the judgment is going to be, and if we make 
appointments that change the perception, we’re going to pay the price. We’ve now been through this four 
or five times. I don’t see why you’re having difficulty with that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I have quite a bit of difficulty with your answers; that’s the problem. I just want 
to say to the hon. member, and he knows as a lawyer, that one of the  
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

things we do in the appointment of judges to the system — the Queen’s bench and the court of appeal — 
to give them independence is give them a tenure of office to carry it out. Obviously we do it so that their 
independence from the political machinery can be set in motion. 
 
I am saying that, in respect to the board of governors, we had a similar situation before. Now you want to 
remove it. Can you clearly indicate why, in the instance of the justices we appoint to the Queen’s bench and 
the court of appeal we give them independence, but this does not apply similarly with respect to the 
appointment of the board of governors? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I think the hon. member is treading on some very strange ground, because if he is 
arguing for similarity — the Leader of the Opposition had indicated that we didn’t want a similarity with 
an independent judiciary. There are significant differences in the appointments. 
 
Now, let me answer the hon. member, because I’m very surprised at his arguments. The hon. member has 
argued that if we want independence for the universities, we should have similar appointments (and the hon. 
member is nodding his head) to those in the judiciary. And what are those? They have security of tenure 
because they are appointed until age 75 — a significant difference. If you are arguing that, and you feel that 
security of tenure is the main argument (and this has been your argument), I wonder why, under the existing 
legislation, you only have a three-year term. Why only a three-year term? 
 
It is very interesting that the arguments from the member for Regina Centre were to the effect of security of 
tenure, I believe, and the need for that. In fact, the previous system, which he says caused some problems 
with the previous government, wasn’t effective . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I apologize if I have, 
but my understanding of your argument was that I was part of a previous government, and that there was a 
fight between the former premier and the universities . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m sorry. The fact is 
that you would lose the fight. You bet you would lose the fight! You’re probably more on the hook under 
this legislation than you would be under the other legislation. We’re prepared to accept the responsibility. I 
cannot accept, however, the argument of the hon. member for Quill Lakes, that there is a comparison 
between the appointments to the board of governors of a university and the judiciary, which at one time had 
lifetime tenure, and now has tenure to age 75. I suspect that that would be a less than desirable situation if it 
was the feeling of all members of this Assembly that all members of the board of the university should have 
lifetime tenure. 
 
We have already indicated that if that is the desire, we would, in all cases where there is long-term tenure, 
bring the matter back and have it accepted by all members of the Assembly. Right now, I can’t subscribe to 
lifetime tenure for the board of governors, as the hon. member has advocated. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, I did not advocate. I drew an analogy that, in appointments 
with the justice system, we do give them life tenure. We would do that for a purpose. We would do it for a 
significant purpose — the independence of the justice system. And I want to say here that what we have done 
is give to the board of governors some independence. We haven’t gone to life tenure, but we have at least 
extended the period of time of tenure. So I ask the minister: do you believe that an individual with no tenure 
can be more independent, as you are propounding, than an individual who has the protection of tenure? 
 
  



825 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Yes, depending on the individual, most certainly. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Can you indicate to me why with the justice system we have veered to the adoption of 
life tenure or, say, to the age of 75? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I said “can.” I again have difficulty equating the board of any university with 
superior court judges or the courts. I have difficulty. We have to remember that the question of public 
perception is the determinant, and it is decided obviously by politicians that the courts should be seen to 
be independent and that should be reinforced, and the public wants that reinforcement and needs it, and 
so the system was devised. Do I think that individuals of stature, of independence, can be independent 
without tenure? Yes, I do, and I think that hinges on the quality of the appointments. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — One question further on this. If you take the situation that we adopt your proposal, 
and you say that public perception will control it . . . But take the situation that you’re leading us to that 
any of the board of governors can be elected or can be removed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. 
What I am saying here is: if you take your situation, and if there is a disagreement in policy, how is 
that individual without tenure able to express his disagreement with the policy that is being expounded by 
the government? What I am saying is: if you have individuals with a given tenure, they are not 
dependent upon you at your whim, and as a consequence during that tenure they at least have the right to 
raise their objections without simply being removed. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I don’t see why that is a concern. The very simple fact is if someone who is 
appointed for three years objects to the appointer on a regular basis, he’s not going to be renewed, in all 
likelihood, after the three years; it doesn’t matter who it is. 
 
Now, I suggest to you that makes no difference whatsoever and I would also argue (and we have 
many examples in the partisan political process) that if a three-year term appointment, or a five-year, or 
other, significantly disagreed with his appointer it would be incumbent (and I’m talking serious policy) 
upon that person to do the honorable thing and step aside. Now, that’s acceptable. Any person of that 
stature and that quality could do the honorable thing. I suggest to you that if you have someone without 
term who disagrees and disagrees publicly and is fired as a result of it and is right, that puts far more 
pressure on the appointer than the other. So, you can argue either way. I suggest to you that, in fact, 
there are more pressures on the government to make quality appointments with this legislation. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I want to underline what the minister has just said, that in 
his judgement were the government to appoint someone to a board, and were that person to disagree 
with government policy, the honorable thing is for that person to resign — and with respect to a good 
number of boards, I would, of course, agree. But with respect to the board of governors of the 
university, I would respectfully disagree; this is the whole issue that we’re talking about — whether 
those people are there as agents of government policy, or whether they are there to exercise their best 
judgment on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. I think this has underlined the difference in 
philosophy with respect to the universities. Mr. Chairman, I direct my remarks now to the 
University of Regina. The difference in philosophy between the government opposite and us is that we 
do not believe that when the government of the day appoints people to the board of governors of either of 
the universities, those people are expected to reflect government policy or else resign. We just don’t 
believe that. 
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — We believe that that is the wrong basis for appointing people. We believe 
that the right basis is to appoint people who you think have a genuine interest in university education and 
what it can contribute to this province, to the economy, to the young people, and to the whole social 
structure of this province, and tell them to go in there and use their best judgment. We certainly hope 
that they will agree with government policy. But if they don’t, then they are to use their best judgement 
— to tell us so, and to vote against the government policy and to proceed with what they think the 
university ought to be. 
 
I very, very seriously believe that with respect to a small number of arm’s length boards, that is what 
we should be seeking, not people who will reflect government policy, and not people who feel that 
they are under any obligation to resign if they come in disagreement with government policy. If the 
government of the day, our government or any other, stood up and said, “We think the government of 
the University of Regina ought to do this and ought not to hire that person,” I would expect the board, the 
appointees made by our government, to say, “All very interesting, but in effect, get lost. That’s not your 
function. We will decide who is appointed.” And I would expect them to do that and not resign. No way, 
they are there to represent and to give their best judgment to how universities ought to be operated. 
 
This is what we think is implicit in this, the idea that the people appointed to the board are 
somehow representatives of the government. They are appointees of the government, admittedly, but they 
are not there to carry the message from the government, save the two that I have already mentioned a 
number of times — there is usually a person from continuing education and a person from finance who 
are indeed representatives of the government. And they had better say what the government wants 
them to say. I’d expect the deputy minister of continuing education to reflect government policy. I 
would expect the financial person named to reflect it. They are employees of the government and 
everybody understands what their function is. 
 
But the people who aren’t employees of the government, but who are citizens, whoever they may be, 
and members of the board of the University of Regina, are not expected to reflect government policy. 
They are expected to give their best judgment as to how the University of Regina ought to operate. I 
believe that we are on the wrong track when we expect these people to either reflect government policy or 
resign. We are on the wrong track and we will be assigning a new role to these board members. In so 
doing we will be rendering the universities less able to do the job that they can best do. 
 
So I want to underline why we are making these amendment — why we think that the bill before us, Bill 
16, ought not to apply to The University of Regina Act. The minister has just confirmed our misgivings 
about this and his perception that these people really ought to reflect government policy or else, in honor 
bound, tender their resignations. That is not our perception, and that is why we will strongly urge all 
members to support this amendment so as to underline what has traditionally been the independence of 
the board of the University of Regina. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I am sorry the hon. member misinterpreted my remarks because we were in a 
general discussion as to the advantages of tenure as opposed to no tenure, and as I very carefully 
prefaced my remarks by saying, “In a partisan political process we have examples of where individuals 
. . .” 



827 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

I agree with the hon. member as to the independence. One could argue, of course, that a board 
member appointed by a Conservative government may become more independent knowing full well that 
he has to be reconfirmed by a subsequent Liberal or NDP government. One could argue very strongly that 
this legislation may make members appointed far more independent. So, all I am saying to the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition is that in that debate we were talking about the general question of 
length of tenure and the advantages or disadvantages. I would hope my remarks would be interpreted in 
that light. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — One further question, Mr. Chairman. As I understand what the hon. member 
is telling the House, it is: never mind the fact that some of the checks against the abuse of power are 
being removed by this legislation, because in the end result what really counts is public opinion. Any 
government which runs counter to public opinion will be shortly brought up on its leash. 
 
If I may say so, I find that an amazing proposition. I don’t accept it. There are darn few people 
in Saskatchewan who actually believe that, and I am amazed the minister really believes that. Surely 
the history of government in a democratic society is that there must be checks on abuse of power. There 
must be means of preventing government from dismissing members of independent boards whose 
only sin is to disagree with the government. 
 
Is the minister telling the House that his government is so perfect in every way, so completely attuned 
to public opinion, and so utterly responsive to it that there could never be any abuse of power in the 
dismissal of boards? Is that the proposition which you are asking us to vote on and accept? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — The question of abuse or lack of abuse of power is always decided by the court 
of public opinion. I must say that my faith in the court of public opinion was restored on April 26. Be that 
as it may, it is always the court that determines whether any government, of any political stripe, has 
actually abused, or is perceived to abuse, its powers. 
 
There are examples by other governments of all political stripes that I felt, in my own mind, without getting 
into it, were extreme. I can give you an example — the War Measures Act. I happen to feel that perhaps 
that was an abuse of power there. But obviously the public of Canada didn’t. The question of an abuse is 
always determined by the public. That is where it should be. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — So the minister is telling the House that the only protection these poor souls 
have is public opinion — the same public opinion that came rallying to the support of the people in Quebec 
during the War Measures Act, the same public opinion which has protected some of the people who have 
been the object of abuse by government power. I say to the member opposite that public opinion is not an 
adequate check. I doubt that this bill, quite frankly, is the subject of conversation at every dinner table 
in Regina tonight. That is simply not the way public opinion works. Interest and attention doesn’t 
always focus on questions of human rights and independence of boards. I doubt that, frankly, all the 
public understands the nuances of what we are doing here today. 
 
Surely, the whole history of protection of freedoms and independence has been that democracies 
establish within the legal framework checks against the abuse of power  
  



 
July 15, 1982 

by the government. Surely, that is the whole history of the development of our society. That is what 
the charter of rights was all about. It was the legislative means of checking abuse of power. Surely, 
what you are doing is removing what little protection these independent boards have against a 
government which abuses its power. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — We obviously have a difference of opinion. I have great faith in the court of 
public opinion, and that is the final determinant. I hope we never change it. I know this government 
won’t. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A further question. Coming back to the aspect of the validity of tenure, I think I 
indicated to the hon. member that the judicial system, the appointment of judges, is for life tenure to 
give total independence. He has conceded, in respect to quasi-judicial bodies, that tenure should be 
adopted, should be kept in place. And he gave some exceptions, because they are excepted from the 
particular legislation. And he indicated the need for that independence with those quasi-judicial bodies. 
What I am saying here is: is not the independence of the university also important, and doesn’t tenure in 
fact add to that independence? Would the minister answer that and indicate to me why his system 
improves that independence? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I’ve gone over this argument several times already. I fail to see whether a 
one-year term appointment is any more security of tenure or a two-year appointment or a three-year 
tenure. The only way is to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, this is what I’m saying. I’ve already 
disagreed with you. I do not accept your argument, your position, that security of tenure should apply 
to the boards. Security of tenure — the only way in your example is lifetime security of tenure or until 
age 75. When you pick a term, you are always subject to the question: is the term long enough? And the 
only acceptable term is the one of age 75 or lifetime tenure. We simply have a fundamental disagreement 
on that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I have one further comment. I think there are alternatives ensuring independence: 
either as you indicated, give life tenure, or put it into the classification of quasi-judicial, which you are 
agreed to eliminate or, thirdly, don’t proceed but support the amendment that has been proposed. Certainly 
that would guarantee the independence that was there previously, which you are undertaking to dispose 
of. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Except you are in the position of defending the status quo. The status quo has a 
three- year term. That’s what the legislation, I believe, calls for — a three-year term. You are saying 
that’s not adequate tenure . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, he just said no. Would one of you make up 
your mind. When you start talking the question of tenure you start talking 1 year, 2 years, 3 years, 5 
years, 7 years, 10 years, 15 years, 12.75 years, lifetime, age 75. Which is the right one? 
 
I suggest to you that the three-year term established was really for the question of continuity and I’ve 
already addressed that matter. That was the primary reason for it. I suggest that the hon. member go 
back through the history of the bill. The primary reason for the three-year term is the question of 
continuity. We have indicated that that concern has been brought to our attention. We are fully 
cognizant of it and we will act accordingly. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I have one further question. Since the minister is indeed very knowledgeable on 
public opinion. I would like him to indicate whether he would have an opinion as to what the 
public would perceive as being the most independent — to be at the whim of the government, or with a 
certain term. 
  



829 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — I have now answered that four times. I have indicated that the public perception 
is going to depend on the quality of appointment, and the actions thereafter by any government. The 
quality of individuals which we intend to appoint will be more than satisfactory to the public. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I want to make just one point. We should understand that 
this bill does not provide for changing the terms of people who serve on the Board of Governors 
of the University of Regina from a fixed term to a term at the pleasure of the government. It doesn’t 
do that. It simply says that when there is a new government you must have a new board, or at least that the 
government of the day has a right to appoint a new board. 
 
My principal objection to that is that it cannot do anything else but create, in the minds of the public, 
the board and everybody at the university, the idea that the perception of the government which is now 
taking office is that the appointees to the Board of Governors at the University of Regina are 
nominees of the government of the day . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Are political. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I don’t know whether they are political. I don’t want to use that term. But 
the idea is created that they are nominees of the government of the day, otherwise there would be no 
particular reason for selecting them. They are not thought of as citizens whose primary function is to 
discharge their obligations as citizens and not as nominees. 
 
Accordingly, I think it raises in the minds of a great number of people a perception of the university and 
its relationship with the government which is a wrong perception, and one which we have fought long and 
hard to avoid. Now it will very definitely be strengthened, all to the detriment of the University of Regina. 
I want to make that point; I don’t want to belabor it. 
 
It doesn’t matter how long the tenure is, if it is a one-year term, a two-year term or a three-year term, 
the major change is that it is being abridged when a new government comes into power. The major change 
is the one which says, “Thou art an appointment of the government of the day, to do its bidding; though 
art not a citizen who is appointed to exercise his best judgment.” 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Since the independence of the university from the political field has been a tradition 
of this province, has the minister, since he believes in public input, discussed with the present 
board of directors, with the university presidents or with the university professor associations, the 
changes which he is endeavouring to make? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I have discussed with the representatives, a number of people from the 
universities, and the only concern raised (and I have said it five or six times) was the question of 
continuity. We are fully aware of that concern. We have indicated that we will take into account their 
concerns about continuity. Continuity, in my mind, and I am speaking personally, is not the strongest 
argument, because we have governments. There is no question of continuity when a government 
changes; it is a total change under our system. Somehow, we, as Canadians in the British Commonwealth, 
have managed to survive total changes of governments. So the questions of continuity, and again this is 
my personal view, is not a strong one. It is a concern that has been raised  
  



 
July 15, 1982 

and which we have indicated we would be taking into account. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — In respect to the minister’s reply where he indicated he has talked to some 
representatives, could he give us some idea as to the nature of the representatives with whom he says he 
has discussed it? Would it include the presidents and the boards? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I won’t give you that. I don’t really expect to name the individuals that I have 
talked to, but I do give you the assurance that they were extremely senior and involved with the 
universities in Saskatoon and Regina for a very long period of time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, did I understand from the minister’s remarks, the last one 
and the one prior to that, that he feels that this bill which is before us, which will change The 
University of Regina Act, is being introduced because the government perceives a need for any change 
of policy with respect to the University of Regina? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — No. As a matter of fact I in no way indicated that, because that’s not the case. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Then why not leave the status quo? Why create the impression? Why 
change the University of Regina Act if you don’t wish to achieve anything by it? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I indicated at the outset that this is a broad policy as to our position on all 
boards, agencies and commissions — that any new government, no matter of what political stripe, should 
be able to make its own appointments. There’s no legal requirement — very carefully — that any new 
government is required to make the change. It’s not a requirement of any new government. That is 
our general policy position. That was our debate in second reading. That was the debate that the hon. 
member and I had in item 1 of the bill. That’s our position. That’s the policy position. It applies all 
across the board. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think I make the obvious reply to what the hon. member has said. In 
some ways the bill would be more acceptable (and in some ways less acceptable) if it did require you to 
make a new appointment, because the situation now is that you have converted, if this bill passes, 
positions which did have security of tenure to positions which are subject to dismissal any day by the 
government of the day. If you appointed your new people and didn’t otherwise change The University 
of Regina Act, they would have security of tenure. They would then know that they were there over a 
period of three years (I believe that’s the term) to exercise their best judgment. What you have done, if you 
don’t change anybody, is say that those who were appointed by the old government are no longer term 
appointments but they are at-pleasure appointments and should please act accordingly. 
 
With respect to some of these boards of directors, I don’t imagine it will make any difference, because 
they would say, “Forget it, I’ll do as I like and see what happens.” But with respect to some of the others, 
it may not work out that way, particularly if they’re not in the same position to be totally independent. Keep 
in mind that what we’re talking about is an act which converts term appointments to appointments 
dismissible at pleasure. We’re talking about that with respect to a whole series of acts where we, 
making a conscious decision as a legislature, decided that we wanted term appointments. This is 
particularly true with respect to The University of Regina Act, Mr. Chairman. We’ve decided we want 
term appointments. We’ve decided that people  
 
  



831 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

should have a fixed term. This acts says that you are not to have a fixed term; you are to be 
dismissible at pleasure. That is a significant change in the nature of the complexion and construction of the 
board. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — We’ve been over it before several times. I just repeat my earlier argument. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — As bad as the minister’s arguments are, I wish the legislation reflected 
those arguments. I gather that what the minister is saying to us is that, after a general election, when 
a new government comes in, a new broom will sweep everything clean. If the legislation did that, it 
would be bad enough, but it doesn’t. 
 
I assume that, some time or other, this government will be forced to call an election. And no one expects 
it, but even if it were re-elected, this section would come back to play and you could remove everybody 
who is a member of the board on that day. I may be misinterpreting the legislation, but this legislation 
appears to me to operate after every general election, whether or not there is a change in government. Is 
that perception accurate?  
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I’m assuming you read it, and it’s fairly specific. Of course, after any general 
election, on the day of the first cabinet meeting, any new government can either maintain its same 
appointments that it made, or change them, even if it’s the same government coming back in again. It 
may make changes; it may continue them. I assume that, in the likelihood of the same government 
getting re-elected, it would maintain its appointments, but any government should have the freedom to 
make that decision. I don’t see where the difficulty is. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m now raising another question, but that isn’t the way I interpreted the 
act. I assumed that it is “on which an Executive Council is first installed following a general election.” That 
struck me as being the installation of an Executive Council. The only change in an Executive Council 
since 1971 was in 1982. As I understand the act, there was no new Executive Council first installed 
following the general elections of 1975 or 1978, but you may interpret it differently. The Executive 
Council doesn’t change, you know. The legislature changes; the Executive Council doesn’t. You never 
stop being premier just because there’s an election, unless, following the election, you can no longer 
command a majority. If the act means something different from that, then I’m misreading it. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I apologize to the hon. member. He’s correct. There was a misinterpretation on 
my part. My official had just corrected that. It’s after a change in government. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 7 
 
Blakeney Lingenfelter Lusney 
Koskie Hammersmith Shillington 
Engel   
 
  



 
July 15, 1982 

NAYS — 39 
 
Taylor Schoenhals Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Andrew Smith (Swift Current) Klein 
Lane Boutin Rybchuk 
Rousseau Hampton Caswell 
Thatcher Weiman Young 
Muirhead Bacon Gerich 
Hardy Tusa Maxwell 
McLeod Hodgins Embury 
McLaren Sutor Dirks 
Garner Sveinson Folk 
Katzman Sauder Myers 
Currie Glauser Zazelenchuk 
Duncan Parker  Johnson 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m sorry, there was some discussion over here and I missed your comments. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — The question was: is clause 4 agreed? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, it is not agreed. 
 
At the conclusion of my remarks, and that may not occur until 7 o’clock as it is 2 minutes to 5 now, I will 
be moving an amendment which would guarantee the independence of the arts board. 
 
This is a matter about which I feel fairly strongly. That doesn’t just come from having been minister 
in charge of that board for several years. It comes about primarily because of the nature of that board. Arts 
and related activities are things that go to men’s minds and how they think. A politically controlled arts 
board can be a powerful propaganda tool. This board, as I understand it, was established in 1949. I 
think I am correct in saying that during all the changes in government, not one has removed a member of 
the arts board or any member of the arts board after an election because it wanted to put its stamp of 
approval on it. I want to hear the Attorney General tell this Assembly that he wants to put his stamp of 
approval on the arts board — that their personal political staff must go on this board. I think members of 
the arts board are going to find that a startling proposition. 
 
We have accused the Attorney General of being wrong-headed. I think we’ve been unfair. I think he’s 
not wrong-headed so much as obstinate. I frankly don’t think the minister ever thought of some of the 
problems that this wide-sweeping amendment was creating. I think they got swept up in a general net. 
I think the Attorney General may just be obstinate and I wonder why he doesn’t rise to the occasion and 
accept some of these amendments. I can’t believe, Mr. Chairman, that the minister is going to put a 
political stamp on the arts board. I just simply can’t believe he’s going to do that. 
 
It has been assumed, because of the nature of what it does, that the arts board is independent, and I’m 
going to move the amendment, since it’s now 5 o’clock, and of course, we’ll have time after 7 o’clock to 
pick up the discussion again. So, at this point in time, before it’s 5 o’clock, I’ll move the amendment and 
we’ll get that under way and I  
  



833 

 
July 15, 1982 

 

 

suppose then we’ll call it 5 o’clock. 
 
I move, seconded by the hon. member for Pelly, that section 4 of Bill 16 be amended by striking 
out subsection 15.1(2) of the act as being enacted by section 4 of the printed bill and substituting the 
following: 
 

(2) Subsection 1 does not apply to a person: (a) whose appointment is expressly stated in an act to be 
subject to termination by the Legislative Assembly, or (b) who is a member of the Saskatchewan Arts 
Board appointed pursuant to The Arts Board Act. 

 
The Assembly recessed until 7:00 p.m. 
 


	LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN
	July 15, 1982
	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	QUESTIONS
	Public Service Compensation Package
	Reviving Construction Industry in Province
	Construction of Archives Building
	Addition to Courthouse
	Surveys to Determine Problems of Small Businessmen in Saskatchewan
	MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS
	POINT OF PRIVILEGE
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	GOVERNMENT ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	SECOND READINGS
	YEAS — 8
	COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE
	Clause 4
	YEAS — 8
	YEAS — 7
	YEAS — 7

