






















































Hansard: July 15, 1982


(834) 835 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

July 15, 1982 
 

EVENING SESSION 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Interpretation Act 
 
Clause 4 (continued) 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I made a brief argument in favor of the 
amendment. However, it is fair to say that the Minister of Finance, who I gather is now piloting this, was not 
piloting the bill at the time, so I will repeat what I said. 
 
The arts board was set up in 1949. Basically, it is and always has been a grant-giving institution. In the days 
before grants became a way of life with governments here and elsewhere, this body was set up to give grants 
to artists and cultural groups. Since it was set up, it has, through a variety of different governments, been 
seen as sacrosanct, beyond the touch of politics. I may say there is an excellent reason for that. This body 
gives out grants to cultural organizations. What cultural organizations do and say relate to how men think 
and feel and see themselves. An arts board which is starkly political, or even moderately political, could be a 
powerful propaganda tool. For that reason, the Thatcher government didn't make any changes. When it came 
in, the Blakeney government made no changes. 
 
We, therefore, propose this amendment. I really cannot believe that the logic which members opposite have 
used to justify this bill can apply to the arts board. I really can't believe that this is an institution over which 
they want to put their political stamp. If they do, there will be a lot of artists and cultural groups that are 
going to be pretty concerned. 
 
I'll take my chair and ask the minister what their position is with respect to this amendment. I hope it will be 
accepted. I'll leave it at that for the moment. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, I don't think it will be of much value for me to simply repeat 
many of the arguments advanced by the Attorney General during most of this afternoon. I don't think that 
serves a great deal of purpose. 
 
I will say, with regard to propaganda, though, that I don't think that the members opposite should take such a 
sanctimonious approach to principles about propaganda. You can talk about propaganda all you want. It 
seems to me that over the last four years that I was in this Assembly, and the last four years that I was 
involved in politics, a lot of propaganda came out of the government that was defeated on April 26. I think 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan, certainly with regard, let's say, to the crown corporation 
advertising . . . That became propaganda. So, from the overview, I don't think that we have to hear the 
sanctimonious argument that somehow this government is going to use a particular board for its propaganda 
agency. 
 
I think the Attorney General over and over again indicated to the Assembly today that the function of this 
legislation was to provide a basic overview principle on these particular boards and commissions. We are 
going to proceed with that. 



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
836 

I think the proof of whether or not we are going to politicize all aspects of government, all aspects of boards, 
is going to be seen in the next year or two of this administration. 
 
I dare say that when we stack our performance up against the performance of the previous government, then 
one thing is going to be clear; the administration of government in general, the administration of crown 
corporations in general, and the administration of various boards and commissions is going to be far less 
political than it was under the previous administration. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I must say that I'm not sure what to make of those comments. Are you 
saying, "You guys wrote the book on propaganda; therefore, why be so sanctimonious"? I suppose the 
logical conclusion to be drawn from that remark is, "Okay, we're going to do the same, and that's what we're 
going to do here." Is that what you are saying? Are you saying "You distributed propaganda, so we can, too"? 
Is that what I am suppose to assume from those comments? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think if you listen, what we simply said is that this administration is not 
prepared to be a propaganda machine like the previous administration. Looking at the government over the 
next four years you will not see the expenditure on television advertising of beautiful crown corporations 
like before. You're not going to see stuff crunched out of government to here, here, and here. You can talk 
about advertising if you want; in my view it was propaganda. I am simply saying I don't seek counsel from 
you on any sanctimonious views of the principles. You people do not have a monopoly on principles, on 
rights, on anything else. And the people of Saskatchewan turned you down April 26, and one of the reasons 
was your concept that everything is going to be political, this new administration is going to provide good 
government, is not going to be obsessed with politics in every aspect of government. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would remind the minister that an election has taken place. It's over, the roles 
have changed. You are not required to accept counsel from this side of the House. You are under 
responsibility to give us information, and you haven't done that. We've been here all day getting the same 
circuitous responses. 
 
I wish the minister would just try to confine himself to the question, instead of giving us pompous lectures 
about what a terrible period the 1970s were. If he would just try to stick to the question — why do you feel 
you need to get a political handle on the arts board? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I don't recall hearing the Attorney General this afternoon (and I thought he was 
very patient, given the circumstances) indicate that we wanted to put a political stamp on anything. He 
simply said that, overall, the principle we are dealing with here is that we believe the government should 
have the right, on the boards and commissions, to determine whether or not they want to make changes. That 
doesn't mean it's political or that we're going to politicize things like the members opposite did. I simply 
reiterate the statement of the Attorney General this afternoon, and I can repeat it all night if you like. I don't 
see how it serves any purpose of the legislature. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would remind the minister that the subject before the House is not the general 
principle. This is not the second reading of the bill. The amendment brings to the fore the application of the 
principle to the arts board. Why do you have to  



 
July 15, 1982 

 

 
837 

have that principle applied to the arts board? What's the specific need with respect to the arts board? 
 
The minister has been on his feet three times. I don't think he has ever used the phrase "the arts board." I 
don't think he has ever mentioned it. I really would appreciate it if the minister would try to answer the 
questions, and save the sanctimonious lectures for someone else. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I would simply like to once again reiterate what the Attorney General said 
this afternoon. We as a government view this as an overall policy; we intend to have the various boards and 
commissions in a situation that we can say that we would like to do this or that, or nothing at all. 
 
As the administration unfolds (as the Attorney General ably put it this afternoon), we are going to be judged 
whether we have politicized this or this or this, and I can quite frankly advise you that that is not our 
intention. But it clearly was, in my judgment, the intention of the previous administration. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Why does that principle have to be applied to the arts board? You haven't 
answered the question. You still have yet to use the phrase "the arts board." 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think the Attorney General indicated this afternoon it was going to apply, in the 
purpose of this bill, the interpretation bill, as it applies to all boards and commissions. It applies to all boards 
and commissions. We will put our stamp on it. Some will change; many will not change, perhaps. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Does the minister envision any changes to the make-up of the arts board? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — At this point in time I can honestly advise the House that I would not envision 
any change. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Can the minister envision any circumstances under which he would want to 
remove members of the arts board? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There are certainly, I suppose, situations where perhaps that could occur. I 
would not be prepared to elaborate on those at this particular point in time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Is the minister aware the arts board is on appointment at pleasure? You can 
remove individuals wherever you want. I really think you owe us just a simple explanation as to why you 
think you need the right to wipe the arts board off the face of the earth in a single fell swoop, which is what 
you are giving yourself the power to do. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Perhaps I could come back to that when the officials look it up, if you don't 
mind. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I've asked the minister if you envision making any changes to membership in the 
arts board. I gather, so far as one can make any sense out of those circuitous answers, the answer is no. I 
asked if you could envision any circumstances under which you might want to make any changes. You 
couldn't give us any. Why on earth then don't you agree to the amendment? Is it just pure obstinacy? 
 



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
838 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Again, I just would wait until we get the make-up of the particulars of that 
board. I just hope you can appreciate that I haven't been wheeling this bill through the House, and if you 
could just give me that time . . .  
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Let me ask a question of the chairman on procedure. He may want to seek advice 
on this. I assume that by unanimous consent we could set this one aside and go on to something else. I think 
it requires unanimous consent to set this aside and go on. Perhaps we might, while the officials are getting 
the information . . . We have 47 amendments here. If the minister wants to go on to the next one while he 
finds out about the arts board, we will be happy to do that. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — As I am advised, the term of the arts board is for a one-year term. What is a term 
of one year? It doesn't seem to me to have a lot of relevance. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think we need to be sure about the practice which has grown up of appointing 
members to the arts board for a period of one year. Am I being told that The Arts Board Act requires a one-
year term? I don't think that is accurate. I think The Arts Board Act says nothing about the length of term and 
it is, therefore, at pleasure. The practice has grown up of the orders in council naming a person for a term of 
one year. I will also tell you the fact that the practice has grown up of renewing them for two further periods, 
and they get a three-year term. That is a practice. They are, under the legislation, appointments at pleasure. 
They can be appointed for any length of time you feel appropriate, including an investment period. I think if 
you put it for one year or three years, you have virtually no restriction. There is virtually no restriction now 
on their appointments. They can be revoked at any time, as well. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The only thing I am doing is reading from the act. Perhaps an amendment has 
come since the revised statutes. What it says is: 
 

Each member of the board shall hold office for a period of one year, but may be removed for 
cause by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. 

 
I base it on the fact that the act said that. If it has been amended since then, fine and dandy. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think that does answer the question. It's a one-year term, removable for cause. 
What is there about that that's insufficient? Why isn't that adequate? That's the question the amendment 
raises. It doesn't raise a general, philosophical question about the rights of government to sweep out the halls 
on assuming office. It raises the narrow issue of what's wrong with that. Why do you need to change that? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think we simply go back to the original argument, which the Attorney General 
indicated, that this government would like to have The Interpretation Act come through so that when a new 
government takes office, it has the right to use that in order to put its stamp on boards and commissions. 
That's the general principle. It's not a specific thing with regard to the arts board. If there are 10 people on the 
arts board who are all politically appointed, you can wait a year and put some more political people on the 
board from another stripe, but you don't solve a great deal. 
 
The assurance I can give you is that it is clearly not the intention of this government to put a bunch of card-
carrying Tories on the arts board. Far from it, but there is a  



 
July 15, 1982 

 

 
839 

principle, and I simply don't think we have to back over and over that principle. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Why does your general principle admit to no exceptions? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think it has exceptions, and I think the exceptions advanced by the 
Attorney General this afternoon were very significant. What he said is that any appointment that a 
government somehow believes should be for a longer period of time, as in the cases of the ombudsman and 
the provincial auditor, which were exempted, should be dealt with in the same way that those two 
appointments in particular were dealt with. 
 
In other words, they are dealt with in a rather non-political way. This past session, the term of the provincial 
ombudsman was extended for a period of time, and the then government, that now sits over there, advanced 
the name of Mr. Tickell, so that he would proceed for a second term. The members of the opposition, who 
are now the members of the government, indicated that they accepted that. This Assembly, in effect, 
appointed Mr. Tickell for a second term, and that's good. I think that's an important, key thing.  
 
Now, what we are simply saying is that if we believe any board appointments (and I think the House, as a 
whole, believes that those appointments should be for a term period) should be for that term period, they 
have the general acceptance of the entire House. That is a clear exemption from the rule. We intend to 
extend that rule past the ombudsman down the road. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — None of the exceptions mentioned by the Attorney General, in my view, have any 
application to the arts board. The minister is just putting red herrings before this House in talking about the 
ombudsman and the provincial auditor. They are already protected under the first clause of that which says 
that anybody whose appointment is approved by the legislature is an exception. So that isn't in any sense 
germane to the subject. 
 
As I understood the Attorney General, he said "semijudicial bodies" and this is clearly not a semijudicial 
body. Another assurance (and I couldn't think of a more vague, less specific assurance) he gave was "other 
bodies in which the public have an interest in long-term appointment." That seemed to be the general thrust 
of it, and that doesn't seem to apply to this either. I'm not sure the public does have an interest in having a 
single arts board for 10 years. I think you want new and fresh blood which represents changes in the artistic 
community and so on. 
 
None of the exceptions which the Attorney General gave this afternoon give any assurance to the people on 
the arts board that their independence will be respected. When I ask you why the arts board, you say, "Well, 
we have this general principle." My question then is: why does your general principle admit to no exceptions 
except the ombudsman, the provincial auditor, a semi-judicial body, and that fourth exception which I don't 
really understand (and I don't think anyone else in this House understands that fourth exception the Attorney 
General gives). Why not the arts board as a fifth exception? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I simply repeat the statement made now for the 75th time that the overall 
principle is that we believe we should have the right to review all the boards and review all the commissions, 
and that's what the legislation is for. 
 



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
840 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — So you want a right to review the arts board to see if it is performing its functions 
in accordance with your views of what's right and what's wrong. Is that right? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think the answer was that we would like the opportunity to review all boards 
and commissions. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — For what purpose? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Quite frankly, I think I can speak for a lot of the members in the Assembly in 
saying that when we came to power and someone said that there are 135 or 137-odd boards and commissions 
with some 1,000 people working for them, it took most of us aback. We want simply to look, review them, 
see how they're operating, see if they're operating in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan and, if 
they are, clearly there would be no changes; if they're not, then we would make some changes. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — For a government that seems to be condemned to eternal review and study, why 
didn't you just leave this bill for a couple of months until you had a chance to see which bodies might 
appropriately be the subject of this legislation and which bodies would not? Why does this thing have to be 
proceeded with now? Why can't you do some of your homework and then pass the thing in the fall when 
we're back here again? 
 
I gather that the cabinet minister's response is, "Well, we don't know. Some boards we do; some boards we 
don't. We don't know." Why don't you find out before you pass the act and then you can agree to these 
exceptions or defend your defeat of them instead of just saying you don't know what you're talking about? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We're simply allowing ourselves the opening that if we, in fact, find a given 
board here, a given commission there, that is not by order in council, we will have the power to effect the 
necessary changes that we have to. And I think that we have gone through it in question period; we have 
gone through it in the last two weeks in this Assembly. The main thrust of the criticism of the government 
opposite is that you're studying things too much. I would simply like to repeat my answer. 
 
A government has been in power for 11 years. The government fell out of favor with the people and it fell 
out of favor with the people in probably the most dramatic way that's ever happened in the province of 
Saskatchewan. A new government has come into power consisting of 54 or 55 members. None of them has 
ever been in government before and we're not going to apologize to anyone for reviewing all boards and 
commissions, all crown corporations, all departments of government and every policy of this government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I remind the members opposite that merely the fact that you won an election 
doesn't justify your every whim. Let me approach it from a different point of view. Does the minister support 
the concept of an independent arts board? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think that's probably something this government would give serious 
consideration to. I'm certainly not going to commit the government to that particular concept at this point in 
time. Obviously, I don't know. 
 



 
July 15, 1982 

 

 
841 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are you telling this Assembly that you want to review the question of whether or 
not the arts board should be independent? Is that what you're saying? That's an astounding proposition if it is. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I assumed when you indicated an independent arts board you were talking about 
our concept for a period of long-term appointments with the approval of the entire House and I simply say I 
don't know whether we want to move in that direction or not. But I can tell you one thing: we are not 
intending as a Government of Saskatchewan to somehow go out and politicize the arts board. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do you support the concept which has been accepted by at least three 
governments — CCF, Liberal and NDP — that the arts board is an independent institution, which ought to 
be free from political interference? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I have to get somewhat of a chuckle out of the member opposite. It wasn't more 
than about a year and a half, two years ago, that the same member, I think, was a minister. He was still then a 
minister in the government and he brought in a cultural policy secretariat. He was going to create a crown 
corporation for culture and he was going to do this and that for culture and he was going to create his own 
television station and tell people what they were going to read. And I simply say to the member opposite that 
this government is not going to take sanctimonious counsel from someone like you who, if anybody ever in 
the province of Saskatchewan wanted to propagandize, to politicize the cultural affairs of Saskatchewan, it 
was you, and it will not be this government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I say once again to the minister opposite, you don't understand your role. Nothing 
about the history of this institution requires you to accept any counsel from me. You are under an obligation 
to give us information when it is reasonably requested. All I want is some information. Do you support the 
concept, accepted by at least three governments, of an independent arts board, free from political 
interference. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I answer that question in the same way I have answered three or four times now. 
This government is not going to politicize every aspect of the Government of Saskatchewan like the 
members opposite did for 11 years. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — It is interesting that the member refuses to commit himself to the concept of an 
independent arts board. I have to say that that is something, quite frankly, that I didn't expect. Does the 
minister envision making any changes to the personnel of this board? I haven't received an answer. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I do not represent that particular ministry of government; I cannot advise you 
whether we intend to make changes to that board. I can honestly say no decision has been made on that. 
Certainly, we wish the opportunity to look at that board to determine if it is functioning properly. If the 
assurance that you give us is that it is so independent, then I can give you the assurance that it would not be 
changed. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Then I assume the minister will be prepared to pass the amendment. If that long 
monologue means that you do support the principle of an independent arts board, then I assume you'll agree 
to the amendment. It stands to  



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
842 

reason. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I simply answered the question referring back to a Vichert report, which you 
described in glorious terms as being independent as well. Quite frankly, I didn't quite believe you at that 
time, so I'm not quite sure I should believe you now. We will study it and give you the benefit of the doubt; 
we have no intention of it being anything but independent. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Once again the minister is saying that he does not have sufficient information to 
answer my question. Would the minister agree to postpone this bill until the fall, until he can get the 
information he needs? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think that was voted on the six-month hoist, which is, in effect, interpreted in 
the rules as being a vote against the bill. The vote was counted. This side won; that side lost. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 7 
 

Blakeney Koskie Engel 
Lingenfelter Hammersmith Lusney 
Shillington   
 

NAYS — 33 
 
Taylor Andrew Pickering 
McLeod McLaren Katzman 
Currie Schoenhals Smith (Swift Current) 
Boutin Hampton Weiman 
Bacon Tusa Hodgins 
Sutor Sauder Glauser 
Parker Smith (Moose Jaw South) Klein 
Rybchuk Caswell Young 
Gerich Maxwell Dirks 
Hepworth Folk Myers 
Zazelenchuk Johnson Baker 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — There's another amendment; I'm not going to take long on this. I just want to put 
the members opposite on record as apparently not being in favor of an independent board. It is the labor 
relations board, which decides rights having a very significant economic impact on the business community 
and on workers in this province. I am going to move an amendment which will provide that the labor 
relations board will not be subject to the act. I'm going to sit down in a moment; I would just like the 
minister again to tell this House why you need to get a handle on the labor relations board. What is it about 
their past activities or their future opportunities which makes you feel that you have to have them by a tight 
grip? 
 



 
July 15, 1982 

 

 
843 

I move, seconded by the member from Pelly, that section 15(1) of The Interpretation Act, as being enacted 
by section 4 of Bill 16 — An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, be amended by adding the following 
subsection: 
 

Subsection 1 does not apply to a person whose appointment is to the labor relations board 
made pursuant to The Trade Union Act. 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I don't happen to be all that knowledgeable on the labor relations board. I am 
advised that the labor relations board is at the pleasure of the Lieutenant-Governor in Council. 
 
Pardon me, Mr. Chairman, I beg the indulgence of the Chair. In that the amendment does not, in any way, 
change the act, is it a valid amendment? 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 7 
 
Blakeney Koskie Engel 
Lingenfelter Hammersmith Lusney 
Shillington   
 

NAYS — 33 
 
Taylor Andrew Pickering 
Hardy McLeod McLaren 
Katzman Currie Schoenhals 
Smith (Swift Current) Hampton Weiman 
Bacon Tusa Hodgins 
Sutor Sauder Glauser 
Parker Smith (Moose Jaw South) Klein 
Rybchuk Caswell Young 
Gerich Maxwell Dirks 
Hepworth Folk Myers 
Zazelenchuk Johnson Baker 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, the act is in Revised Statutes of Saskatchewan, Volume 6, Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute, page 4206. This is a special board that I think you should consider because 
the board members are appointed by all three provinces. We participate in the Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute on a formula that Saskatchewan provides. Saskatchewan provides 45 per cent of the funds; Alberta, 
35 per cent; and Manitoba, 20 per cent. The board members are appointed by joint agreement by the three 
ministers of agriculture. I think it would be quite a slap in the face and I'm not sure, with the special 
agreement you have in this case, why you would want blanket legislation to apply to something that you 
really need the agreement of the other two provinces to change, as I see it. 
 
If you look at section 6: 
 



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
844 

The affairs and business of the institute shall continue to be managed by a council under the 
name of Prairie Agriculture Machinery Institute Council, consisting of not less than five 
members appointed by the minister, or where the minister has entered into agreements . . .  

 
And the agreements are, like I suggested, 45 per cent Saskatchewan, 35 per cent Alberta and 20 per cent 
Manitoba. 
 

. . . where the minister has entered into agreements under section 21 (which he has), by the 
minister and the persons with whom the minister has entered into such agreements. 

 
Consequently, these agreements have been reached jointly, and you have to have joint consultation with the 
other three ministers. I really think that you would save yourself a lot of trouble — and I'm really helping you 
clean up your act in this case — if you would accept this amendment. If you do, you know you will not run 
into problems,  
 
because the total act could be thrown out because of this one instance not being exactly like it. So I'll just 
move this amendment, that section 4 of Bill 16 be amended by striking out section 15.1(2) of the act to 
substitute the following: 
 

Subsection 1 does not apply to a person whose appointment is expressly stated in the act to 
be subject to the termination by the Legislative Assembly; or who is a member of the Prairie 
Agriculture Machinery Institute Council, appointed pursuant to the Prairie Agriculture 
Machinery Institute Act. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member for Quill Lakes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — It will be noted, as the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has said, that 
there are (at least we believe there are) agreements existing between Alberta and Manitoba with respect to 
this. It will also be noted that the act specifically says that these agreements can be ignored. That's the 
substance of the words "or agreement." And the question which I would direct to the minister is: is this the 
agreement, or one of the agreements, which you wished to have covered by the words "or agreement" where 
they appear in lines two and three of the to-be-enacted section 15.1(1)? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I don't think it was the intention of this government to renege on any agreements 
that we've made with neighboring provinces. Certainly we would take that into consideration and any 
appointment to this, if it's by agreement of the three provinces, would have the approval by agreement of 
those three provinces. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — My question then is: why not pass this amendment and take that axe off those board 
members and deal with them on the terms that you have set out in your agreement? Why hold a special axe 
over this particular board? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I understand that if we had the desire and ambition to get rid of the members on 
this board now, we could probably get rid of them now without this legislation. Why worry about it? If 
you're concerned that we are somehow going to politicize this, we could do it now, whether we had this 
legislation or didn't have this legislation. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, the point I am trying to make is: you are talking about an  



 
July 15, 1982 

 

 
845 

individual's freedom and liberty, and here you have some board members and you're passing another piece of 
legislation to ensure you can hold this heavy hammer over their heads. You already have the authority; they 
are at the pleasure of a joint agreement with the ministers. I can't see why you want to treat this with blanket 
legislation when there is already legislation in place. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I will simply put it this way. You say that we have this heavy hammer hanging 
over their heads, right? That's your argument, that there's a heavy hammer hanging over their heads if this 
legislation is passed by this new government. The same heavy hammer was hanging over their heads when 
you were over here before this amendment was even advanced, so where are the great fundamental freedoms 
and principles that are being taken away by this particular amendment? 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 7 
 
Blakeney Koskie Engel 
Lingenfelter Hammersmith Lusney 
Shillington   
 

NAYS — 35 
 
Taylor Andrew Thatcher 
Muirhead Pickering Hardy 
McLeod McLaren Katzman 
Schoenhals Smith (Swift Current) Boutin 
Hampton Weiman Bacon 
Tusa Hodgins Sutor 
Sauder Glauser Parker 
Smith (Moose Jaw South) Klein Rybchuk 
Caswell Young Gerich 
Maxwell Dirks Hepworth 
Folk Myers Zazelenchuk 
Johnson Baker  
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, there are a good number of other acts which I think ought to 
be the subject of amendments. I think it clear that members opposite are not in a mood to accept our 
amendments. In order that we not overly prolong the House, and therefore not have a series of recorded 
votes, I am simply going to put on the record that there are several boards, including the co-operative 
securities board, the municipal employees' superannuation commission, and the hospital standards appeal 
board, which I think ought not to be subject to this act. I would also include the Saskatchewan 
Anti-tuberculosis League, which heretofore has not been in the political arena in Saskatchewan, and The 
Workers' Compensation Act, in respect of the workers' compensation review committee, which has been 
outside the political arena and has worked effectively in a very difficult area. 
 
I would say the same in a slightly different context with respect to the board of the  



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
846 

Wascana Centre Authority, where we have had a tradition where it has not been political. We have gone 
through two changes of government without changing people appointed by the previous government, and 
thereby have established the fact that this was not a board wherein the government of the day sought to have 
the members of the board be nominees of the government. Those would have been the arguments that I 
would have advanced and do now advance but to spare the committee I will not move amendments, since I 
expect that the amendments would share the fate of the previous amendments which I have moved. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don't want to be abrasive, but I don't expect anything but the stonewalling we've 
been treated to all day. But for the record, I really have to ask you why this thing has to be retroactive. Who 
was it that you fouled up on that you have to cover up? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Pardon me. Could I have that question again? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Why the retroactivity? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, this is rather a legally technical argument and I can take it from 
no. 1 and give the Assembly and the members opposite the assurance that it's not designed to cover up errors 
in the sense that I think the message is coming across that someone was terminated in a term appointment 
where we had no authority prior to this act. Nobody in that term to date has been terminated so it's not 
designed to cover up a mistake that supposedly was made. That assurance is there. It's not because we went 
out and said, "Hey, you're off this board because we don't like you," only to find out that legally we couldn't 
do that so we now need some retroactivity. It's not designed for that. The legal people advise me that there 
are some legal matters (niceties) that it has to apply to but I can certainly give the assurance to the members 
of the Assembly that it's not to cover up a botch. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I read that and wondered. Clearly it could mean that it's meant 
to cover any change of government that happens on or after May 8 and catch your change of government. 
That's one possible meaning. So it wouldn't apply to prospective changes of government, but to the one that 
happened on May 8. That's one meaning. 
 
Another one that certainly came to mind was that there were certain acts that had happened subsequent to 
May 8, which were sought to be validated, and you are telling me that the latter is not true, that there were no 
steps by the government, no dismissals, or changes in boards, commission, agencies, etc., made since May 8, 
which are sought to be validated. Rather, the argument is that it is sought to make it apply to any changes in 
the Executive Council, effective May 8. That is the new change. Do I have that right? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — If I can try, in my unclear way on this one, it's the legal advice to cover the 
situation from after the time the bill comes in. There is no intention to cover something that happened 
before, and I can give the members my assurance that that is clearly not what we intend to do. I certainly 
would be reprimanded if that was, in fact, the case, with the assurance that I have given the House. 
 



 
July 15, 1982 

 

 
847 

Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill without amendment. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 16 — An Act to amend The Interpretation Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division and bill read a third time. 
 

YEAS — 39 
 
Devine Taylor Andrew 
Thatcher Muirhead Pickering 
Hardy McLeod McLaren 
Garner Katzman Duncan 
Schoenhals Smith (Swift Current) Boutin 
Hampton Weiman Bacon 
Hodgins Sutor Sauder 
Glauser Parker Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Klein Rybchuk Caswell 
Young Gerich Domotor 
Maxwell Embury Dirks 
Hepworth Folk Myers 
Zazelenchuk Johnson Baker 
 

NAYS — 7 
 
Blakeney Koskie Engel 
Lingenfelter Hammersmith Lusney 
Shillington   
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 17 
— An Act to establish a Public Utilities Review Commission be now read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few words to this debate. My colleague, the 
member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, has dealt in some detail with  



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
848 

problems associated with public utilities review commissions. Their ineffectiveness in dealing with 
spiralling rates has been dealt with in this House and, indeed, was extensively dealt with by Mr. White, the 
former member for Wascana, in a very detailed and scholarly presentation which outlined the history of the 
public utilities review commission in Alberta. So I will not take the time of the House to review all of that 
information. 
 
I do want to mention a few things about the idea of a public utilities review commission in general, and also 
some ideas with respect to the particular public utilities review commission proposed by the government 
opposite. 
 
I think the first thing to note is that the problem that this bill seeks to redress is not a problem of improper 
rate increases. No one, I think, can claim with any justification that there have been improper rate increases 
by Sask Power Corporation, Sask Tel, or SGI. The problem has been inflation. A commission will not stop 
rate increases. I think that point should be made. A commission will do nothing to stop rate increases. It may 
well be that rate increases in the past were not properly explained. If the government opposite feels that they 
were not properly explained, it has many methods open to it to explain its proposals and the proposals of the 
various crown corporations to the public. 
 
I will talk about power rates, and I will not in each case talk about telephone rates or SGI rates, but I think all 
of the arguments which I will address with respect to power rates are equally applicable with respect to the 
other corporations. If it is felt that the rate increases have not been adequately explained, the government has 
available to it the Saskatchewan Power Corporation board, the crown corporations committee, and other 
vehicles to explain the increases. These vehicles, particularly the Saskatchewan Power Corporation board, is 
a board appointed by the government. The decisions with respect to rate increases will be decisions of the 
government, and it will be the duty of the government to explain those increases. It will be its duty to explain 
them to the public, and the government will not be spared of its obligation by having an agency of the 
government, the power corporation, explaining them to a public utilities review commission. The public will 
still expect to have the reasons for the rate increases adequately explained, and explained to them. 
 
A utilities commission is little more than another layer of bureaucracy. And a rather costly one because it 
involves not one, not two, but three groups of experts if the board or commission is to operate effectively. 
The corporation involved, and I'm using Sask Power as my example, will have to have a group of experts 
whose virtual sole function is to prepare presentations for the review commission. The public utilities review 
commission will have to have a group of experts, economists, and lawyers of its own to review the 
submission of the power corporation and to represent the commission when the power corporation makes its 
submission. 
 
But that really accomplishes little if there is not someone who is advocating the consumers' point of view. 
And sooner or later, and I suspect sooner rather than later, there is going to be substantial pressure for a 
consumers' advocate board of some kind with its own group of experts — its own economists, its own 
lawyers. And you and I, as consumers of power, are going to pay for a group of lawyers in the power 
corporation, one in the utilities commission, one in the consumers' advocate group, and a group of 
accountants and engineers in the power corporation, the utilities commission, and the consumers' advocate 
group. It is doubtful indeed whether we will get value for the money so expended. 
 



 
July 15, 1982 

 

 
849 

There are some hidden costs with respect to public utilities review commissions. One of them is that they 
consume a goodly amount of managerial talent. Managerial talent is a scarce and valuable commodity. To 
the extent that we have senior officials of the power corporation (or Sask Tel or other corporations) spending 
a great deal of time making up legal cases and preparing themselves to be witnesses, we have less 
managerial talent directing itself toward how to generate power and deliver it as cheaply as possible. 
 
There is a third cost, and that is the cost to the credit rating of the province. The Minister of Finance has 
already indicated that certain provisions in the bill are there because the persons representing potential bond 
buyers have indicated that they are very nervous about public utilities review commissions. Certain time 
limits are put in the bill for that reason, or so we are told. 
 
I think we should not ignore the fact that wherever utilities are subject to review by public utilities review 
commissions, they have more difficulty raising money. Now, this may not have a large impact on 
Saskatchewan Power or Sask Tel, because the essential security may be in the credit of the province, rather 
than the earning capacity of these utilities. To some extent, however, we have attempted, over the years to 
use the utilities and their lengthy record of profitability as a means of persuading bond buyers and rating 
agencies such as Moody's, Standard and Poor's to regard our bonds as good credits. Over the years this has 
been successful. 
 
To the extent that these rating agencies and bond buyers are familiar with the U.S. scene, and not with the 
Canadian scene, and to the extent that they have experienced utilities having difficulties when review 
commissions deal with their rates, the credit and the credit worthiness of bonds floated for the purposes of 
Sask Power and Sask Tel will be affected. I am not asserting that that will be a large factor, but I am 
asserting that it will be a negative factor. 
 
Before turning to the bulk of my argument, I want to raise a couple of specific points, because I wasn't clear 
what was intended when I read the act. The act appears to deal with power which is dealt with on a retail, 
wholesale, or bulk sale basis to municipal corporations. As I read the words retail and wholesale, it seemed 
to me they were together totally inclusive. Either one sells something at retail or one sells it at wholesale, and 
I am not sure whether there are any other categories. Clearly, another category is thought of, and that is bulk 
basis. I would have thought bulk basis was wholesale, but I'm not here quibbling about the words. I am 
quibbling about whether or not the bill means that there are bulk sales of power to persons other than 
municipal corporations which will not be covered by the act. And I am going to inquire as to whether or not 
the act, will, for example, apply to a bulk sale of power to a new potash mine, or to Interprovincial Steel, or 
to a pulp mill, whatever the case may be. If not, then clearly some information which would be fairly 
important to the public utilities review commission will not be before it. That is the question of whether or 
not the utility is providing power at too low a price to some major consumers, thus affecting other rates. And 
if so, then clearly some problems are presented to the Minister of Industry and Commerce when he discusses 
the location of major industries in Saskatchewan, when one of the factors is the power rate, and when he 
needs to be able to give some assurance of what the power rate is. 
 
I don't say that's an insoluble problem. It may well be quickly explained. I am simply raising it so that we 
will be able to consider it when committee time comes. I am also unclear as to the application of the act to 
interprovincial long distance rates and the  



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
850 

Trans-Canada Telephone System. 
 
I now want to turn to some other aspects of the legislation. I am not going to refer to individual sections, 
except to illustrate what I see as a couple of trends running through this particular act which I think are 
undesirable trends. 
 
I will use the example of power. The rates which the power corporation charges depend largely upon the 
calibre of the directors, and the calibre of the management, and that is up to the government. There is no way 
that the public utilities review commission can influence that in any effective way, and accordingly, since the 
government makes the decisions, the government should be responsible for explaining those decisions. 
 
Rates also depend upon the overall policies of who is served and with what quality of service. Those, too, are 
decisions not made by the public utilities review commission, but by the board of directors of the power 
corporation and the cabinet. Accordingly, they should explain their policies and how they affect rates. Rates 
depend also on the overall policy of profit or non-profit, the philosophy of profit or non-profit, being pursued 
by the corporation, particularly with respect to the capital investment program. 
 
I think this is a point which I will want to pursue in brief compass, because it seems to me that the 
government opposite has, on a number of occasions, indicated that in its judgment these corporations should 
operate on a non-profit basis. The utilities commission appears to have been given other instructions, and 
this is rather key. It is to take into account, have regard to, the earnings necessary to ensure the financial 
health of the corporation, including the earnings necessary to finance a reasonable proportion of the 
corporation's capital investment program, in a manner consistent with sound financial practices. 
 
Clearly, what the commission is being directed to do is to set rates which will cover not only expenses, but 
also a reasonable proportion of the corporation's capital investment program. I would assume, therefore, that 
the commission is being directed to set rates or to approve rates which will generate at least a small surplus 
which will be reinvested, i.e., a small contribution to the corporation's capital investment program. That 
seems to me to be at variance with what we have heard. I an not now expressing opposition to that particular 
principle. I am asking for clarification in this debate of whether that principle is to be pursued by the 
commission or whether the commission is to be given instructions to set break-even rates. And it's a fairly 
fundamental difference. 
 
I am attempting to say, Mr. Speaker, that the big determinants of rates are the calibre and direction of the 
management, the policies of who is served and what rate of service, and the policy with respect to whether or 
not a profit is to be earned to make some contribution to capital expenditures. And all of those decisions are 
to be made by the government and not by the public utilities review commission. The cabinet should make 
these decisions; it should explain them; it should defend them to the public, and not content itself with 
having them asserted by the power corporation to a public utilities review commission. 
 
The extent to which a corporation's rates should contribute to its capital investment program is a very real 
matter of debate among utility operators. I thought some members might be interested in an article on this 
issue in the July-August 1982 issue of Policy Options, which argues the case for operating utilities, and in 
this case, Ontario Hydro, without any foreign debt. Indeed, it goes even further by essentially arguing that  



 
July 15, 1982 

 

 
851 

Ontario Hydro should conduct its affairs such that before long it would not have to borrow any money for 
capital investment. 
 
I do not in any way want to repeat those arguments, save to say that that is a key question with respect to 
determining what the power rates are likely to be in the future. It's a question which must be asked by the 
government, decided by the government, and I would suggest, explained and defended by the government. 
 
Now I want to move on to quite a different point, and that is that the procedures set out in this act are unfair. 
They are procedures designed to see that public bodies like the consumers' association do not appear before 
this public utilities review commission. They are designed to make it difficult and hazardous for any member 
of the public or any body representing consumers to appear before the public utilities review commission. 
 
Note the nature of section 13 and the policy contained therein. If the commission makes a decision, and that 
decision in your opinion is wrong, flat wrong in law, and you have the temerity to appeal, as you are given a 
right to do, to the court of appeal, and the court of appeal says that you are correct and that the utilities 
commission is wrong, wrong in law, the bill specifically says that the utilities commission is not liable to pay 
any costs. 
 
Think of the consumers' association attempting to upset a bad decision by the public utilities review 
commission, being able to illustrate to the court of appeal that the decision was flat wrong in law, and then 
having to pay all its own costs because it can get none from the public utilities review commission, which is 
not liable to pay any. It is this and other things I will note which appear to be part of a scheme to make 
appeal by ordinary customers or consumers' groups next to impossible. 
 
I refer to you the general scheme of the act set out in sections 30 and 31 and the sections surrounding that. 
The commission will decide who can appear before it; there is no general right of appeal by the public to the 
public utilities review commission. No citizen and no consumers' group have the right to appear. The utilities 
commission decides who appears before it. Now a case can be made for that, since it might be possible that a 
very large number of people would put in appearances and hold up the work of the commission. Therefore, I 
don't totally oppose that sort of provision. But it obviously starts down the road of making it more and more 
difficult for consumers and consumers' groups to appear. 
 
Then it goes on from there to make it even more difficult for consumers' groups to appear. It provides that 
the commission may appoint counsel, may appoint a lawyer for consumers' groups and then the commission 
may say who will pay that lawyer. Just consider that for a minute. A consumers' group appears and feels it 
doesn't have enough money for counsel; the commission can appoint counsel to facilitate its work and decide 
that the consumers' group has to pay that counsel. There is no provision which would, in any way, protect the 
consumer or consumers' group from being saddled with the costs of counsel it did not hire. 
 
Moving on from that, there is nothing to protect a consumer or consumers' group from being saddled with 
costs, because the commission can decide who will pay the costs. We have noted that when the commission 
is wrong before the court of appeal it is protected in the act against paying costs. If the Consumers' 
Association of Canada is  



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
852 

wrong before the commission, it isn't protected. It may be saddled with costs. And the commission really 
doesn't worry too much whether it is saddled with costs because it's an agency of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. But an impecunious consumers' group will worry a good deal, and all the evidence that has 
been put forward about the operation of utilities commissions in other jurisdictions has indicated that 
consumers' groups are reluctant to appear because the costs are just too heavy. 
 
There are a good number of stories recently about the consumers' group in Alberta deciding it wasn't going to 
bother appearing before the public utilities review boards in Alberta with respect to telephone rates. That 
indeed has been the history of consumers' groups in attempting to appeal to the CRTC (Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) with respect to Bell Telephone applications, and I 
think they don't bother appearing now since they can't afford it. 
 
So we have here a situation whereby the commission is protected from having costs charged against it, but 
consumers' groups are not only not protected against having costs levied against them, but they are not even 
protected against the commission hiring lawyers and saddling the consumers' group with the costs. One 
would say that it was a very venturesome consumers' group which will go very far with an appeal before this 
review commission that the group thinks the review commission doesn't want to hear, because the group 
may well land up with the costs of a lawyer which it didn't hire as well as all of its other expenses. 
 
As I say, these sorts of provisions, designed to keep consumers' groups and the general public out of 
hearings, will scare off all but the most venturesome and, indeed, I would say the most foolhardy. 
 
I wonder if any members opposite have looked at the general procedures that are provided for this 
commission. In some ways, the procedures are lax so far as civil liberties are concerned — lax to the point of 
being quite unacceptable. 
 
The commission may make regulations but these regulations are not subject to the rules made by The 
Regulations Act. They are, therefore, not subject to any review by this legislature. We pass many acts 
providing for regulations and in those acts we are silent about what happens to those regulations, knowing 
that if we are silent they are subject to The Regulations Act. They go before the committee of this legislature 
to see whether or not there are abuses buried within them. Not so the public utilities review commission 
regulations, they are exempted from purview by the regulations committee of this legislature, and no reason 
has been advanced for that. 
 
I invite anyone to read the sections 28 to 35 inclusive. Indeed, there are some others which I also invite you 
to read and to see whether or not you are satisfied with that type of legislation. 
 
The commission can proceed in any matter that it considers convenient. It is not, in any way, hindered by any 
considerations of natural justice. No general direction of any kind is given to the commission as to how it 
should conduct its proceedings. It is not in any way constrained by the ordinary rules that govern courts nor I 
think should it be so far as evidence is concerned. The purpose is not to set up very formal procedures but 
somewhat informal procedures. But there ought to be contained in the act some general direction that it 
ought to adhere to the tenets of natural justice. 
 
The commission is authorized to hold hearings in camera when it thinks it's in the  



 
July 15, 1982 

 

 
853 

public interest. No other direction than that is given. It's also authorized to hold them when it thinks that 
confidentiality of records may be prejudiced. So, clearly, we're not thinking about confidentiality when we're 
talking about public interests. We're thinking about something else. What, I don't know. I would be 
exceedingly hard-pressed to know any reason why a public utilities review commission should hold a 
hearing in camera, other than to protect the confidentiality of business records. But there are some reasons, 
because the commission is given the power to hold these when it deems them in the public interest as well as 
when confidentiality might be interfered with. 
 
The commission is given power to enter upon and inspect any building or any property. There's no nonsense 
about search warrants, none of the ordinary concerns which you and I would ask for when clothing any 
government agency with powers of that nature. Why that sort of power to enter upon and inspect any 
building or property without a search warrant? They can subpoena any witness. They can require the 
production of books. They can cite for contempt. Now, surely they should be able to subpoena witnesses. 
They should be able to require production of books. But when you combine that with the right for them to 
hold in camera meetings, you have a very wide and all-encompassing power. 
 
This collection of powers is far too wide and I would invite members opposite to identify any other acts 
where this collection of powers exists. Sure, we have in The Game Act and in The Liquor Act power to enter 
buildings, but that's all for the preservation of evidence. And I want to know what evidence has to be 
preserved for review by a public utilities review commission. What evidence is likely to get away from them 
in the consideration of what power rates should be or telephone rates should be? It's not exactly the same as 
taking a deer out of season. And when you combine all those you reach the conclusion that the powers are 
too wide. They can call witnesses; they can force answers on pain of contempt proceedings; they can have 
secret meetings. 
 
Now those powers are simply too wide. You may say, "Well, people of good judgment, people similar to the 
calibre of judges, will be named to the public utilities review commission. And the powers, therefore, will 
not be abused." And I might be mollified by that argument if I thought that only the commission was going 
to exercise those powers. But that's not what the act says. The act allows the commission to have a single 
commissioner exercise all of these powers — a single commissioner to have a hearing, in camera, 
subpoenaing witnesses, examining them under oath and forcing them to answer, to bring their books and 
papers, on pain of contempt. 
 
And that would be bad enough, but you will say to me, "Well, these commissioners are going to have to 
break up their hearings and they're going to have some one, single member carrying on proceedings from 
time to time. And it's not unreasonable to give a single commissioner powers to have secret hearings and 
examine people under oath." But that isn't the end of it. The commission can authorize anybody — 
anybody— to have similar hearings, to have them in camera, to examine under oath, to force them to bring 
books, to force them to answer questions. All for what purpose? Surely, there need to be some proper 
safeguards in an act of this kind. 
 
If these powers are needed — these very extensive powers — I think some explanation ought to be offered. 
I'm not here to raise a great number of red herrings, and I know that the commission itself will have to have a 
strong body of powers. I do suggest that when the commission is not sitting as a commission but only as a 
single commissioner or some other person they name, then the powers of subpoena and in camera meetings 
ought not to be exercised except on the express written consent of the commission. I  



 
July 15, 1982 
 

 
854 

would go further; I would think of a court or perhaps the Attorney General, but at minimum we should not 
be passing legislation which allows a commission to appoint any person in Saskatchewan to administer 
oaths, hold meetings in camera, or force people to appear and bring their books and the rest. That legislation 
is not good legislation and needs to be corrected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have made all the basic points I wish to make. I do not believe that this legislation will lead to 
lower rates. I believe it may well actually hinder the operations of some corporations, and the borrowing 
capacity of some corporations. I think it will discourage the government from fully explaining why it is 
proceeding in the way it is with respect to the structuring of, let us say, the power corporation, of the 
decisions it is making and their impact on rates. I believe it will effectively discourage citizen participation 
before the public utilities review commission because all the dice are loaded against the public before this 
review commission. I believe certain provisions in this bill violate accepted standards of civil liberties. 
 
Because of all of those reasons, I propose to oppose the bill on second reading and to ask the government for 
explanations for some of the points I have raised when the bill reaches the committee stage. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of 
the whole at the next sitting. 
 

YEAS — 42 
 
Devine Taylor Andrew 
Rousseau Thatcher Muirhead 
Pickering McLeod McLaren 
Garner Katzman Currie 
Schoenhals Smith (Swift Current) Boutin 
Hampton Weiman Bacon 
Tusa Hodgins Sutor 
Sveinson Sauder Glauser 
Schmidt Parker Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Klein Rybchuk Caswell 
Young Gerich Domotor 
Maxwell Embury Dirks 
Hepworth Folk Myers 
Zazelenchuk Johnson Baker 
 

NAYS — 7 
 
Blakeney Koskie Engel 
Lingenfelter Hammersmith Lusney 
Shillington   
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:55 p.m. 
 


