






















































Hansard: November 24, 1982


1049 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Twentieth Legislature 

 
Wednesday, November 24, 1982. 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES AND SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Mr. Speaker, I have a message from His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – The message from His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor reads: 
 

The Lieutenant-Governor transmits estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1983, and supplementary estimates of certain 
sums required for the service of the province for the 12 months ending March 31, 1982 and 
March 31, 1983, and now recommends the same to the Legislative Assembly. 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move, seconded by Hon. Mr. Berntson, the 
Minister of Agriculture: 
 

That His Honor’s message, the estimates and supplementary estimates be referred to the 
committee of finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNOR ORDERS 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan demanded a change of course 
on April 26. They voted for a new Premier, an new government and a new direction. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – They made it clear, like never before, that they were tired of a government 
that was still clinging to the belief that prosperity could only be achieved through the endless 
expansion of government ownership. People wanted to see the chances for the individual effort 
initiative widened, not narrowed. April 26, Mr. Speaker, was above all else a declaration in the 
confidence and the optimism in the future of our province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – As this Assembly knows, the spending estimates for the fiscal year were 
tabled by the former government, but not approved. They decided to call an election before they 
could be passed, and the people of Saskatchewan rejected those estimates when they rejected the 
previous government of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – The spending plans to be tabled later tonight, Mr. Speaker, have  



 
November 24, 1982 
 

 
1050 

been revised to reflect the new priorities. They include the new programs that we promised to the 
people of Saskatchewan. My statement tonight is therefore a midcourse correction to the spring 
budget of the previous government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Before I outline the changes made, let me comment on the general state of 
the Canadian and the Saskatchewan economy. The industrialized countries are experiencing a deep 
and prolonged recession. Canada has had the worst economic performance of any of these nations. 
Obviously, the causes of some of our problems lie beyond our borders, but not all of them, Mr. 
Speaker – not all of them. 
 
The federal government has made mistakes in economic policy, grave and damaging mistakes. The 
federal budgetary deficit for this year will approach a whopping $24 billion. Energy policies have 
devastated one of our strongest industrial sectors. Foreign investment policies have been ill 
conceived and inconsistently implemented. Erratic tax changes have discouraged confidence and 
driven off investors, and the results, Mr. Speaker, have been disastrous: double-digit inflation, 
paralysing interest rates, 1.5 million people unemployed, a weak dollars, withering productivity. Not 
for half a century has the level of confidence in the economy shown by Canadians at home and 
observers abroad been so low. 
 
We in Saskatchewan have not been immune to the effects of national and international recession. 
Saskatchewan is recession resistant, but it is not recession proof. Prices for our agricultural products 
have deteriorated. Fortunately, our farmers have produced another record crop this year, and this will 
cushion some, the effects of international price declines. Our mining industry, particularly potash, 
has continued to experience serious declines in both price and demand. Revenue and jobs have 
suffered as a result. The national energy program, along with the Saskatchewan-Ottawa energy 
agreement has almost knocked our oil industry out cold. In July, some common sense royalty 
adjustments were made by our government. These changes, Mr. Speaker, along with a little bit of 
good will – yes, Mr. Speaker, a word sometimes not heard, but a little bit of good will – has started 
to turn the oil industry around. We expect federal action to further encourage recovery in that 
industry which is so vital to the Saskatchewan economy and so vital to the Canadian economy. 
 
In the past, we have had our differences with the national government. But in these difficult times, 
people are not prepared to tolerate time wasted or stand-offs between two levels of government. 
Bickering further damages the confidence in the national will to act. We are ready to co-operate, Mr. 
Speaker, if the federal government’s commitment to co-operation is genuine. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Both levels of government have a responsibility to start producing results. 
Despite these problems, our economy has performed and is performing, better than any other 
province in the nation. Our unemployment rate is half the national average. Saskatchewan’s annual 
cost of living increase over the past several months has been consistently the lowest in Canada and 
would have been far lower, Mr. Speaker, had our mortgage assistance program been considered in 
those calculations. 
 
We, in this government, are not apostles of pessimism, I am optimistic, I am optimistic tonight that 
the  



 
November 24, 1982 

 

 
1051 

Saskatchewan economy will soon rebound. Mr. Speaker, we have been the last into the recession; we 
intend to be the first ones out. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – It is within this framework, and with these challenges in mind, that we 
have reworked the 1982-83 budget. As we set about that process one fact quickly became obvious. 
The figures in that spring budget were in touch with reality to the same degree that that former 
government was in touch with the people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Potash revenue estimates were out by over $126 million – 200 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. Oil estimates were out almost $100 million. At the same time expenditure costs were 
underestimated another $100 million. And we discover, Mr. Speaker, an overpayment to 
Saskatchewan from the federal government under the equalization formula, this overpayment another 
$100 million. We have to pay it back, Mr. Speaker, over a period of five years now as we have 
arranged with the federal government. But this year, Mr. Speaker, it will cost the people of 
Saskatchewan $29 million to pay the share back for this year. 
 
And the heritage fund – the heritage fund, Mr. Speaker, our hedge against tough times – was empty, 
all gone, all gone, Mr. Speaker. It had been used to feed the ravenous appetites of our family of 
Crown corporations. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Now had nothing been done but simply implement the previous budget, I 
would be announcing tonight a deficit approaching $200 million, with no money, Mr. Speaker, 
available to cut the tax on gasoline and no money available for mortgage relief for our home-owners 
or our farmers, and no money available for job creation. 
 
We have been told again and again in this Assembly that challenging policies already in place is 
government by inaction and government by review. We have been urged from the members opposite 
to stay the course. Well, Mr. Speaker, on April 26 the people of Saskatchewan did not vote to stay 
the course. The people of Saskatchewan voted for change. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – The people, Mr. Speaker, demanded relief from the high mortgage costs. 
In July we introduced the mortgage interest reduction program at a cost of $35 million for 1982-83. 
This program, Mr. Speaker, has done two things: it has provided home-owners with protection and a 
sense of security. The mortgage holders will not be suddenly find in six months or in a year’s time 
that all of a sudden their house payment has doubled, or increased by something like that. On a 
second thing, Mr. Speaker, the mortgage interest reduction program has also started to pull 
Saskatchewan housing’s industry out of the record slump it was in the for the first six months of the 
year. 
 
Housing starts in all categories are recovering. Nationally they’re still going down. The backed-up 
inventories of existing houses for sale is being cleared away. In other  



 
November 24, 1982 
 

 
1052 

words, Mr. Speaker, the program is working. Not surprisingly several jurisdictions across this 
country are now copying that very program. 
 
The people demanded that their government deal with the high cost of living. They demanded tax 
relief. We acted by eliminating the sales tax on gasoline. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – That tax cut was the largest single tax cut in Saskatchewan’s history – a 
total of $122 million. For the average driver, Mr. Speaker, for the average driver that is in excess of 
$200 a year in their gas bill – money into their pockets. This action has been chiefly responsible for 
an approximately 2.5 point drop in the consumer price index in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you that tonight we are proud on this side of this House. Mr. Speaker, I can tell 
you that tonight we are proud on this side of this House. We are proud to say that that cut has given 
us both the lowest price of gasoline and lowest consumer price index in the entire country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – We have also put into effect, Mr. Speaker, a freeze on the rates of various 
utilities and we’ve established a public utilities review commission. Never again, Mr. Speaker, never 
again will a government be allowed to raise taxes by rate increases through various utilities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – These actions have provided our citizens, Mr. Speaker, with protection. 
These actions have put dollars back in their pockets. These actions will help restore confidence in 
our economy. In total, Mr. Speaker, $157 million will be recirculated back into the Saskatchewan 
economy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Since we had inherited an already significant deficit from the previous 
administration, program expenditures listed in the spring budget had to be subject to some close 
scrutiny. Had we proceeded to implement the March budget without holding it up to the light, Mr. 
Speaker, I would not be able to announce this evening, cut in expenditures from that budget, not 
$157 million, Mr. Speaker, but $170 million that we took out of that budget. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – These expenditure reductions have been made without affecting essential 
government service. At the same time, these reductions made it possible to establish new initiatives 
that are timely and are necessary for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now during the review of estimates, we will provide in the committee of finance details of all these 
changes. But let me tell you here tonight, Mr. Speaker, where we haven’t made those changes. We 
haven’t made those changes at the expense of fundamental social programs. No cuts have been made 
or will be made in social programs. In Saskatchewan, we help each other when times are tough. 



 
November 24, 1982 

 

 
1053 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – This government is committed to protecting those whose income and 
security is being eroded by inflation and by recession. 
 
We promised to substantially increase the level of investment in the province’s health care. This 
promise we are keeping. In March, $702 million was allocated to the health budget. Today we are 
allocating, not $702 million, but $728 million, an additional $26 million to health care. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Over and above this, Mr. Speaker, an initial $500,000 is being provided 
for municipal ambulance service. We are reviewing that whole operation to see which is the best way 
to provide that service. 
 
Our pledge to build a better education system is also being kept, Mr. Speaker. In March, $584 
million was allocated to the education budget. Tonight we are allocating $593 million — $9 million 
more than the March budget. We believe, Mr. Speaker that in the coming years, there must be a 
substantial increase in the attention given to the educational facilities. The number of training places 
available for Saskatchewan’s young people is already inadequate to handle the number of applicants. 
The shortfall in technical places will be even more serious, Mr. Speaker, as the level of 
industrialization in our province increase, as businesses come forward and growth starts to happen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – And finally, Mr. Speaker, these adjustments have not been made on the 
backs of the poor, the less fortunate, those on fixed incomes, or our senior citizens. Our senior 
citizens pulled Saskatchewan through hard times in the past and we are committed to giving them a 
secure future. Nine thousand of Saskatchewan’s senior citizens benefit from special-care homes. The 
March budget proposed an allocation of $110 million in operating funds to those homes. In these 
revised estimates, that amount has been increased to $127 million – an increase of $17 million. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, further funds will be directed into this area under the job creation 
program. 
 
Social assistance costs, however, Mr. Speaker, have escalated dramatically. This year alone, the 
social services budget has outstripped the previous estimates by over $40 million. We are addressing 
this matter with care to ensure that where we make changes there, those with the needs will be 
protected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn now to the question of agriculture. The agriculture sector has given 
the Saskatchewan economy its present resilience. It has given us experience and confidence as 
competitors on the world market. It is from our heritage as an agricultural province that we draw our 
strongest sense of family, of community, and of our will to act co-operatively. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 



 
November 24, 1982 
 

 
1054 

HON. MR. ANDREW: – While we can be thankful for a succession of record crops, we must 
remain alert to the threat of the health of our agricultural sector. Input costs are rising. Borrowing 
rates remain high. The transportation system is inefficient and vulnerable to strikes, and it may soon 
become very much more expensive for the farmer to use that service. 
 
Economic pressures are accelerating the tendency to larger and larger farm units. This trend, Mr. 
Speaker, has increased the difficulty facing young farmers who want to establish themselves on a 
farm that they themselves own. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Total domination of the agricultural sector by giant farms would dry up 
the rural community life. The present alternative of state-owned, leased farms will not encourage, 
Mr. Speaker, the independence of spirit and respect for the soil that has characterized our 
owner-operators of our family farming units. Saskatchewan farmers expect intelligent help from their 
government, not landlord-tenant relationships. Our grandfathers did not pioneer this province so they 
could lease their farms from the government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – We promised to make it possible for Saskatchewan farmers to own the 
land they worked. To keep this promise, the land bank will be replaced, with the exception of exiting 
leases. It will be replaced by a new Saskatchewan Farm Purchase Program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – This program will assist young farmers with the purchase of farm land by 
providing loans of up to $350,000. For the first five years of that loan period, the rate will only be 8 
per cent. For the next five years, the rate will be the lower of market rate or 12 per cent. For the 
balance of this year – four months – these low rates will be available on up to $150 million of loan 
capital in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – That is more money than had been made available for the entire year 
under previous programs of both federal and provincial governments. 
 
By investing in the agricultural sector through the farm purchase program, we will be helping young 
farmers, Mr. Speaker, to buy a farm. We will enable family farms to be passed from one generation 
to the next, and we will ensure the continuity and stability of the farming communities of this 
province. The farm purchase program will help with the purchase of more family farms in one 
months than can be credited to the land bank program in 10 years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Operational details of the farm purchase program will be outlined by my 
colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, with the introduction of that bill  



 
November 24, 1982 

 

 
1055 

in this Assembly next week. Other funds have been allocated to the extension of agricultural 
programs. The beef industry has been assisted with the introduction of a finished-feeder stabilization 
program. In total, the estimate increases for the Department of Agriculture budget year over year will 
be 17 per cent, an extra 1 per cent or $800,000 more than forecast in the March budget of the 
previous administration. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Mr. Speaker, I believe that unemployment has become the number one 
economic problem in Canada. 1.5 million people are without jobs, 12 to 13 per cent of the entire 
work force. In Saskatchewan we’re much better off: one-half the national average. But, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s still not good enough. 
 
The federal government has announced a $500 million job creation program. We have indicated our 
support for that initiative. We have indicated that we will match dollar for dollars the portion 
allocated to Saskatchewan. There will be $11 million in new federal money being spent in our 
province over the next two years. Our commitment will not be $11 million. Our commitment will be 
$15 million. Our commitment will not be over a period of two years; it’ll be over a period of four 
months. Our commitment will not start January 1, 1983; our commitment starts today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – I would like to summarize the government’s fiscal position for 1982-83. 
Last March the previous government announced a budget with a surplus of $208 million in the 
consolidated fund and heritage fund. As I mentioned earlier in my remarks, Mr. Speaker, this was not 
an accurate description of the actual budgetary position. The revenue/expenditure gap would have 
resulted in a very sizable deficit. To overcome the revenue/expenditure gap in the March budget, and 
keep any deficit to a minimum, we have worked to achieve a leaner, more productive public sector. 
 
Government spending for travel, contractual service and promotional advertising has been reduced. 
A hiring freeze is in effect and we are reviewing the need to fill many of those current vacancies. In 
1982-83 we anticipate expenditures of $2,925 million; revenues, $2,705 million, resulting in a 
combined deficit of $220 million. This is a minimum and manageable deficit. It has been directly 
translated into assistance for the people of the province of Saskatchewan. I am very pleased, Mr. 
Speaker, to announce that within spending limits of the same magnitude – spending limits from the 
March budget – we have been able to extend additional protection to the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan: mortgage protection, tax relief, increased funding for essential services and funding 
for a job creation program. We are taking additional measure to ensure the careful use of our tax 
resources. 
 
The Premier announced in August that the government would adopt a public sector wage guideline. 1 
per cent below the annual rate of inflation for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, the many agencies across Saskatchewan receiving third-party grants from the government 
should understand that funding decisions will be based on adherence to those wage restraint 
guidelines. Because, Mr. Speaker, 50 per cent of the government spending is personnel related 
expenditures, it seems that a sensible way to control government spending is to carefully manage this 
cost. 



 
November 24, 1982 
 

 
1056 

In short, Mr. Speaker, we intend to see the finances of the province managed in the same careful 
value-conscious manner that farmers or businessmen or individuals have to exercise in the arranging 
of their own affairs. And we will give the assurance, Mr. Speaker, that government spending will be 
part of the solution. It will not be part of the problem. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – As part of the government’s review of the province’s finances, we are 
examining the account of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. The fall-off in non-renewable resource 
revenues has severely reduced the flow of cash into this fund. Its usefulness for planning has been 
limited by the previous government’s policy of transferring heritage fund moneys over to the Crown 
corporations – investments in enterprises already 100 per cent owned by the government. These 
transfers, Mr. Speaker, have swallowed us piece meal the whole fund, so that nothing is available. 
There’s no money there, Mr. Speaker, when the fund could be available for real help at this time to 
alleviate hardships that we’re facing in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Crown corporations are an important part of the Saskatchewan economy, but they are not the 
only part, Mr. Speaker, and they have not proved to be the pied pipers of prosperity. We believe that 
the crowns should operate under similar rules as companies in the private sector. They should use 
their resources carefully; knowing that any appeal for new funds has to be based on demonstrated 
potential for future growth and efficiency. The overall place of the Crown corporations is under 
review by the Crown investments review commission. The Department of Finance is developing 
proposals on future operation of the heritage fund, and I will be announcing necessary changes in the 
role and the structure of the heritage fund in the spring budget. 
 
Let me now turn to capital financing requirements of the government and the Crown corporations. In 
the current fiscal year, we anticipate that the net borrowing requirements for the Crown corporations 
will be approximately $1 billion. $116 million of this will be provided by the Canada Pension Plan 
and $868 million from the capital markets, beyond the $28 million advanced by the previous 
government. I can give you this assurance as well, Mr. Speaker: from now on there will be no more 
interest-free money provided by the heritage fund of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – The budgetary deficit will be financed by short-term borrowing and by 
reducing cash reserves. The total borrowing requirement for the Crown corporations and the 
budgetary deficit will be approximately $1.2 billion, and we expect to be able to obtain that without 
much difficulty. 
 
On the revenue side, we are committed to establishing a competitive tax environment for business, 
and to protect the incomes of individuals. This government has made a commitment to tax reductions 
where practical. We delivered part of this promise with the restructuring of the petroleum royalties 
and the elimination of gas tax, which has been the single largest tax reduction in the history of the 
province. The review of taxation levels will continue, and we are committed to further reduction in 
sales tax and other taxes. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 



 
November 24, 1982 

 

 
1057 

HON. MR. ANDREW: – These reductions will be targeted (1) when we can afford them, and (2) 
where they will generate jobs and create economic activity. A further thing that we will be doing is 
bringing in legislation to remove the E&H tax for clothing for children under the age of 15 years. 
 
At the same time, Mr. Speaker, we are committed to providing the highest quality of education and 
health care. That is why I am announcing two revenue measure tonight. In recent years several 
provinces have moved to increase taxes levied on insurance companies operating within their 
jurisdictions. I believe a small increase can be justified in Saskatchewan, and therefore I am 
announcing that effective January 1, 1983, the insurance premium tax of insurance companies will be 
increased from 2 per cent to 3 per cent in gross premiums collected. This measure will yield $4 
million in revenue for 1983-84. The new higher tax rates will not apply to insurance premiums for 
sickness, accident or life insurance. In this way the cost can be kept down for protection against 
personal losses from such tragedies. 
 
At the same time I would like to correct an anomaly in our tax system affecting insurance companies. 
Most insurance companies are currently liable for Saskatchewan Corporation capital tax. 
Co-operative insurance companies are not liable for capital tax, providing them with an unfair 
advantage in the insurance industry. 
 
I would like to announce that effective January 1, 1983 all insurance companies will be treated the 
same, and will be exempt from Saskatchewan corporation capital tax. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – I have one other revenue measure to announce today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In recognition of my colleague, and the steady increase in the cost of health care, the tax on 
cigarettes and tobacco will be increased. Effective midnight tonight the tax on cigarettes will be 
increased from 38 cents to 42 cents per pack; the tax on tobacco from 15 cents to 17 cents per gram; 
the tax on cigars will go up a penny for those under 40 cents, and two pennies for those over 40 
cents. These measures will yield another $11 million in revenues to the province in 1982-83. 
 
The budgetary course charted before we took office, Mr. Speaker, has been shifted away from its 
obsessive emphasis on the plans and the priorities of government and Crown corporations. We have 
put that emphasis on the people, on their plans, their priorities, their needs and their talents. 
 
We want to build; we want to stimulate the economy and growth in our economy. It is our view that 
support for Saskatchewan’s private sector, in which the vast majority of our people work, is the best 
way to generate economic activity and create jobs. But while we see the private sector as a principal 
instrument for mobilizing our productivity in creative resources, we will not hesitate to bring into 
action the potential of the public sector. 
 
We will act as necessary through Crown corporations, joint ventures, or loan guarantees. We will 
build on any strategy or combinations of strategies that produce results. We are committed to 
preserving and expanding the services needed by the people of this province – education, health care, 
security for senior citizens, assistance for our less fortunate. These services require money, Mr. 
Speaker. That  



 
November 24, 1982 
 

 
1058 

money has to be earned by economic performance. A generous social security structure must rest on 
the foundations of a health economy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Mr. Speaker, a high level of economic performance cannot be achieved by 
government alone, or by business or farmers alone, or by labor alone. It will be achieved by the 
co-operative effort flowing from a common heritage, common values and common goals. The 
challenges we face, Mr. Speaker, we face together. The harvest we reap we will share together. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pride and satisfaction for me as a 
member of the government of Grant Devine, the newest Premier, the most exciting and dynamic 
Premier in the country today . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – It is with that sense of pride, belonging to that government, Mr. Speaker, 
that I move, seconded by the member for Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the committee of finance. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, I will want to add a word or two to the debate tonight and 
a further word or two later on in the proceedings. 
 
We have a budget brought forward by the Minister of finance. The overwhelming fact of that budget 
is the deficit of $220 million. That is a greater deficit than has ever been accumulated in any year in 
the history of Saskatchewan. It is in fact a greater deficit than in all the years that Saskatchewan has 
been a province. In all the 77 years that it has been a province, if you take all the accumulated 
deficits, they wouldn’t add up to the one which the Minister of Finance is proposing tonight. 
 
Even as it is, Mr. Speaker, I suggest that the figures which the Minister of Finance has put forward 
tonight are going to bear a little analysis. I suspect, Mr. Speaker, that when we get into these figures, 
we will find that he has included in revenue some substantial sums of money for oil export tax which 
was in respect of past years. We will find that out, but I suspect that that is the case. We will see . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . Mr. Speaker, I think that I must remind hon. member that we did not 
interrupt the Minister of Finance and may I have the same courtesy. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – You touched a nerve. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, the background of this budget is the Conservative 
campaign and its promises. The Progressive Conservative Party made three broad promises to the 
people of Saskatchewan. They said that they would distribute the wealth that the provincial treasury 
enjoyed, as they perceived it when the  



 
November 24, 1982 

 

 
1059 

election campaign was on, and they would do it through tax cuts. They then said that they would 
bring about a more prosperous economy, and so, therefore, greater revenues, and the potential for 
greater tax cuts through the application of private enterprise economics. They said, thirdly, that they 
would do both of these without budget deficits, and without bad financial management That’s what 
they said they would do, and that’s what the people of Saskatchewan now look to them to do. 
 
They are asserting (and we heard it again tonight) that somehow the money that was supposedly in 
the heritage fund was not there. There is, of course, not a shred of basis for that allegation – not one 
bit. Every member of this House, when he stood before his constituents and asked to be elected, 
knew of the condition of the heritage fund, and knew where the funds were invested. They had the 
audited statement before them. They could read on page 26 the audited figures. For those who had 
difficulty with the audited figures, there was a pie chart on page 6 which gave the full position of the 
heritage fund without possibility of peradventure. Everybody knew where the heritage fund was. 
Everybody knew that the money had been invested in Saskatchewan resources. 
 
Members opposite, and I know that other people who operate heritage funds, believe that the 
appropriate place to put the money is in the bonds of the province of Nova Scotia, or as the case may 
be. It is possible to argue that the heritage fund should not have been invested in oil wells, but should 
have been invested in Government of Nova Scotia bonds. That’s a tenable argument. I don’t agree 
with it, but you can make it. What you can’t argue is that you didn’t know the position of the heritage 
fund. Every person who was seeking public office in this province knew full well the condition of the 
heritage fund; knew full well that the money was invested in oil and in potash and in uranium and, so 
far as I am concerned, was well invested there since it added both to our economy and to the prospect 
of significant revenues in the years ahead. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, there was no question about the nature of the financial 
position of this province. The government, which I had the honor to lead, brought in budgets 
successively in February or March of each year. They were compiled in a comparable way. Everyone 
could see what the proposal was. Everyone could compare the budget with the previous budget. 
Everyone could compare the estimates in the budget with the financial statements which were 
included in the Public Accounts. And everyone could see, in fact, what was happening to the 
finances of this province. 
 
Well everyone I think knows that compounding estimates is not an exact science. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – Drop that one by them again. They don’t what that means. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – I’ll say that again. I’ll say again that compiling estimates is not an exact 
science and especially is this so in times like the 1970s when oil and potash an uranium royalties and 
revenues were rising and falling; when inflation was sharply rising; when interest rates were rising 
and falling. In fact, it was a difficult time to estimate one’s financial possibilities for 12 or 14 months 
ahead. But notwithstanding that, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding that, through the whole decade of the 
’70s our government made its predictions and we lived with them, and taking the two funds together 
in each and every one of those years, we didn’t ever have one deficit – not one –even though it was 
difficult to predict and even though we had to make adjustments.  



 
November 24, 1982 
 

 
1060 

The provincial treasurer, the Minister of Finance, is not prepared to make the changes necessary in 
order to balance his budget. He takes the easy way out and runs to a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we vacated government when there was a very substantial surplus. I noted that the 
Minister of Finance says that he inherited a deficit. I wonder: is he going to rewrite the financial 
statement he issued last July 31 indicating that on March 31 of this year, there was a surplus of $140 
million – a surplus of $140 million? I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if he is going to ask anyone in this 
House or anyone in this province to believe that that surplus of $140 million vanished by May 8, 
when he took office. Surely that is not totally non-credible. That is non-credible and nobody in this 
province and nobody in this House, sir, will believe you when you assert that proposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the allegations made by the members opposite with respect to our government are 
essentially the ones that I have indicated: that the heritage fund was not in cash. And of course it was 
not in cash, and no heritage fund in Canada is in cash, and anyone who decides that he is going to 
save for 10 years or 15 years hence and keeps his money in cash is a very, very poor steward of those 
funds. He ought to be investing them in long-term investments; that’s the position we took. And I 
will be interested in seeing whether all hon. members believe that they were bad investments, 
because that’s not what I hear some hon. members opposite asserting in other fora. I think they will 
continue to assert that some of those investments are pretty good investments, as they have proved to 
be in the past. 
 
The second criticism – and we heard it again tonight – was that the estimates contained in the March 
budget were defective and were in error and that they wouldn’t have turned out to be the facts by 
next April. And, of course, they may be right. And perhaps the estimates, which we have here, will 
not turn out to be accurate. If I were members opposite I wold not be quite so smug as to whether or 
not the estimates which you are putting forward here tonight will prove to be accurate when next 
March or April comes. 
 
It is remarkable indeed if any provincial treasurer or minister of finance is able to put forward 
estimates which are accurate in a precise way when the year is out. Of course, the Minister of 
Finance has a great advantage now because he is making up the budget in November and not in 
January, so he will have a little better chance this year. But we will await next year and see how good 
he is at estimating and see whether all his estimates turn out to be the facts. 
 
One thing, I think is certain. If the new government when it took office on May 8 didn’t like our 
estimates, they had every opportunity to bring in their own. They could have brought them in in May 
and June. They could have done this so-called mid-course correction in May and June instead of 
waiting until November. At that time they believed the estimates were fairly accurate; otherwise they 
wouldn’t have entered into the massive tax cuts in the full knowledge that they were going to be 
financed by a deficit. I don’t believe that the Hon. Minister of Finance, believing that he was going 
to have deficit, would launch into a series of major tax cuts in the full belief that they were all, to the 
very dollar, going to be financed out of your kid’s pocket and not yours. I don’t believe the Minister 
of Finance is that irresponsible. 
 
I believe when he made those proposals back in the spring, he believed the estimates. He now does 
not, and he now comes here with a deficit of the order of $220 million. I  



 
November 24, 1982 

 

 
1061 

think that nothing can be said about this budget except this: the authors of the budget sit on the 
treasury benches. It is their budget and their deficit. They took credit for the tax measures which 
obviously were popular. They now must take the responsibility for the deficit which flows as to 100 
per cent from the measures they took and as to 0 per cent from anything they may have inherited 
from the government before them. 
 
Let me make a couple of other observations, Mr. Speaker. There was mention of job creation and the 
suggestion that the commitment to do something about job creation starts today. Maybe the 
commitment starts today, but the obligation started on May 8. That was the obligation. Your 
obligation was to start creating jobs in May and not start creating them in late November. And while 
you may acknowledge that your commitment to create job starts in November, I suggest to you that 
the people of Saskatchewan believe you have the obligation starting in May when you became the 
government. That goes with being the government, you know. You can’t set aside your obligations 
and decide that you will pick up the obligation to create jobs along about November after you have 
studied and reviewed and had your task forces and all of your other – visited psychics – and all of the 
other things . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – . . . which you have done in order to get some idea of how your 
government ought to be operated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of flights of fancy in this, and some fancy footwork too. You heard 
the Minister of Finance say that $702 million was budgeted for health and he is gong to spend a lot 
more. And a figure was budgeted for education and he is going to spend a lot more. And what has he 
done? He has, of course, taken the money from the Department of Health and said that was the 
money for health. And we all know that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan had a significant 
sum of money in for health. And now he has taken that out of the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, put it over into the Department of Health saying, “Look how much more I’m 
spending on health!” 
 
They have, Mr. Speaker, done exactly the same thing with respect to spending on education – exactly 
the same thing. We know in this House that the responsibility for the Department of Health, for 
health in northern Saskatchewan, has been taken over by the department October 1. We know that 
spending after October 1 will be marked up to the Department of Health and not to the Department 
of Northern Saskatchewan. We know that therefore the money that was in the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan will be now credited in the Department of Health, and what do you know, 
the estimate of the Department of Public Health is higher. Well done, well done! A great contribution 
to health in this province. 
 
I could say the same with respect to education; the same thing has been done there. They have taken 
spending out of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, put it over into the Department of 
Education and Continuing Education and said, “Look how much more we’re spending on 
education.” 
 
Now that’s the sort of fancy footwork which I think a budget presented by the Minister of Finance 
can do without. I think that there is no reason. I particularly looked at the figure of $702 million for 
health which he has quoted in here, and it is the precise figure for the Department of Health in the 
estimates of March, and he well knows it. And he well knows also that there’s money in the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, and now  



 
November 24, 1982 
 

 
1062 

that will be increased to swell the spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are delighted that they’re going to bring in some legislation to deal with the sales 
tax on children’s clothing. As we know, I think, that was taken off by the previous government, the 
legislation was not passed, and I think we ought to pass the legislation. It should have been done in 
the June-July session but it wasn’t. And better late than never. I compliment the Minister of Finance 
for deciding that he is finally going to make the law accord with the facts. 
 
With respect to senior citizens, I think it was very touching of him to say that they’re going to spend 
some more money on senior citizens who are in nursing homes, notwithstanding the fact that they 
have increased the fees. I would have liked also to see some indication that they were going to try to 
do something for senior citizens who live in their own homes through the senior citizens shelter 
allowances, which was in the previous discarded budget and is not in a program which has been 
discarded. And among the people who in effect are discarded are those 21,000 senior citizens who 
would have benefited from that program, but will not now benefit from that program because it has 
been struck out by the current government 
 
Mr. Speaker, I obviously have more comments to make as soon as I have an opportunity to examine 
the figures more fully, and as soon as I have an opportunity to see the estimates which have come 
across. We have all noted that the previous budgetary documents were in the cobalt blue which we 
had come to be accustomed to, and the new ones are showing up in this dark or royal blue. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – And I’m particularly glad at the change of color because I would not 
have wanted anyone to confuse the budget in this dark blue cover with anything that our government 
would have brought in. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, in order that I may add some further remarks at a later 
time, I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: – Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Hon. 
House Leader: 
 

That the debate on the motion that this Assembly do now resolve itself in the committee of 
finance to be resumed on Friday next. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:02 p.m. 
 


