






















































Hansard: December 16, 1982


(1830) 1831 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 16, 1982 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
GOVERNMENT SERVICES 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 13 

 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce her officials? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to introduce my acting deputy 
minister, Mr. Cousineau, on my right, and Mr. Brown, the director of public works. Behind me, to my 
right, is Don Nevill, the director of planning and property, and directly behind me is John Law, 
executive director of operations. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I want to start out by saying that we probably won’t be 
spending a long time on this department if the answers we need come quickly. We are very much 
encouraged by the government’s co-operation in bringing the estimates forward quickly and I am sure 
that over the next three or four days that will continue and we will be out of here by Christmas. We will 
do everything in our power to make sure that happens. 
 
The first question I would like to ask the minister is if she can send to me a list of the members of her 
staff, names and salaries. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — In the whole department, or . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My personal 
staff under government services: I have one special assistant by the name of Elizabeth Crosthwaite who 
earns $54,000 per annum and whose qualifications are a B.A. from Carleton University, and an M.A. 
from the University of Toronto. Her employment history is that she has worked with Multiple Access 
General Computer company, the Toronto Board of Education, the Carleton Board of Education. She was 
a research assistant at Carleton. She was also a teaching fellow at Carleton, and a research assistant at a 
place called . . . (inaudible) . . . in Athens, Greece, and her last place of employment was with the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . board of education in Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes, can the minister tell me if any of these people in the group who are in 
the administration branch in the department are now on contract rather than full-time employment? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No contracts. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I’d like as well a list of the executive directors as well as the deputy 
minister and any associate deputies or ADMs that you might have and their  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1832 

salaries as well. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Would the member like me to send it across? 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Maybe while we are just waiting for that to come across. I could ask you a 
couple of other questions. Can the minister give us a list of the people in the department who have been 
dismissed since May 8 through order in council appointments? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The only two OC cancellations in the Department of Government Services 
was the former deputy, Mr. Dennis Foley and Val Senicar. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — These I understand, were . . . 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — And one more, I’m sorry: Owen Mitchell, who was on probationary. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister indicate whether or not settlements have been made with 
these people, whether there’s arrangements being made at the present time or whether in fact settlements 
have been arranged with the three individuals? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — They’re in the process of being made. To my knowledge they haven’t been 
made to date. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The minister is saying that in all cases, in the three cases, that no 
compensation has been paid? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I believe all three of them are, will be . . . All three of them will be 
receiving a settlement. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister indicate a time frame that the three individuals, who have 
had their appointments cancelled, can they plan on a certain time frame that you’re looking at to have 
that settlement arrived at? The reason I’m questioning in this line: Dennis Foley, who was the deputy 
minister and had a long history in the government as well as in the private sector with Poole 
Construction, I believe was terminated sometime in May — I think May 11. And that being almost eight 
months ago, I think it’s very unusual that a settlement couldn’t have been arrived at by now and lay this 
to rest. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I’ll take your points under advisement that we are in the process, as I 
indicated before. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The question of a time frame, can you give any indication of the time? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I can’t be specific on that. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — These positions that you mentioned, Owen Mitchell, Val Senicar and I 
believe (who was the other one we were talking about?) Dennis Foley, were order in council. Have you 
got the list of other people who are not order in council who have been dismissed since May 8? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The only one not an OC was Mr. Harold Knight, research  



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1833 

officer 1. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Was there compensation or a settlement arranged with Mr. Knight? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s presently at grievance. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I wonder if you could indicate any of the ones that you’ve mentioned that have been 
dismissed. Were any of them dismissed for cause? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — All I can say is that they serve at the pleasure of the Queen, and the Queen 
wasn’t pleased. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Ladies and gentlemen, the minister says . . . I imagine implies that the 
deputy minister, Dennis Foley, was . . . I’m not sure what she’s saying . . . Was not at the pleasure of the 
Queen, I guess is how she phrases it. But can she give us any indication what the Queen was displeased 
with in Mr. Dennis Foley, who had an outstanding career in the government and with Poole 
Construction for some 20 or 30 years prior to being dismissed, probably for the first time in his 
illustrious career? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — All I can say is that the order in council for the three individuals was 
cancelled, and that’s . . . We don’t have to show cause. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — In the case of Val Senicar, you’re saying that she has compensation which 
will be coming to her. Can you give any indication of the type and the amount of the settlement, which 
will be arrived at? Will it be the regular so many weeks pay for years served? Can you give us an idea of 
what the settlement will be? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The compensation package is the one that’s set out in The Labour 
Standards Act, and I believe it’s one weeks pay for each year of continuous service. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — In the case of Val Senicar, can you tell me what position she was in when 
she was dismissed? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — She was a secretary to the senior architect within government services. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Who had hired her to that position, and who signed the OC that hired her 
in that position of a secretary. I believe it was a clerk steno 3, in the department in the engineering and 
architectural branch? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We’ll have to take notice because we don’t have the OC here. I’ll get that 
information to you. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Could the minister get us that information tonight before we are finished? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We can get it to you tonight depending on how long we are here. It’s in the 
deputy minister’s files downtown, and he has indicated he will get it for you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to return for a few moments, if I might, to the issue of  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1834 

Dennis Foley. I want to begin by reminding the minister that the Minister of Agriculture stated that Mr. 
Foley had been released because he had made a $200 donation to an NDP candidate. Do you affirm that 
as a reason for his dismissal, or disavow it? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — As Minister of Government Services I wanted to have my own person in 
there. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Why? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Because. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I think that the minister is stonewalling. Let me try this from a 
different tack. Let us deal with principles rather than personalities. Does the minister support the 
principle of a professional public service which carries on from one administration to another and does 
not support the party in power, but serves different administrations in a professional capacity? Does the 
minister support that principle? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think so. And I think it’s fair to say that that’s probably what we have in 
the majority of cases within the civil service. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — And was Mr. Foley’s retention inconsistent with that policy, or that 
principle? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — As I indicated before, I wanted to have a person in there whose 
qualifications I had confidence in. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That was the answer to my question three questions ago. That was not the 
answer to my last question. My last question was: was the retention of Dennis Foley inconsistent with 
the principle of a professional public service? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — You say, “Was the retention of Dennis Foley in keeping. Well, we didn’t 
retain him. We dismissed him. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Was it inconsistent with the principle of a professional public service? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: —I wouldn’t say necessarily that it’s inconsistent but it was my desire and I 
acted on it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — If you support the principle, and if it was not inconsistent, why was Mr. 
Foley not retained? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Because perhaps I didn’t think he was a professional enough. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: —I see. You let him go because you did not think he was professional. Would 
you define what you mean by professional? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I indicated to you earlier that I wanted a deputy minister in there whose 
qualifications I felt comfortable with and had confidence in. Obviously, if I dismissed Mr. Dennis Foley. 
I didn’t have confidence in his ability. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You stated because he was not professional. Would you define  



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1835 

professional? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I could get a dictionary. I believe being professional is having the 
qualifications and the ability to carry out the wishes of the government in power. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I take it from your answer that he did not have the ability to carry out the 
wishes of the government in power. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, that is not what I am saying. I said I wanted someone in there that I had 
confidence in and I do now with Mr. Cousineau, my acting deputy. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — How long had you worked with Mr. Foley before you gave him notice of his release? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Two days. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Were you able to form your opinions in respect to his professionalism within the two 
days? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Obviously, I must have. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to congratulate the minister on her ability to make up her mind. I just 
wish some other ministers in this government had the ability to make up their minds on some more 
substantial issues. We have been badgering this government for some months about some decisions on 
other issues. I just wish you’d show the same decisiveness with respect to some other issues such as the 
minimum wage and the final report of the workers’ compensation board . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Listen, I was just complimenting the minister. Now, I hope all of the members won’t object if I 
compliment the minister, for once, on being decisive. I’m still looking for your definition of 
“professional.” You said you let him go because he wasn’t professional. Would you tell me what you 
meant by “wasn’t professional”? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I don’t know how much clearer I can make it. I indicated to you that 
professionalism is being qualified and capable and obviously I have said to you I didn’t have confidence 
in Mr. Foley and had him dismissed. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — In what way was Mr. Foley not qualified or not capable? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I don’t know. Call it woman’s intuition. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You’re saying you destroyed a man’s career on the basis of woman’s 
intuition? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I don’t think we destroyed anybody’s career. I believe Mr. Foley had been 
with the department for six years. You keep saying, “long-term government employee.” He surely 
wasn’t a long-term government employee, he had only been with the government for six years. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — So is the minister saying that you feel perfectly free to end a six-year career? 
I’ll tell the minister, it was a lot longer than that; if you will check with one of the gentlemen behind you 
they will tell you that Mr. Foley worked for the government before he worked for government services. 
You say that you have ended a man’s career of many years on woman’s intuition. Is that what you’re 
now telling this House? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1836 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I’m trying to explain to you why Mr. Foley was removed. He was 
removed at my request because I did not have confidence in him, in his ability to work with me and for 
me. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — On a point of clarification, Dennis Foley had worked for three and a half 
years with the compensation board, and then six and a half years with government services, for a total of 
10 years with the government. What I think is important is the new milieu that we are attempting to 
create in Saskatchewan: Open for Business. The fact that he worked for 22 years with Poole 
Construction and had an impeccable career in the private sector as well as with government would lead 
one to believe that he was capable of carrying out the duties as a deputy minister of government 
services. I think it’s going to be interesting to watch in a very sensitive area where government contracts 
are handed out. And there are other things we’ll bring up in this area, but having a person of Dennis 
Foley’s impeccable credibility is very important. 
 
My question goes back to one Val Senicar who was dismissed by OC on October 6th, but it’s also how 
she was employed in the department. She was hired by OC. The OC was not hired by the previous 
government but was signed by one, the Premier of the province, Grant Devine. What I want to know is 
why Val Senicar, who was hired by OC 933, signed by the Premier of the province on June 6, was then 
subsequently dismissed on October 6, by OC 1630. What was her crime in the department that caused 
here to be fired, having been hired by the premier of the province? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — For the clarification of the members opposite, Miss Senicar was not 
dismissed per se, she was moved out of the minister’s office here, into the department downtown as 
secretary to the senior architect. Why she was dismissed is because the previous incumbent failed her 
probationary and actually bumped Miss Senicar, within her own rights. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Was the position a classified position or an unclassified position that Val 
Senicar was in? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — She was in an unclassified position and got bumped by a person within the 
classified position. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, I’m a little amazed that a person in the classified section . . . Is this 
not unusual for that to happen, where a person who is in a classified category would be able to bump 
someone who is in an unclassified area? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Miss Senicar was OC’d as you’re aware and she was held against a 
classified position. When the previous incumbent failed her probationary on a promotion, she used her 
rights of provisionary bumping. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’d just like to ask the minister — you’ve sent out the number of your personal staff. 
The acting deputy minister at $5,176 a month —could you indicate whether the acting deputy minister is 
a Saskatchewan resident, and some of the background? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — He was a resident of Saskatchewan for two years, moved down east, and 
has since established his residence in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Can you indicate where he was born and spent most of his life? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1837 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Born and raised in Ontario; Ontario. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I have some questions dealing with the policy and 
procedure manual directive dealing with the policy concerning demonstrations at the Legislative 
Building here in Regina. I’m wondering if the minister can tell me on what basis or what grounds 
changes to that policy were made? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — This is the first actual policy that has ever been in place in government 
services. The previous policy was unwritten. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, in the Assembly in question period several days ago, you indicated 
that the new policy was based on the fact that the structure of the building was not sound and that you 
could only have so many people in the rotunda area and so many people on the steps. On what basis was 
the decision made that this was the policy of the government? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It was done as the result of analysis of the original plans, and done by the 
professionals within the department. I think one of them is Mr. Smith, chief architect in the engineering 
and architectural branch. I might also add to the member that I indicated that it was brought to our 
attention earlier this summer, but digging around in old files, we find that the previous government was 
informed about it in November of 1979. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The piece of paper that the minister is referring to in November of 1979 is 
probably this handwritten statement by a Mr. Smith. I’m wondering if you can tell us what the 
qualifications of Mr. Smith are. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — He is one of the very professional people in my department. He’s a 
registered architect within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister tell me whether or not the policy she is saying she 
designed is based on this one-page, handwritten statement by this individual? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The policy was generated within the department by people who I feel are 
qualified. I myself am not an engineer, nor am I an architect, but when people who have degrees in those 
areas tell me, based on their knowledge, professional knowledge, that the load limit out here is 
somewhat less than what was once thought, I take those people’s word for it. And it was the people 
within the department that worked up the proposed policy. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — So was the new policy written and developed for the sole reason of the 
problem that you identified as a result of that 1979 November memo to do with the weight and the 
structure of the building? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes it was, in order to protect the safety of the public. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, in reading the policy and dealing with the Legislative 
Building — if the reason was the weight of people. I just want to quote into the record the steps that 
have been taken in order to avoid the building collapsing under weight: 
 

(a) The demonstrating group must appoint demonstration marshalls and  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1838 

establish a method by which they can readily be identified, i.e., arm bands. 
 
That seems a little removed from the weight problem. 
 

(b) Representatives of the demonstrating group must provide assurance that their marshalls shall 
enforce the guidelines set down by the Saskatchewan Government Services. 
 
(c) Access to hallways and Legislative Chambers, members’ areas and ministerial offices must 
be kept clear. 
 
(d) Demonstrators must not attempt to touch, block, or in any way interfere with the actions of 
elected officials or staff employed in the building. 
 
(e) No bull horns, portable microphones, or other methods of voice enhancement are to be 
brought into the building. 
 
(f) Fire safety regulations regarding maximum numbers of persons present in the area, and fire 
exit corridors must be complied with. 
 
(g) The demonstrations and speeches within the Legislative Building are to be concluded once 
the Legislative Assembly has begun to sit. 
 

All these points, Mr. Chairman, I find very difficult to understand how they apply to the weight load in 
the rotunda area. I say that the reason these were brought in on November 29 was in light of the fact that 
there was going to be a demonstration on December 2 by the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor. Does 
the minister not confirm that? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I most certainly do not confirm that because that is not the reason it was 
brought in. It was signed by the deputy minister on November 14, and the SFL happened to be the first 
group to demonstrate here after the policy was put in place. I might add, for the benefit of all members, 
that the points given by the member for Shaunavon are no different that what you people had in place. 
Demonstrations here are not just willy-nilly, demonstrations are always negotiated — the time they’re 
going to be here, the numbers that they expect to show up. These things are always negotiated. 
 
I might add, Mr. Chairman, that not all things made the shredder. And on November 20, 1981, a cabinet 
agenda item: a request from the former Speaker requested government services to have all demonstrators 
refrain from entering the Legislative Building. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — From the Speaker’s office? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — A cabinet agenda item, which you discussed. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (inaudible) . . . The Speaker’s office. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Right. And the reason given is the last two openings of the Saskatchewan 
Legislature have been hampered by demonstrators harassing the opening procession. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1839 

I would also like to indicate to the member that on the news one day you said something about them 
being asked to leave as something new. It isn’t something new. Currently it is the policy of government 
services to have the deputy minister negotiate with groups who wish to participate in a demonstration. 
Following negotiations, the group wishing to demonstrate is allowed access to the interior of the 
building. They have been allowed to express their views during the processional ceremonies, but once 
the House begins to sit they have been asked to leave in accordance with commitments achieved during 
the negotiation process. So what this policy is, is putting it . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That wasn’t our policy. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It was too your policy! It is putting it down on paper. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I thought you said we didn’t have a policy. A minute ago you said we didn’t 
have one. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — You didn’t have one written down. This one is written down. This one is 
written down, and . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Where did you read it if it isn’t written down? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I’m reading it off your cabinet agenda item of November 20, 1981. I would 
imagine you guys took them when you took your files. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — It’s a little difficult to follow the logic. At one point, not five minutes ago, 
the minister said that we had no policy; that’s why this was developed. Then she proceeds to stand up 
and read what our policy was. A little confusing. There’s a leap in logic here in trying to understand 
whether we had a policy or didn’t have one. 
 
What I’m saying is that (g) on the new policy, “demonstrations and speeches within the Legislative 
Building are to be concluded once the Legislative Assembly has begun to sit,” was never a policy of our 
government. This is a new policy and has little to do with the weight load in the rotunda area. And I say 
that it’s because of the fear of this government in dealing with demonstrators who come to display their 
displeasure with the government’s policy on various issues. I think that it’s obvious that we did have 
demonstrations that carried on well after the Assembly was in session, and the minister will be well 
aware of that. And this policy is a departure from what was in place prior to the election on April 26. 
 
The other thing: she refers to a request from the Speaker’s office and deals with that as if it’s a policy of 
the New Democratic government. If you have a request from the Speaker’s office, the government deals 
with it. In this case, when the SFL was controlled by police and chains, there was no consultation with 
the Speaker’s office. I’m saying that if there is a concern about the building, that that’s where it should 
come from, the way it did prior to April 26. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — For the member’s edification, when you first started this line of 
questioning, I indicated to you that this is the first written policy of the Department of Government 
Services. What I read to you before was off a cabinet agenda item dated November 20, 1981 when you 
were in government. It states that it is the policy of government services to have the deputy minister 
negotiate with groups. That was your  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1840 

unwritten policy. What I am saying to you is that this written policy is in fact using a lot of things that 
were in place before but now it’s made public. 
 
I think the member opposite also knows that demonstrators always appoint a marshall. They always 
negotiate, other than the anti-nuke demonstrations we had here, I believe. Anybody who wants to 
demonstrate at the Legislative Building has the perfect right to, but they do it in a very orderly fashion. 
They negotiate either with the deputy minister of government services or a senior official in the 
department. They will say how long they are going to be here, what time they are coming, and how 
many people are going to be in attendance. 
 
We negotiated with the SFL. They said, “We will be here at 12:30,” and they showed up at 1:15. This 
policy that we have written, which is similar to what you had unwritten, was accepted by them. After the 
demonstration period was over, they were invited to come into the minister’s offices. They said no and 
they went back to Moose Jaw. So all I am saying to you is that what we have written down is an 
accumulation of what has been going on for many, many years. It’s not something new and it’s not a 
departure from what has been happening over the years. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m sure that demonstrators who come to the building 
and find areas chained off know full well that there is a change in policy; that it isn’t merely a 
continuation of something that was in place. The fact that you can no longer have bullhorns, for 
example, or sound-making devices in the building is a departure from what was there before. The fact 
that the demonstration has to end when the session begins is a departure from what was there before. It’s 
not very difficult to understand that there is a new policy in terms of demonstrations which are held in 
the building. If you are trying to deny that, it’s going to be very, very difficult to convince the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labor that they are treated the same by this government as they were by the 
previous government. We can argue all night as to whether there is a new policy or not, but I can tell 
you when they came into the building in the past they were able to circulate at will as they should be 
able to in the seat of government. I think this argument could go on a long time. The demonstrators who 
came to the building for the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor demonstration found a different policy 
than what they were used to. 
 
Question to the minister. Can you inform me who negotiated the demonstration that occurred with the 
Land Bank Tenants’ Association? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The deputy. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can you tell me what process was carried out, who the deputy negotiated 
with, what kind of correspondence and the individuals he negotiated with? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The deputy met face to face with the president of the Land Bank Tenants’ 
Association and negotiated. And I might also add they were invited inside the building and they said, 
“No, we prefer to demonstrate on the steps. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And they do it. And as far as 
your reference to police and chains, the chain or rope or whatever you want to call it leaves an access for 
the public, other than the demonstrators, to have access to the building and for fire safety. You have to 
keep a lane clear. As far as the police are concerned, they are Wascana police and they attend every 
demonstration. They attended every demonstration under your administration. They’re always here. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1841 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister tell me the name of the person the deputy met with and 
what time and what day the meeting took place? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Nine o’clock in the morning the day of the demonstration. The deputy and 
the president met down in the cafeteria here in the building. The name escapes him and it escapes me 
too. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I want to congratulate the minister for abandoning a disastrous policy. 
I don’t expect you to respond to this but I think you have abandoned the policy of restricting access to 
this building. It was symbolic that the chains disappeared after the protest and were replaced by a rope. I 
think that was symbolic. I think the federation of labor will be the last group who will ever be denied 
access to this building. As my colleague said, I’ve seen the weight of 450 people in Kentucky fried 
chicken in demonstrators out in that hall. That’s without a word of a lie. There have been thousands of 
people out there. And I predict, Madam Minister, we have seen the last of the chains and we have seen 
the last of a policy which restricts the right of demonstrators to access to this building. I’ll make that 
prediction that we have seen the last of it, and I want to congratulate you in showing enough good sense 
to get rid of the policy when it clearly was disastrous. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I don’t know where you got your information because the policy that is set 
down has been used twice now and it will be used with anybody that wants to demonstrate at the 
building . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, how can you restrict people? They have access to the 
building. That’s only, they’re restricted — the area the demonstrators can be is restricted just during the 
time frame that they have negotiated that they will be here. Now if the galleries are empty and they want 
to come into question period after their demonstration, they’re more than welcome to come. If they want 
to wander down the halls and see some of the ministers, they can come. But what I’m saying to you is 
that you knew in 1979 the possible hazard that was out there, and you did nothing. And the member for 
Regina Centre snickers. It’s no laughing matter, my dear. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Let’s leave that subject and get on to one of your other striking successes, 
the purchase of the Nimbus water purifiers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I say let’s leave that subject 
and get on to one of your other striking successes, the purchase of the Nimbus water purifiers. I have a 
series of questions. They will be short at the beginning. 
 
Who placed the order for the purchase of the water purifiers? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The associate deputy minister of government services, who is now the 
acting deputy minister. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — His name is? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Cousineau. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Did Mr. Laidlaw play any role in the purchase of the Nimbus purifiers? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well obviously Mr. Laidlaw was acting deputy for me for some time before 
Mr. Cousineau took over, and of course he knew about it. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1842 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Laidlaw placed the order for the purchase of the purifiers? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Cousineau placed the order for the purifiers. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What role did Mr. Laidlaw play in this affair then? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — As acting deputy, Mr. Laidlaw was informed and it was discussed and 
concurred in. Mr. Cousineau, in his capacity as acting associate, placed the order; Mr. Laidlaw himself 
didn’t. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Your present — deputy or acting deputy? — acting deputy signed the order? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That is correct. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — At whose request were the Nimbus purifiers purchased? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The purifiers were put in at my request. The decision to select Nimbus was 
made by the associate deputy minister at that time, after evaluating several systems that are on the 
market. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Were tenders called for the purchase of these purifiers? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, they weren’t. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Is it still your position that that is within the dictates of The Purchasing Act? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The associate deputy deemed it a specialty item and because I requested it 
they pursued it and this is what we have. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I am fascinated to know that any deputy minister has the authority to deem 
something to be a specialty item. I thought (and I read the regulations), but I thought that was defined in 
the regulations. If your deputy deemed them . . Are you saying he consulted the regulations? Are you 
saying he just woke up one morning and decided “It’s a nice day to decide these are specialty items and 
away I go”? On what basis did he decide they were specialty items? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — On the technical points of the various types out. There are about three or 
four different types of filtration systems out, some requiring large storage units, some requiring 
whatever (the electric thing). He knew that we wanted them in the coffee areas and in the offices. It’s 
compact; it’s relatively maintenance free, and he made the decision. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You must jest, Madam Minister. These things can be purchased off the shelf. 
Any number of people make purifiers. You must jest when you suggest that any purifier is so unusual 
with respect to its capacity that it has to be a specialty item. You must jest. These things can be bought 
off the shelf. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No. I do not jest, because there is no reverse osmosis system available in 
package form anywhere in Regina that would fit under the sink. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1843 

MR. SHILLINGTON: —Did the need to have pure water for visiting dignitaries play any role in your 
decision? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes it did. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are you saying this is the only system that could provide pure water for the 
visiting dignitaries? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, but I indicated to you before that is the only type that would fit under 
the sinks that are in the building now. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — All right, so it was because they would fit under the sinks that we bought the 
Nimbus system? Is that the answer? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What is? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We bought them because they were a reverse osmosis type that would be 
placed underneath the sinks, and they are maintenance free, I might add. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What is the definition of a specialty item in the regulations passed pursuant 
to The Purchasing Act? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I don’t have the regulations here. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Is your deputy aware of what a specialty item is under regulations of The 
Purchasing Act? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The deputy has indicated that he wasn’t well versed in regulations at the 
time but he has boned up on them since. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, I’ll bet he has taken time to find out since he got you into all this 
trouble. We are going to pursue this a little further in revenue, supply and services. I say to you that any 
deputy of government services who doesn’t know the basic rules of The Purchasing Act is going to get 
this minister into trouble really quickly, just as yours did. I would suggest that if he is acting deputy 
minister, he find out what The Purchasing Act says. 
 
I may say that if it had been an error — an honest mistake on the part of a new official — I would have 
understood that and I think I would have not have made the fuss about it that I did. What bothered me 
about it was your attempt to defend what was clearly an illegal purchase, because there is an important 
principle involved and that is that items which are bought should be tendered wherever possible. 
 
The regulations of The Purchasing Act have been the subject of years of refinement. I am not upset 
about the fact that a mistake was made, although I don’t believe that it just by chance happened to go to 
Ross Reibling. I don’t believe that for a moment. I am coming to expect that of this government and I 
would have not got so upset if you would have admitted, Madam Minister, that a mistake was made but 
that The Purchasing Act will be followed consistently and throughout. And what bothered me about the 
whole  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1844 

affair was your attempt to defend the indefensible. 
 
I am going to be getting into this again in revenue, supply and services, because that’s really the area it 
comes in. Your deputy minister of government services should not have been purchasing the purifiers 
are all. The other deputy should have been doing it because you’re also Minister of Revenue, Supply and 
Services. I want to get on to a different subject. I’ll get back to that in revenue, supply and services. 
 
I want some information, and if your officials have it, that’s fine. If you want to supply it in writing that 
will do as well. I want to know the amount of new space, not the net difference, but I want to know what 
new space you have leased since May 8, 1972. May 8, 1982, sorry. What new space you have leased, 
and please be clear, I’m not asking for the difference. I want to know what additional places you leased, 
the square footage of the same, the rate per square foot of the same, and the entities from whom the 
space is leased. 
 
You may have anticipated the question and have it ready. You may not have, and if you haven’t, it will 
suffice if you undertake to give it to me in writing. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Do you want the renewals too or just the new space? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I do not need the renewals, just any new additional space that you’ve leased 
and the information I’ve asked for. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We’ll get that information over to you as soon as possible. It might not be 
available tonight, by the way. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — So long as it’s as soon as reasonably possible, it doesn’t have to be this 
evening. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, the member for Regina Centre was bringing up the tendering 
practices. While a member in opposition, I was continually asking about the tendering practices as well. 
And during that time there was a building called Saskatchewan House, and I understand we in the 
opposition were waiting for an answer (was it tendered or not tendered), and we believe that in those 
days it was not tendered and brought it before the former government. Could the minister now give us 
the answer when I’ve waited almost a year for it. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can indicate to the member that in the estimates of 1979, the new 
Attorney General asked the minister of youth and culture about the restoration of the territorial 
administration building and specifically asked if the projects were tendered. And if so, was the 
successful bidder the high bid or the low bid, and the then minister of youth and culture answered. “Yes, 
it was tendered, and yes the low bidder got it . . . “ That was not exactly accurate because it happened to 
be a multimillion dollar cost-plus contract that wasn’t tendered. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The minister is misrepresenting the situation. That was a question asked in 
question period. The information was inaccurate, and it was corrected later on. If you will check the 
estimates you will find out that the member was provided with the information he requested. The 
building was not tendered. We never claimed it was. It was an historical property being restored along 
historical lines, for which no contractor would accept any contract except cost plus. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1845 

The member was told that, and I resent that sort of misrepresentation. I remember getting into a long 
argument with the member for Rosthern about this, about whether or not we should be tendering 
buildings like the Saskatchewan House. That’s an honest argument. The information which was just 
attempted to put before this House frankly falls a little short of that standard. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — The member for Regina Centre asked for a point of privilege. I think that it’s 
more to do with facts than privilege. I don’t think it is well taken. The member for Rosthern. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, the former government can make all the accusations they want. I 
have one advantage by not sitting on the treasury benches with the present government, but I was a critic 
of this department in opposition, and I had questions that never came and I’m attempting to get my 
answers after all the work I’ve put in. I think I have that right, unless you want to try to muzzle me that’s 
your choice. In opposition I constantly gave the minister, who was Mr. Snyder at the time, advance 
information on some questions I was going to ask, and therefore he brought the documents with him. In 
one case the document was that thick. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. You may ask questions of the minister. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: —Mr. Chairman, the members next to me seem to be a little . . . Let me go back. 
There were a couple of other things that I remember while I was in opposition, and one I remember that 
I never did find out, is when a Mr. Davey Steuart, a former member of this House, and I were speaking 
one time, there was some indication in Prince Albert that there was a building to be named after him. I 
asked that question in the House, when the building was brought forward: was there a policy, or was 
there not? I was also informed through my own sources that — sorry — I was informed then that there 
was supposedly no policy and yet I understood from talking to people in Prince Albert that the building 
in P.A. called, I believe, the McIntosh Mall, was to be named the Davey Steuart something or other, and 
I would ask the minister if she is aware of that and is there a policy or isn’t there a policy in government 
services on naming buildings? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — There isn’t a policy per se within government services. I believe that the 
general accepted policy is that government members have an input into naming of government 
buildings. As far as the McIntosh Mall is concerned, one of the former members did suggest that the 
McIntosh Mall be named the Davey Steuart Building, but some members objected to it. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, the information that I had received was that McIntosh was supposed to be 
Steuart, but somehow got changed around to another name, which was the way it was done in those 
days. Is that correct? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s difficult for me to answer that question because I wasn’t part of the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to get a little more information with respect to the minister’s personal 
staff. The executive director of operation is J.C. Law. I just wanted to ask the minister whether J.C. Law 
was in fact executive director when she assumed the office as minister? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — He was transferred from revenue to government services on  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1846 

September 8. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — 
And the acting associate deputy minister at 4,628 a month, could you indicate who that is? We don’t 
have the name of the acting associate deputy minister. I’d like to know who that person is and could you 
indicate if he is a Saskatchewan boy? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s a position within government services, but there’s no one in that 
position right now. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — In respect to the executive director of property and planning at 4972, could you 
indicate who is filling that position at the present time? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Don Nevill, sitting behind me on the right. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to know if the minister could indicate: do any of the minister’s staff and 
which ones are assigned the CVA vehicles, if indeed they are, and whether her special assistant is also 
assigned a CVA car. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Did you say personal staff within the building here, or downtown? The 
only people in government services who have assigned cars are myself and my deputy on the executive. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I was thinking in respect to your personal staff. Are any of your personal staff 
assigned a CVA vehicle? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have a question to put to you again. You may answer in writing if you like. 
I’m trying to exclude the trifling contracts. With respect to capital projects over $50,000. I would like to 
know if you could tell me those contracts which were overspent and those contracts which were 
underspent — if you could give me a list of contracts over $50,000 which was underspent and those 
which were overspent — spent less than what was budgeted, like, came in under budget. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We’ll take notice of the question and supply you with the response. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister. I have a number of questions essentially 
about the current state of proposed construction projects. I will just start down the list. With respect to 
the proposed archives building at Regina, can you tell me the current state of that project, by which I 
mean are plans complete, has a site been selected, have tenders been called? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The design is about 90 per cent done, and it’s the Ikoy architectural firm 
here in Regina. The site hasn’t been resolved, and the decision to proceed or not to proceed will be 
addressed to the’83-84 budget. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, do I understand the minister to say that 
the plans are nearing completion, being prepared by Ikoy architectural firm, in the Regina office of Ikoy, 
that the site has not yet been resolved, and that whether or not tenders will be called will be probably 
indicated by the 1983-84 budget. Did I understand it correctly? 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1847 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, the site is picked but the location for the building, that’s the problem 
right now, I think. We are trying to decide whether to have it on Cathedral corner or a different corner. 
The design is being done by Ikoy. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the site, you say that the piece of ground has been 
selected, if I understand you correctly. The location of the building on that particular plot has not been 
selected. Would you tell me where the piece of ground is? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The site is the Qu’Appelle Diocese on the corner of Broad and College. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I refer now, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, to the rehabilitation centre, 
the proposed rehabilitation centre, and I ask the same questions. Are the plans complete; has a site been 
selected; and have tenders been called? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Government services is not responsible for the rehab. Health is doing that 
themselves. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I will ask then, am I to understand that the Department of Health will be 
tendering that, if it is tendered? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I would assume so. Government services has never been involved in the 
proposed rehab centre. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I will just get this established, and I don’t think I am in any doubt about 
what you are saying. The Department of Government Services has not been approached in order to assist 
in the preparation of plans and assist in the site selection, or to take any steps with respect to calling for 
tenders with respect to the proposed rehabilitation centre. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It has been discussed, but we have not assisted them. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I turn now to the proposed provincial laboratory, the new provincial lab, 
and ask whether or not plans are completed; whether a site has been selected; and whether tenders have 
been called. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The proposed provincial lab is in the very, very early stages. There is a 
significant siting problem. The site selected by the previous administration near the Plains Hospital — 
the infrastructure that would be required to put the lab there would be extremely costly, I think in the 
neighborhood of millions of dollars, and there is no guarantee that we would have an assured water 
supply there. And right now we are negotiating with the Department of Health to look at several 
alternative sites. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do I understand the minister to say that a site adjacent to the Plains 
Hospital has, at least tentatively, been rejected for the provincial lab? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It hasn’t been rejected but it hasn’t been accepted either. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Is the minister in any position to give us a date on which it is likely that a 
decision will be made on the provincial lab, to proceed with, to tender? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I cannot give you a date at this time. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1848 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I now turn to the University of 
Saskatchewan and to the geology building at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is my understanding that the Department of Government Services plays a role in the construction of 
buildings at the University of Saskatchewan. Could the minister advise me of the role played by the 
Department of Government Services in the construction of major buildings at the University of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The only role government services plays in the universities is that we do 
look at the plans submitted to us by continuing education. We have indicated to them that the geological 
building can proceed to working drawings if funds are available. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I understand the minister to say that the Department of Government 
Services has approved the plans to the extent that they can proceed to working drawings and this 
approval on behalf of the government which, as I understand it, approves these buildings by order in 
council. Am I right in saying that the Department of Government Services has approved the plans to the 
extent that they may go forward to working drawings? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That is correct. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, could the minister advise me approximately when this 
approval was given by the Department of Government Services? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s just a matter of days since that was sent back to continuing education. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Not very many days ago is what you’re telling me. I’m puzzled by that. 
Mr. Chairman and Mrs. Minister, are these plans significantly different than the plans previously 
approved by the department on behalf of the government some considerable time ago? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I’m not sure if I understand your question correctly. Government services, 
when we look at the preliminary drawings, and say whether they can go ahead or not . . . This is the first 
time that that building was given approval to this stage. It’s the first time it came to government services 
department. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I turn to the technical institute in Moose Jaw, and my question to the 
minister is: what contracts have been let with respect to the technical institute at Moose Jaw; what 
construction contracts, if any, have been let since May 1, 1982? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That contract was let prior to May 8, and it went to a Winnipeg firm, 
Gateway Construction. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And do I understand the minister to say that since May 1, 1982 no 
contracts have been let with respect to the Moose Jaw technical institute other than perhaps very small 
contracts? No significant construction contract has been let? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, that contract was in place when we took over on May 8. Yes. And . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, no. I mean they are doing the building so . . .  
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1849 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m happy that the minister appreciates that. On a goodly number of 
occasions I have heard this particular project being taken credit for by members opposite, and I just 
wanted to make the point that notwithstanding its frequent announcement by the current Premier, it was 
the previous premier who dug some dirt and one thing and another in connection with it. Just making 
that point. 
 
With respect to the courthouse in Regina, the intended expansion of the courthouse at Regina . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s next. With respect to the intended expansion of the courthouse at 
Regina, could the minister advise whether or not plans are completed; whether or not a site has been 
selected; and whether or not tenders have been let? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The plans are not completed and the site has not been finalized, and the 
decision is at cabinet right now. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I saw a news story a few days ago which 
quoted the minister as follows: 
 

“Expansion of the Saskatoon and Regina courthouses could be part of the province’s new 
lease-purchase approach to the government’s acquisition of office space,” Revenue Minister Joan 
Duncan said this week. 

 
The story goes on to suggest that the courthouses might be built by private groups and leased by the 
government for the purposes of the courthouse needs of the government. Can the minister advise 
whether any consideration has been given to a rent-to-own system for either the courthouse at Regina or 
at Saskatoon? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The rent-to-buy or lease-purchase is an option that was analyzed by 
officials in my department, and as I indicated before, is at cabinet right now. That’s about all I can say 
on it. It is an option and there are several alternatives, and that’s one of them. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What conceivable argument can be mounted for lease-purchase or 
rent-to-own of courthouses? One can indeed possibly mount an argument (I think it’s a bad argument) 
for an office building, on the ground that if you don’t use the office building someone else can use it. 
With respect to a courthouse, is it reasonably supposed that anybody would build a courthouse other 
than on a lease which gave them a complete return? Is there any likely other tenant for a courthouse than 
the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Lease-purchase is an option, as I indicated. Somehow we have to provide 
buildings for government. This is, we feel, a better alternative than building them ourselves. Ownership 
eventually reverts to us, and the buildings are constructed on specific specification as put out by our 
department. We think that virtually any building can be built on a lease-purchase arrangement. There is 
one advantage, too. Instead of whacking out $50 million in one short period or one or two years, the 
people who will be using these buildings over the length of a lease are actually contributing their taxes 
and actually paying for the use of the building. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: —Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I would have thought that this was 
somewhere close to the ultimate, until I recalled that in Newfoundland the legislative building was 
owned privately and the government leased it for a while. I  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1850 

wondered whether there were any plans perhaps to sell this building and then we could lease it back and 
then the people could pay their taxes on an annual basis for the use of this building, which presumably 
will go on for some time to come. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I don’t think you will have to worry about us selling the legislature, but 
are you suggesting we do? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think we’ll attempt to get that commitment in writing, but perhaps not 
tonight. 
 
With respect to courthouses, my point, Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, is that there is no prospect 
of anyone building a courthouse and leasing it to you, except on lease terms which guarantee to him 
total recovery. He is not going to ever take the chance of that being vacant. Unlike an office building, 
where someone might build you lease space on a 10-year firm lease and thinking that at the end of 10 
years if he can’t lease it to the government he can lease it to someone else and he’s broken the back of 
his capital costs by then, no one is going to lease a courthouse on that basis. Because the alternative uses 
for courthouses are not obvious. 
 
Accordingly, at the outset, you are going to have to enter into a contractual arrangement with guarantees 
that the government pays 100 per cent of the cost of that courthouse for sure. The only difference is 
whether or not you pay it when you build it or pay it when you rent it. There are possibly tax 
considerations with respect to the private owner, but the overwhelming cost of a building like that is the 
capital cost. There’s no doubt it’s not the operating cost of a courthouse but the capital cost of putting 
one up that is the nub of the problem. 
 
It cannot be justified that it be private unless you can show me that private people can raise money 
cheaper than the Government of Saskatchewan. Otherwise, how can it possibly be economically sound 
to get a courthouse on a rent-to-own basis rather than on a total ownership basis. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — All I can say, as I indicated before, it is an alternative. It is one of many, 
and we are looking at it. I think we will be looking at every building we, as a government, will have to 
have down the road. This is one of the options we are looking at. I didn’t say it would be accepted or 
rejected. I said it was one option rather than owning it yourself. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I turn now to the courthouse at Saskatoon and ask the same questions. 
Perhaps I will ask a preliminary question there. Is an expansion of the courthouse at Saskatoon or a 
replacement for the courthouse at Saskatoon in the planning stage? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s at cabinet also. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to that, what decision is before cabinet? I am not asking you 
what the cabinet decision is, but with some particularity, what is being asked — shall we build one, or to 
whom will we let the tender, or shall we do it on rent-to-own, or what? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think the former premier knows that cabinet documents are confidential. I 
can’t answer that. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1851 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, I will direct my questions to the minister then, not as to what is at 
cabinet, but what is the policy of the government? Has the government, in the planning stage, a proposal 
for expanding or replacing the Saskatoon Courthouse. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Has an architect been commissioned? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, an architect has been commissioned — a Saskatoon firm. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Could you give the name of the firm of architects? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Forrester, Scott, Bowers and Walls. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The Forrester firm. Has a site been selected, Madam Minister? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The site is being reviewed at this time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do the instructions to the architect involve an addition to the existing 
courthouse or a new courthouse? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We’re looking at two alternatives — an addition and/or a new one. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I refer to the matter of accessibility 
standards and would ask the minister whether she can tell us what projects to make government 
buildings accessible to the handicapped have been proceeded with by the government in the last six or 
seven months? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — School for the Deaf, Saskatoon, to provide enclosed lift on the outside 
building and handicapped-accessible main floor washroom; STI in Moose Jaw, handicap accessibility 
completed; Saskatchewan Valleyview Hospital in Weyburn has been completed; the WIAAS Parkway 
completed; WIAAS south Albert is in progress; St. John Street campus, WIAAS, is completed; Gordon 
Building, Regina for the Saskatchewan Hearing Aid Plan completed. North Park Centre, Saskatoon, 
completed; and we’re in the second stage, too. Yorkton Courthouse was completed and as I indicated 
earlier on, those type of accessibility standards will be . . . Oh, pardon me, it is slated for '83, the 
Yorkton Courthouse. Right. It’s slated for ’83. 
 
And it’s just an ongoing program. Of course, you do the areas where you have the highest concentration 
of population first and then spread out. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — . . . (inaudible) . . . I find out from the minister about North Park Centre in 
Saskatoon and exactly what is that? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — . . . (inaudible) . . . Prince Albert, pardon me. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — On the courthouse in Gravelbourg, can you tell me how many square feet 
are being rented for the minority language office? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We don’t have that information, but we will get it to you. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1852 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Maybe in getting that information, you could get me the square footage 
that is rented in the Gravelbourg Courthouse as well as the cost of that area. 
 
Moving to the P.A. tech the minister will be well aware that the previous government had made a 
commitment of some millions of dollars toward the construction of a facility that would house about 450 
students and, through Outreach, would have served about 1,500 others. Can the minister tell me whether 
or not plans are moving ahead on that project and whether an architect has been hired to carry out the 
design of the building? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we have Tomporowski, Taylor and Moore as a consortium on that 
project . . . (inaudible interjection)) . . . Tomporowski, Taylor and Moore. I believe they’re in Prince 
Albert. It’s a consortium of firms in Prince Albert that got together on it, and they’re under contract to 
government services. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister inform me whether a site has been chosen for the building 
and, if so, where? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we have the site in Prince Albert. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — When does the minister expect the sod turning to take place? Can you give 
us any indication of a time frame — January, February, March, during 1983? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We are a long way away from design completion. It is quite a massive 
building: you know what technical schools are like; they are not just something you can design quickly. 
And I might add also, it is at cabinet, and I’m sure the Minister of Continuing Education will invite you 
to the sod turning. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The minister is then saying she doesn’t anticipate a sod turning for that 
P.A. tech in the near future — January, February? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, we don’t. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister inform me about a job creating program — I believe, and 
I don’t just see it right offhand — worth approximately $5 million? Can you give me a bit of detail on 
the program? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The government services share of that $5 million is approximately 
$700,000, and we propose to spend it throughout the province in different areas. I can give you a few 
examples if you like. Some money will be spent in Glaslyn; some money will be spent in Porcupine 
Plain; we are going to be doing some work on the Centre of the Arts, and that type of thing. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The projects we have talked about tonight in looking at what the previous 
government had budgeted in provincial development expenditures — the provincial lab, the 
Saskatchewan archive building, the expansion of the Saskatchewan Technical Institute at Moose Jaw — 
the total was some $17 million, and in looking at your budget it’s $2.9 million, or a reduction in the area 
of $14 million. It seems difficult to explain that you would cut $14 million out of significant programs, 
and announce a $5 million program, and expect anyone to believe that this is a great wondrous 
announcement that’s going to create more jobs than what there were before? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1853 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — You said our capital expenditure was $2 million. I would indicate that even 
if you take out the $5 million our capital expenditure budget is still in excess of $15 million 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister inform me whether or not there are any plans to build a 
new government building at La Loche at the present time? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s not within our jurisdiction. That part of DNS doesn’t come to us 
until January 1. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — These estimates are until March 31. Are there any plans once you can take 
over that operation, between January 1 and March 31, for a government building at La Loche? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That is not normally the construction period in northern Saskatchewan. I 
could probably say with confidence that nothing will be built there between now and March 31. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I think that in all the questions that we have been asking for the last 15 
minutes we have been talking about plans, drawing and technical work being done. I don’t think we are 
going to do a lot of construction on any of them. Can you tell me whether or not there are any design 
plans or a location then for a government building in La Loche? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — To our knowledge, we don’t know of any plans but we can check with 
DNS. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The minister will then send me a note on that, if in fact there are plans? On 
the Cypress Hills development, can the minister inform me what projects have been cancelled since 
April 26 in the department that were planned and scheduled to be studied or the technical work done on 
this past summer? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s all tourism, not government services. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — In the budget of March that the previous government had planned, in the 
Department of Government Services there was $3 million scheduled for capital expenditure in the 
Cypress Hills Park. I’m wondering if you can tell me which of those projects have been cancelled, 
because I believe at the present time there is $80,000 in that area to be spent this year. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — In the proposed March budget there was stuff in government services for 
tourism, but it was given back to tourism to be a decision on them and they haven’t let us know. I 
believe at Cypress Hills right now they’re building a new sewage treatment plant and pumping station 
and that type of thing. I think the member is aware of the perennial water problem out there and the 
proposed $10 million expansion was. I must say, never well accepted down there. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I think we can debate whether or not the expansion at Cypress Hills was 
accepted or not. I know it was in Shaunavon during the April 26th election. 
 
But when you say that there is no money in your department for tourism. I see under subvote 9, tourism 
and renewable resources, in your budget $1.6 million. Can you explain to me how you can have no 
money for tourism and yet have $1.6 million? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1854 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That money doesn’t relate to Cypress Hills. That’s for the fish hatchery at 
Fort Qu’Appelle. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — In the area of the Cypress Hills development, you can’t inform me which 
projects were in your department? This is what I’m asking. Which projects were in your department 
which have been either moved to tourism or cancelled, which were ready to go and on the drawing 
boards? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can only indicate to the member that the proposed programs that we were 
to take care of for tourism have gone back to tourism. We don’t handle it anymore. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — That’s what I want to know. What were those proposed projects? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — You would have to talk to tourism because we don’t have the status of 
those. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a number of questions which are really 
wanting information and not any particular point of disagreement between the minister and I. Were there 
any contracts let which were not tendered? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Not that we’re aware of, no. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Would you supply me with a list of the capital projects that you have in your 
budget, the nature of the project, its estimated cost and any changes in the project since May 8, 1982? I 
don’t expect you to get up and recite that, but if you would supply that in writing? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we’ll supply it in writing. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Would you undertake to supply me with a list of all vacant space: the 
location of the facility; the person from who the facility is leased; if it is leased or, if it is owned, an 
indication of that; the size and the cost of the vacant space; and the reason why it’s vacant? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we’ll supply you with that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Have any of the projects which were planned by your department been 
cancelled since May 8, 1982? If so, I would like a list of them with the same detail. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we’ll supply you with that information also. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are there any plans to change from the maintenance of the building? I’m 
phrasing this very poorly. If the minister will bear with me, are there any plans to contract out 
maintenance of any government buildings for which we now employ the maintenance staff? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Is any serious consideration being given to that? I recognize your department 
at any time is probably considering everything. But is there any  



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1855 

serious consideration being given to that change? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Maintenance, no. We haven’t even talked about it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Over the session that we’ve had here, we’re referred to vacant space and 
government lease space. I believe there is a document (a computer printout) that would include all this 
information. It’s a rather involved book, about that thick. Can we get a copy of that? Will you send that 
to us? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we can get that over to the member for Shaunavon. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — In the department of DNS there’s a portion called project management. 
Would that be shifted to your department as of January 1, 1983? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, it will. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — All of them, Madam Minister? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Just building services. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I have one short question here on person years. Madam Minister. Can you 
tell me why the large increase from 535 to 656? And also, why the large increase in non-permanent 
workers from 104 to 152? I want some clarification on those two items. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That is a result of the realignment of DNS. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — The second part of it, why would you, when you are transferring them, 
transfer them as non-permanent? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — They are labor service people. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, would you provide us, so we won’t take 
the time in the committee, with a list of any employees of the department who are on secondment to any 
other agency of the government, and any employees of the department who may be hired by contract? 
That’s an odd sort of phrasing but I think we know what we mean: any people who are on personal 
services contracts with the Department of Government Services? And I’m not now speaking of 
professional services, but substantially full-time services. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We have no personal services contract in government services, and we have 
one person seconded from the systems centre working in government services. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Have you anybody who is included in this budget of government services 
who was seconded to any other agency of government? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — All of them are working at the services included in this vote, or these two 
votes. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1856 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s correct. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mrs. Minister, two other questions that I’ve always asked in the past . . . I guess I 
would have to go back, I guess it’s 21 months since I’ve last been able to ask this question before. Have 
we in the last while given any tenders, sorry, any contracts out to the non-low tender? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, we haven’t . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, 24 months. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mrs. Minister, the last time that I was able to ask this question must have been 21 
months ago approximately, and the minister used to always tell me 12 months prior. So I guess this time 
I have to ask for 21 months, because that’s the last time I had a chance to answer. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — To our knowledge, we have never, in the last 21 months, awarded a tender 
to anyone other than the low bidder for construction. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — One other question, Mr. Minister — too used to talking to Gordon Snyder, I 
guess — Mrs. Minister. Under the former government, there was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Under 
the former government, the antique furniture, I guess you would call it, was allowed when we first came 
in’75 in opposition, and then it was not allowed. Is there a policy in place on that antique furniture? 
Over the years I have noticed that it is being refurbished constantly through this building. Is it contracted 
out when it is done and do you have any idea how much money the government has been spending on 
refurbishing all the antique furniture. I guess is the word, rather than the Chamber or something? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The antique furniture is an option for ministers’ offices only, and we do the 
refinishing work ourselves. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Madame Minister, I keep hearing rumors of a grandfather clock refurbishing in 
the government that was rather expensive. I keep hearing past $5,000 or $6,000 and I am just wondering 
if that is correct. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — There is a grandfather clock in the building, an antique one that was 
refinished. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is the rumor correct that it cost $5,000 or $6,000 to refix it? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I don’t have the breakdown but it was part of a larger package of antique 
furniture that was refinished for a minister’s suite. The total price was around $8,000. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — A minister’s suite? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, for a minister’s suite. A minister has the option of having antique 
furniture in his or her office. Some ministers do have it. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — To refurbish this particular clock and whatever else was with it cost over $8,000? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — There were other miscellaneous items with it. It was around  



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1857 

$8,000 but there were the table and chairs and the clock and different things. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Is it tendered out or do we do it ourselves, did you say? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Our own forces do it. We do the refinishing ourselves. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 agreed to 
 
Item 3 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Am I correct in assuming that the increase in other expenses, which is fairly 
hefty, is as a result of your absorption of DNS? Operations administration, subvote 3, we’re on 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, it is. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m going to save some time. Am I correct in assuming the same explanation 
holds true for 4 and 5? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s correct. And 5? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And 5. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, item 4, the very substantial increase 
in personal services again, is that as a result of the absorption of DNS. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s correct. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Items 5 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, a substantial increase in other 
expenses from $5.5 million to $6.2 million . . . Sorry, from 5 million to 7.7 million. Could you give us a 
brief explanation of that substantial increase? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That would be rents, utilities and taxes, over which on our lease basis, we 
have no control. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, it goes up by that sum, 50 per cent? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s cleaning, the operating, the maintenance and the  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1858 

additional space to our client tenants. The increase is as a result of the space required by client 
departments. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Could the minister give us some detail on that, exactly what increases that 
would be? I notice, just going back for reference to 7, the increase is nowhere near 50 per cent the way it 
is in 8, and I would believe is nowhere near in 9 as it is in 8. Could you give some detail as to what the 
increase is? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s contracted space in the MacPherson, Leslie, Tyerman building and the 
Williams building and accommodation in other locations. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — It would be easiest if the minister would give us a list and a breakdown of 
that. Could you do that for us? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we will. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Item 9 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Chairman, back to my original question on this legislative area. I assume 
when the minister is referring (because it is furniture we are refurbishing), and from some side 
comments I got to my right, by the sound of it we are talking about a cabinet minister’s office with a 
grandfather clock. From the comments made by one member across, we are talking about Mr. 
Shillington's former office. Is that correct? I’m just going by what was coming across to me sideways. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I indicated the policy is that for those cabinet ministers who desire to 
have antique furniture in their offices in keeping with the décor of this building that’s within their realm 
of preference. I might say that that particular clock is now in the cabinet room. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m not sure how much in order I am. That clock was in my office. I was 
sitting there one day looking at it when I should have been meeting with someone. I noticed that the 
clock had an identical beaver to that one on it, and it had lion’s feet on the bottom, the same as some of 
these tables and chairs used to. I asked the Clerk of the Assembly to have a look at it. The Clerk did and 
eventually discovered that that clock was built and designed for the Chamber, and sat in the Chamber for 
some 10 years before it was moved to the cabinet office where it sat until the’50s. So, in fact, between 
the Clerk and me, I think we salvaged an extremely valuable piece of Saskatchewan history. That’s how 
that clock came into being, Madam Minister. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Items 10 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 13 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

GOVERNMENT SERVICES 
 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 14 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1859 

Item 1 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You were going to give me a list of all projects since the estimated 
expenditure for which had changed May 8, 1962. I assume I will then get explanations as to the changes 
in all these figures. Is that accurate? When you answer that question, will you answer a series of 
questions which might well be asked, and that is why the changes in the figures? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — You mean from the proposed March budget? If there’s any changes in 
items 1 to 10? Okay. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I wonder, in order that we might save the time of the committee, whether 
the minister would provide me with a breakdown of the projects, all of them let’s say over $100,000, 
unless someone else has already asked for that. I’m interested in having them. The first big one is item 4, 
and if someone has asked for that, my apologies; if not, I would like it. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It has been asked and we have said we would furnish that information. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Items 5 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, can the minister indicate why the big 
change there? Is that one item, or a couple of items that have changed there? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Are you asking for the reasons for the change from the 1981-82, like a big 
drop? In ’81-’82 there were some big projects completed, like the corrections centre, and that’s that . . . 
(inaudible) . . . The proposed March budget allocated $2,183,000 compared to our $1,986,200. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I believe our March budget allocated $4.8 million. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The figure here doesn’t reflect the proposed permit or security as proposed 
in the March budget. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Would that be the total, or would there be work at Moose Jaw that would 
be included in that as well? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — This figure reflects our forecast and as you are aware, with the construction 
strike on for this summer, a lot of the work that was to be done didn’t get  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1860 

done. 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — This doesn’t reflect then any projects cancelled at the Valley View 
institution in Moose Jaw, for example, construction of different types of fire escapes and that type of 
thing? 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, any programs that were identified for Valley View were carried out. 

Item 8 agreed to. 

Item 9 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have one question that is a standard question of all ministers. Do you have 
any plans to hire a press agent or a public relations agent who would work with you? 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Not at this time. 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are you considering hiring such a person? 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Not at this time. 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — You keep saying “at this time.” 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I might change my mind and decide I would like to have a press officer. I 
don’t see a need for it at this time. 

Item 9 agreed to. 

Item 10 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, would the minister send me a list — you mentioned a 
number of them but I didn’t get them all written down — would you send me a list of the projects, 
locations, and the value of the projects for the $5 million? 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We would be more than pleased to. 

Item 10 agreed to. 

Vote 14 agreed to. 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

GOVERNMENT SERVICES 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Vote 14 

Items 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 

Item 6 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — I just want to re-ask a question I asked earlier. This sum does not contain 
funds for a sod turning before the end of the fiscal year? 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Not to my knowledge. 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1861 

Item 6 agreed to 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, just a final note on this. It’s hard to believe that in the 
minister’s own riding and in our beautiful part of the country in southwest Saskatchewan that we have 
lost a major development in the Cypress Hills Park. We had anticipated a $10 million expansion of 
Cypress Hills which would have included such facilities as a 37-room hotel, a snow machine and a ski 
life. We find now that this project is not going ahead. It would not only have served as a destination for 
many Saskatchewan residents, but also created a large number of jobs in the Swift Current area which is 
presently experiencing about 100 per cent increase in people looking for work at the Canada Manpower 
Centre in Swift Current. 
 
I just want to make the point, as a member from that part of the province, the disappointment that is 
expressed in the lack of the $3 million which had been in the budget before. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s, as I indicated before, gone to tourism, and I might add for the members 
of this House that the people in my riding do want to see Cypress Hills developed. But no one was too 
keen on having a $5.6 million 37-room lodge. What the people of my area would like to see that money 
go toward is a new golf course and a snow machine and a new pool. We take the view on this side of the 
House that we are going to increase the recreation facilities at Cypress before we would even consider 
building a $5.6 million lodge. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask the minister: is she giving us a commitment 
here that there will be a pool and a snow machine and a ski lift in place at Cypress in this fiscal year? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can’t give a commitment for tourism at all. 
 
Item 8 agreed to 
 
Vote 14 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

GOVERNMENT SERVICES 
 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 13 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 6 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1862 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, actually it’s on no. 5 but if the minister wouldn’t mind, I 
would like to have included in the list that she was sending for the Regina west district the $70,000 as 
well for this project or increase. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Agreed. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Vote 13 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

LABOR 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 20 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the Minister of Labor introduce his officials. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to introduce to the Chamber Mr. Peter Grady, 
the acting deputy minister, Pat More, director of administration, Merran Twigg, director of women’s 
division, Don Goss, policy and planning — Don’s at the back — and Mans Crozier, director of 
pensions. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I want to ask a question or two about the 
operations of the minimum wage board, but they may deal with some other agencies so I will ask them 
on the admin vote here. Have you received a recommendation for an increase in minimum wage from 
the minimum wage board? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, I advised a member during question period that we are 
preparing some recommendations for cabinet now and will be looking at that package and those 
recommendations in the next week or two. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, is it true that you have received a 
recommendation from the minimum wage board more than three months ago? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It would be two to three months ago, yes. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — There’s a series of questions we’re asking all ministers. It is the name, 
salary, length of your deputy minister, any contractual benefits which may be accrued to him in addition 
to his salary — any perks, as we call them. You may supply this in writing if you choose. I don’t 
particularly need this orally, but I would like this information ready — his salary, any other contractual 
benefits which may accrue to him in addition to the salary and in addition to the vehicle with which 
deputy ministers are traditionally supplied. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The answer is no, that he is just on a basic salary, and we have a list of the 
salaries of the people in my department that I could send over for you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay, why don’t you send them over there? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1863 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — May I introduce one of my people, Mr. John Alderman, the inspector of 
mines and with the occupation health division. Sorry, John. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I will be asking for the same information for your personal staff, Mr. 
Minister. Again, every minister has been asked for it. Most have had it in writing. I assume you probably 
do and I assume you will send it over. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, that’s right. We have it for our staff in the legislature here. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — With respect to your policy, planning and research branch, are there any 
positions vacant in this branch? For your information, I will also be asking if there are any vacant 
positions or any such positions that have been frozen. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have four vacancies in the policy planning area at the present time and 
none of the positions are actually frozen, if we feel the need to fill them. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do you have any positions which are frozen in your department? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, there are not. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are there any plans to expand or contract the operations of policy, planning 
and research? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — To answer your question before, there are some frozen positions in the 
branch but not in the department. Or vice-versa, pardon me. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You don’t have the information readily available so you may supply it in 
writing. I see your deputy nodding his head, so perhaps you want to supply in writing a list of the 
positions which are frozen. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, we have the list of the positions that are frozen. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are there any plans to expand or contract the operations of policy, planning 
and research? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Right at the present time, no. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What were the reasons for the dismissal of the former deputy minister? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The former deputy minister was on secondment from the Saskatchewan 
potash corporation and he would have been going back to the corporation within a few more months so 
we made the move now. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, let me rephrase the question. Was the choice his to leave at the time? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I will ask you the same question with respect to Mr. Sass. Why was Mr. Sass 
dismissed? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1864 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — We felt that the executive directors level of people that we released was not 
required. We wanted to make some organizational changes to the department and we decided to let that 
group of people go. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, have you abolished his position? Is that what you’re saying? You don’t 
need his position? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: —No, the position hasn’t been abolished but it’s not going to be an executive 
director’s position when we fill it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, what is it going to be then? What is it going to be? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Specifically, Mr. Sass’s position was an associate deputy minister and we 
are not intending to fill that position. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Why, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We are looking at restructuring the entire department, and there’s going to 
be some changes made. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Was Mr. Sass given the option of remaining in the department and of 
continuing to work with the occupational health program? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Will Mr. Sass be working in it? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Was he given the option of continuing to work in the department with the 
occupational health and safety? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, he was not. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Why not? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Because I want to have a group of people who are with me that I can have 
confidence in, in carrying out our wishes. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Would you feel that Mr. Sass was against you? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — All I can say, sir, is that when you’re putting a team together there are 
professionals, but there are professionals who could sell a General Motors car, and there are 
professionals who could sell a lot of cars. I wanted the person who was going to work with me on the 
things that we wanted to work on. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Did you feel that Mr. Sass couldn’t sell occupational health and safety? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — He could sell occupational health and safety, certainly, but there are lots of 
other people who could sell occupational health and safety also. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Would you just be specific and explain to me the particular shortcomings in 
Mr. Sass that resulted in your feeling that you couldn’t work with him? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I have known Mr. Sass for some time, and the people in the  



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1865 

executive directors group and the associate deputy minister I felt would not fit into the plans that I had 
as a Minister of Labor. I wanted to get my own people in, just as the former Minister of Government 
Services was saying, we wanted to have our own people in place. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — There was no other reason, just a desire by you to have your own people? 
There was no other reason for it than that? He exhibited no shortcomings in the position that you can 
name for me. He discharged his duties in an exemplary fashion. You just wanted your own man. Is that 
what you’re telling me? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, it is. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You’re telling me that you brought the career of a dedicated public servant to 
an end who had performed (and you just finished saying this) his duties in an exemplary fashion, 
because you wanted your own man. Is that what you are telling this House? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — There are people that I can get into place who are going to carry out the 
wishes of the department as well, if not better, than the people who were there before. We have no 
intention of hurting the occupational health department or any of the departments in the Department of 
Labor. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You’re admitting, Mr. Minister, that there was something personal between 
you and Mr. Sass. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, I’m not saying that. Another reason is, when I reviewed the records, I 
found out that he was outside of the province most of the time speaking to people from the Pacific to the 
Atlantic Ocean. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, did you ask him whether or not he was doing so with the consent of 
and on the instructions of his minister or deputy? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you complained 
that he was outside the province a good deal. Did you ask him whether or not he was doing so with the 
consent of and on the instructions of his superiors? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — All I know is that I have a list every month of the people that are travelling 
outside the province, and on checking that for the last several years, this is what we discovered. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Have you received any complaints from trade unions with respect to the 
dismissal of Mr. Sass? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, we had a number of letters from trade unions across the country. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Have you received any complaints from any employer groups with respect to 
the dismissal of Mr. Sass? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I can’t recall that many. There may have been one or two, but there was 
some that congratulated us for doing it, also. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, and isn’t that the reason why Mr. Sass was dismissed? It was because 
he was worshipped by the trade unions and in fact was despised by  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1866 

management. Isn’t that why he was dismissed? You felt he was just simply too pro-union for your style 
of government. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, that’s not true. We’ll take exception to that. That is not true 
whatsoever. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m going to leave it for the moment. I suspect I can continue to say that 
black is black and you can say that black is white. We may not agree upon the subject. I want to register, 
Mr. Minister, in the strongest possible terms my disapproval of the dismissal of that man. He had 
pioneered occupational health and safety in a fashion which had made this province the leader, and had 
saved the lives and the health of countless numbers of Saskatchewan workers. To have dismissed him 
for what I allege, Mr. Minister, are personal reasons . . . You said you didn’t want to work with him and 
I suspect that’s the truth. To have dismissed this man for personal reasons, a man who had done so much 
for the workers in Saskatchewan, is making a scant contribution to the labor field of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to ask you bout the . . . I’m not sure if I’ve asked you this. I think I did. Have you any plans for a 
public relations or a press officer in your office? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I already have one. It’s on the list. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have not had an opportunity to review this since we got it. Where on this 
list is the press officer listed? I’m sure it’s there. I just don’t see the words “press officer” on the list. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It’s the seventh one down on the list. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The seventh one down on my list is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
seventh name on my list is Cliff Magen. I’m surprised to hear that he’s your press officer, actually. I 
wonder if we could just save time if you could just give me the answer in writing. I don’t particularly 
need it orally. If you could just give me in writing his name and salary. 
 
I would like, Mr. Minister, from you an explanation for the delay in raising the minimum wage. I would 
like your explanation for the lengthy delay in increasing the minimum wage. As you know, the 
opposition has been very upset about it. I think that, in fact, we haven’t gone out of our way to conceal it 
from you. I would appreciate your explanation. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I’ve been getting a lot of letters and that from people around the province 
saying that we shouldn’t do it. They are afraid of the impact on the business community now with the 
recession the way it is. This is why we have been holding off, but that’s not saying that we will not act 
on it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, don’t those on minimum wage suffer from inflation the same as those 
who are above minimum wage? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I agree with you, but a job is better than no job at all. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: —Do you have any evidence, Mr. Minister, that an increase in the minimum 
wage results in a decrease in employment? Is there any evidence to support that theory? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1867 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have had letters from business saying that if the minimum wage goes 
up they’ll have to lay off one more person. I’ve had quite a number of letters from businesses saying that 
if the minimum wage goes up they will have to lay off one more person; quite a number of letters stating 
that and with some of the statistics that we are hearing, it is truly a fact. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The province for many years, for some years, has had the highest minimum 
wage in Canada, and we have had the lowest unemployment rate in Canada, and I wonder if that 
suggests anything to the minister opposite. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well, that’s why we don’t need to change. We’ll leave it the same. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I suspect, Mr. Minister, I should give you high marks for integrity, 
because I suspect that is the honest answer. It has nothing to do with saving jobs. It has to do with the 
fact that you believe the minimum wage is now too high and you’re waiting for events and inflation to 
catch up. And I want to congratulate the minister on a candid answer because I suspect he just gave me 
the real reason why you haven’t increased it. You think it’s too high as it is. 
 
I had better get on to a suggestion that I think was made for the Minister of Labor. I think it was a good 
one and I want your reaction to it. Those involved in dealing with the labor relations board, by and large 
the legal profession, have suggested that decisions of the labor relations board should be published and 
indexed so that they are available to members of the legal profession the same as the decisions of court 
are. I saw the suggestion made to the Minister of Labor, I think it was at the annual meeting of the Law 
Society of Saskatchewan. I wonder if this idea has been considered and if you have any reaction to it. It 
would make the work of lawyers dealing with the labor relations board so much better, and I think it 
would improve the law relating to labor law in Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We haven’t had a submission to our office at this time but it’s something 
that we would consider. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I put it no harder than that. I wish the department would consider it. I 
don’t think it would be costly and it was requested by the Law Society of Saskatchewan and it would 
make quite a contribution to the development of labor law in this province. It’s a highly esoteric topic 
that I don’t expect is going to start rioting in the streets, but I wish that the department would seriously 
consider it. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, I’m led to believe that there are decisions. There are 
volumes 1 and 2 out now on decisions, and volume 3 is close to being available. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Let me just ask you, Mr. Minister. Are they published on a regular basis, 
annually, biannually, or every six months, or are you publishing a compendium of the decisions to date, 
without any regular publishing schedule? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — What is being practised at the moment is that it’s 10-year volumes; ’44 to 
1954 is volume 1, and volume 2 is ’52 to ’64; volume 3 is up to ’75. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, what I was suggesting, was something a little more timely than that — 
periodic publishings at least once a year. My understanding is that that is  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1868 

now available from Alberta. And I raise that because I know your deputy minister’s background and I 
wonder if that’s been considered here? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well I’m aware that Alberta is doing it, but it’s from the private sector in 
Alberta. As I have said before, it will be considered. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t particularly like dwelling on such things, but they stand in sharp 
contrast to your treatment of minimum wage people. I wonder if you would give me the rate of 
remuneration of . . . I wonder if you would first of all give me the names of the chairman and the 
members of the labor relations board? Have one of the pages bring it over. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — There have been no changes to the board itself. The chairman is the only 
change. We’ll get that list for you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m going to use these figures publicly because I’m going to complain about 
it, Mr. Minister. Would you give me the rate of remuneration of the former incumbent? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The basic salary was $35,000. There is no change. The expenses were 
increased from $250 a day to $500 a day. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — How do you justify the 100 per cent increase in the per diem, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — That’s what we had to negotiate to get our new chairman. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Were there any alternatives who would have come at say, let’s pick a figure 
out of the air, an increase consisting of 1 per cent less than inflation? Was there anybody in the province 
who would take it at a time less than that? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We had a number of people who we had asked and they were considerably 
higher than that. We couldn’t even talk to them, what they were asking for was so high. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I did a calculation, Mr. Minister. Assuming the board sits the same 
number of days this year as last year, it comes to about $70,000 for a part-time job. I would have 
thought that you could have found someone who would take a part-time job at something less than 
$70,000. For a part-time job 77 days a year, which is I understand the number of days the last board sat, 
that comes to $70,000 a year. I am surprised that that’s the cheapest you can get yourself a chairman. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The number of days, Mr. Member, are considerably higher than that. They 
usually sit two weeks a month. Then there is the writing of all the decisions and judgments. I can get the 
numbers of last year’s hearings and give that to you also. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You certainly got a willing buyer there. I would like to know the number of 
days the former chairman was paid for. I had assumed, I guess in error, that the former chairman was 
paid only for sitting days, that preparation and travelling time came out of the $35,000. I now understand 
from what you say that that isn’t so. Is he paid the $500 for every day he works as distinct from every 
day he sits? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The previous chairman got travel and expense allowance on  



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1869 

top of the $35,000 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Paid $200 a day for travelling time and $200 for preparatory time and for 
writing judgments? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, the 250 days was for sitting time, and the expenses covered the other. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — 250 days? Is that how many days the chairman is paid for? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — $250 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Ah, you said 250 days. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order! Order! Would the minister answer from his feet, please. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — That was $250 per sitting day. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The minister will confirm he’s going to supply us with the number of days 
and the amount, is that right? One final question. Since you had so much trouble getting someone who 
would do this, who would try to keep body and soul together on less than $70,000, did you consider 
sticking with the former chairman, who was doing it at a lot less than this? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No. Mr. Sherstobitoff came to see me shortly after us taking over and 
suggested that possibly he would step aside. We didn’t do it immediately, but five months, six months 
later, we did. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, let’s be honest. I don’t think I would know Mr. Sherstobitoff if I saw 
him in a crowd of 30 people, so I haven’t had a conversation with him. But I have this abiding suspicion 
that what he did was come to you and say, “Listen, Mr. Minister, if you can’t work with me, then I will 
go.” And you said in words to the effect, “Well, thank you. I appreciate that. Go.” Is that not in fact what 
happened? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — In fact, it isn’t. What I said to him was, “Business as usual.” 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — And did he resign? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No. Three or four months later we decided that we would make the change 
of the chairman. That’s when we contacted him. 
\ 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Since you got so completely taken to the cleaners with the finding of a new 
chairman, did you consider asking the old one to stay on, who was doing it at a more reasonable price? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I don’t believe we got taken to the cleaners with the price that we’re paying 
for the present chairman. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to get on to what I consider . . . I have a couple more trifling 
questions, then I want to get onto another issue that I consider with some seriousness. Occupational 
health council. Any change in the membership? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The occupational health council, all the appointments have  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1870 

expired and we will be working on setting up a new board very shortly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — So you don’t now have an occupational health board. I guess it is they call it. 
Is that what you’re telling me? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Till term is run out. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — And what was their term? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — My understanding, one-year terms. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Would you, in addition, when you respond with respect to the former 
chairman’s pay . . . Let me be clear. I see a wrinkled brow above the glasses of your deputy minister, so 
let me be clear about what I’m asking. I want to know what the former member was paid (and I know 
that was $250 a day); I want to know the terms under which it was paid; and I want to know what the 
total amount was, so that I may make my comparison between that and what the former person is paid. 
By the same token, I want to know the contract — I guess it would be a contract — with the new 
chairman. Under what conditions is the per diem paid, of $500? I just would like your undertaking that 
you’ll supply that information. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, we’ll get that information for you. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — I gave notice to the minister and the opposition critic that I had one question. It 
goes back to my days in the opposition. I’d like it on the record, that’s why I’m asking the question on 
my feet. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I indicated to you earlier, could you tell me who is now responsible for the inspections 
in northern Saskatchewan at the uranium mines? I know the province was for years, and then the feds all 
of a sudden came in and there was a big dispute. Has it been settled and who’s doing it now? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — There was some discussion between the federal and provincial 
governments. We believe that it should be the provincial responsibility to do the inspections of the 
mines, and, in the meantime, we have agreed to continue their act as federal agents, as we have for the 
last two years. This leads to increased efficiency as we have some obligations to monitor uranium mines 
as proposed by the Cluff Lake inquiry board. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Just a supplementary. So we are still doing it, Mr. Minister, and that’s the way we 
hope to leave it. Correct? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, we are, and we hope it continues that way. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I wanted to ask you, Mr. Minister, about the women’s division. That’s a 
reduction in expenditures in the women’s division. I wanted to ask you what you were reducing 
expenditures on particularly. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It’s my understanding, Mr. Member, that last year the affirmative action 
budget was underspent by more than $200,000, because the program was not fully developed and did 
not include in-scope personnel. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, is the program fully developed now? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1871 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — We are working on that program now, and it is not fully developed as yet. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, could we have some sort of indication, Mr. Minister, as to when you 
think this program might be fully developed? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I’ll let you know in due course. As I say, we’re working on that program. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Let me ask you a question, Mr. Minister. Are you satisfied with the progress 
that we’re making with respect to women in the public service? Are you satisfied that we’re promoting 
enough women to enough senior positions. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well, we took a count the other day and I’m pleased to say that we’ve got 
considerably more women working in our government departments than the previous administration 
had. I just noticed in the labor statistics that there are 6,000 to 8,000 more women working in the 
workforce right now. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have no complaints about the number of women in the workforce. My 
complaint is with respect to the average salary which those women work. I don’t have the figures with 
me, but I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that the salary of the average female employee in the government 
is a great deal less than the average salary of the male working in the public service. Am I correct that 
the responsibility of your women’s division is to promote and seek the advancement of women in the 
public service, or do they extend to the private sector as well? Do their responsibilities extend to 
programs which might promote the advancement of women in the private sector? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Sure, it’s our desire to promote women within the public and the private 
sectors and that will be in our affirmative action programs that we are working on. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m not being combative, Mr. Minister. At the moment, I’m seeking 
information. Does your women’s division have responsibility to promote women in the private 
workforce as well as the public sector? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Sure, we do a lot of work in both areas. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — And do I understand the minister to say that he is satisfied with the progress 
we’re making in this regard? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, I think it could be improved. Part of the problem is of course the 
slowdown of the economy right now. I would like to remind the member opposite that I like women, in 
fact I am married to one, and I am certainly not going to jeopardize women in the workforce whether it 
is public or private. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — This may come as a stunning surprise to the Minister of Labor, but not 
everybody who is married to a woman in fact seeks to promote women in the workplace. It may come as 
quite a surprise, but there are some who are married who have not been very diligent in the area. If you 
are not satisfied with the progress we are making, why are we taking so long to develop the program? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well, we’re working at developing a program, and we’ve had to  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1872 

have some budgetary cuts in all our departments in the Department of Labor. We are doing our part to 
try and contribute to coping with the slowdown of the economy, but as soon as it picks up we will 
certainly be getting more active in that area. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I missed your last sentence. What event is it we are awaiting before we 
become more active with the women’s division? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I said we are becoming more active now but we’ve had to cut back in a lot 
of areas in the department, and the women’s division is one of them. As soon as we have some upturn in 
the economy, we are going to be spending extra dollars in that area. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Apart from the grants to organizations, agencies, institutions concerned with 
labor policy, what other subvotes in your budget are cut back besides the women’s division? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We didn’t hear your question. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You said you are cutting back all over. I don’t have the access to the 
information you do, Mr. Minister, but I’ve run quickly through your estimates, and I’m having some 
trouble finding those other subvotes that you cut back in. It seems the one you cut back in was women, 
and I may say you are not going to be singled out for this type of complaint. My learned friend had some 
vivid language to describe your treatment of women and children. We will be getting to the social 
service estimates presumably in due course. But I am just wondering where else you have cut back. 
What other subvote did you cut back in besides women’s division? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have cut back in pension benefits and the other expenses in the pension 
benefits. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I should have guessed — the old people. Well, apart from the women and the 
aged, are there any others who aren’t your priority? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I suppose I am getting a little mixed up in our ’83-84 estimates. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Sorry, there was so much laughter from this side of the Chamber that I 
couldn’t hear your answer. Would you repeat it please? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I just said that maybe I’m getting a little mixed up with our ’83-84; 
estimates we’re doing that now also. But the two major areas are the women and the pensions in the 
present estimates. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I don’t know where to take this line of questioning. You’ve been so 
distressingly candid that I am thunderstruck. I do want to congratulate the minister for being candid . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Well, the one old one is gone, may I say to the member for Rosthern, the old one is gone. We now have 
a candid minister who admits that women and the aged are the groups he cuts back on. I wonder, Mr. 
Minister, if you want to take a crack at trying to justify that? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We are not cutting back on the aged. I’m taking about the other expenses in 
the pension area. The women’s area — I told you why the figures are less  



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1873 

because we had an over, an underspending of the $200,000, which is showing up here. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The hill; we’re going around and around and around. I started 10 minutes 
ago asking you why the program wasn’t fully developed. You were candid enough to tell me that it was 
a budget cut and you’d cut back all over. So I asked you where else you’ve cut back. It turned out it was 
the aged who had suffered this similar generosity. And I wonder how you justify making your cuts. 
Let’s leave the aged out of it for a minute. I don’t quite intend to get into that but I may. 
 
How do you justify cutting back on the women’s division when you admit there is a very serious 
problem with the position that women occupy in the labor force? It’s just simply a scandal in western 
society that women are paid what they are. I think the minister has too many brains to admit that in front 
of a mike. So I don’t expect that answer, I may say. But if you would just explain to me why you chose 
to cut in the women’s area — was it because you didn’t think you had any problem there to be solved? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — There was no real money cutback in the women’s division. We had the 
extra money from the over, the underspending from before. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Minister, you told me a moment ago that you cut back in this area 
because of budgetary restraint. I suspect that’s accurate. I was a minister myself. I know the problem. 
You don’t get everything you ask for. So you’ve got to cut back in some areas. And you did. You made 
those hard decision a minister has to make together with his deputy. I just wonder why you chose the 
women’s division to cut back in. Why not cut back in some other area but that segment of the work 
force which is paid the poorest? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I am advised that we have not cut back this year. We are still providing the 
services. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — There’s little point in you and I getting into a hair-pulling session. Mr. 
Minister, I don’t think you’re going at it nearly as fast as you could and I don’t think you’re proceeding 
with this program with nearly the vigor that the problem deserves And I think you have been candid 
enough to admit, this evening, that when you chose the areas to cut you chose the women’s division. I 
asked you for the other people who are being similarly over rewarded economically and we chose the 
aged. Let me just deal with the aged for a moment. How is it that we decided to cut back on pensions? 
Do we think the aged in our society are overrewarded? Are they just living too high off the hog? Is that 
why we’re cutting back on pensions? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have not cut back on pensions. Decreases are directly or indirectly 
related to the branch’s reduction in activity associated with the pension reform issues. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Oh, is that no longer something your department’s going to be pursuing, 
pension reform? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — On the contrary. We’re going to be doing more of it in the very near future. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What are you doing it with, the staff of the women’s division that you’re 
cutting back? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1874 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — We’ll be able to do it. I’ve just had memos come in the last couple of days 
on getting into the reform side. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Let me guess. You’re going to use your public relations officer to do all the 
work. 
 
I want to deal with some more mundane topics for a moment. The fire commissioner’s office: how many 
plans have you received and how many have you approved? How many have you approved with 
modification? How many of those plans have you rejected? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We’ll have to get that information for you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — If the member will bear with me for a moment while I find the page in the 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. Why doesn’t someone else with some questions go ahead? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I have a couple of questions, one of 
which I was just leading up to earlier. On July 6 you told this House, Mr. Minister, that we’re already 
doing quite a bit to help the minimum wage by reducing the gas tax and the mortgage interest reduction 
program. The minister will be aware that when you failed to raise the minimum wage by 25 cents on 
July 1, and when you failed to raise the minimum wage by an additional 25 cents on January 1 
upcoming, you cause a loss to an average minimum wage earner, who works approaching 40 hours a 
week, of about $1,000 a year. And you will be aware, I think, that with an ordinary compact car, in order 
to get $1,000 a year back on the cut in the gas tax, someone is gong to have to drive something more 
than 100,000 kilometres a year. Now not many of the minimum wage recipients in my constituency 
drive 100,000 kilometres a year, remarkably few of them. 
 
What I am asking is: can you give us any indication of when you will be able to announce an increase in 
the minimum wage, and will it take into account the fact that one year will have elapsed? And, even a 10 
per cent increase — and over the period of the last year I think the cost of living, particularly for people 
in the minimum wage level will have gone up 10 per cent — would indicate an increase of the order of 
45 cents. Can you give us a date and some indication of the level of the increase? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — No, I can’t give you any date, and I can’t give you any level of the increase 
at this time. But we’re talking it to our cabinet, and I might add that there are other factors. We raised 
the rental rebate for renters this year and with the gas and the mortgage it adds up to quite a few cents. 
And we’re the king in Canada right now. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, in light of the fact that the minister is 
unwilling or unable to give us any additional information on that subject, may I simply urge him to give 
this matter sympathetic consideration since these people have suffered, at least in relative terms, a 
substantial loss in their income compared with your income, sir, and mine, as we vote to increase our 
own pay by . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, we’re still MLAs, notwithstanding, and we’re getting 6.5 
per cent on perhaps $29,000 or whatever the figure is. I haven’t quite calculated it out, but it’s a good 
deal more than 25 cents on minimum wage, I know that. And I need it less and, with all deference to the 
minister, he needs it less. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1875 

I want to turn to another subject and ask the minister whether or not he is giving any request from the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association or from the Minister of Urban Affairs to attempt to 
define essential services, and to consider any special legislative treatment for essential services as has 
been requested from time to time by regional meetings of Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I suppose the answer is that we’re looking at all aspects of The Trade 
Union Act. Yes, we have had letters from SUMA; we’ve had letters from other associations as well. But, 
as I say, we’re not making any decisions at this time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, you indicate that you’re not making any decision on this 
matter of essential services at this time. Are you in a position to indicate when any decisions will be 
announced with respect to that? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — With regards to essential services, no, not at this time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, one further question. On November 20 
in this House, you declined to give assurances that no right-to-work legislation would be introduced. 
You indicated at that time that you would not give any assurances “until all briefs are in” was the quote, 
referring to briefs in respect of revisions to labor legislation, which briefs you were evidently soliciting 
at that time. Will you now give the House assurance that no right-to-work legislation will be introduced 
by your government within the next six months, let us put it that way? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, I can’t give that assurance at this time. We’re still reviewing all the 
options. I’ve had union leaders come in to see me. They’re telling me that there’s still not enough teeth 
in the act yet, and it goes across the whole gamut to right-to-work. We’re still listening to all the groups 
that are presenting briefs and coming in to see us, including union leaders and business. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Let me get this very clear, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister. You have no 
excluded the possibility of right-to-work legislation in the next six months. That’s what I’m asking you. 
I’m asking you to exclude that possibility, and I understand you to say no. Did I understand that 
correctly? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, I’m saying no, and that covers all areas of The Trade Union Act, not 
just right-to-work. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I wanted to deal with one of your other notable achievements, Mr. Minister, 
and that was the creation of 11,000 jobs. The claim was made to one of your more appreciative 
audiences, the federation of labor, and I’m sure you remember the comment. You still stand by that 
comment that this government has created 11,000 jobs? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — At that particular time the answer is yet. We had 466,000 people in the 
workforce now. On April 17, when you people were still in government, there was 455,000 people with 
the unemployment rate the same. So that tells me there were 11,000 more people working. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, is there just the remotest possibility that some of those jobs 
might have been seasonal adjustments in the economy? Does that possibility exist at all? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1876 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Would the member repeat the last question? We were talking here. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just wondered if there was the remotest possibility that any part of those 
11,000 jobs might have been a seasonal adjustment in the economy? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I think that a lot of the 11,000 jobs were the extra construction starts we 
have this fall. There has been . . . All I can go by is StatsCanada. We’re using the same book. I used the 
same book when I referred to April 17. I’m not jumping around with different books, it’s the same 
figure. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, your success was fleeting, because there are now 5,000 fewer people 
employed in Saskatchewan than there were a year ago. Does that suggest that your success was 
somewhat fleeting in creating jobs? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I am not aware that they are 5,000. Could you give me those figures? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I’m going by an article in the Leader-Post, another appreciative article 
on your speech. It says that the labor force in September last year, after the kids had gone back to school 
— this is the labor force — was 462,000. In September it’s 467,000, an increase of 5,000. But the 
number employed, however, has dropped from 444,000 to 439,000, a loss of 5,000 jobs. Does that 
suggest your success was just a bit fleeting in creating jobs? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: —That doesn’t sound like the same book that I was reading (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Minister, would you tell me at this point in time how many jobs 
you’re taking credit for? Is it still 11,000 jobs? Is that still the number, or has there been a new book? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I have some new figures for up to November. We still have more jobs 
created, but they have dropped. It’s not 11,000 anymore, after the school students went back. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want to ask some questions for 
information, particularly with respect to your pension policy, and whether or not you have adopted a 
different pension policy. The previous government believed strongly in improving pensions, and 
improving pensions based upon an improvement of the Canada Pension Plan or possibly a provincial 
pension plan, something based upon an improvement of universal or semi-universal plans. Is it your 
policy to pursue those avenues or are your adopting the position which has been promoted, let us say, by 
the Government of Ontario, suggesting that what was needed was a considerable expansion of private 
pension plans? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We are not excluding any options at the present time. The Canada Pension 
Plan is one of the areas that we want to investigate. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1877 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, a newspaper report indicated that the 
premier in a speech in Winnipeg advocated or at least favored a change to make the Canada Pension 
Plan voluntary. Is that the policy of your department? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, it’s not our policy. The premier was raising concerns on the fact that 
the Canada Pension Plan was not being fully funded. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — That raises another question, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister. Is it the 
policy of your department and your government to advocate the full funding of the Canada Pension 
Plan. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: —The answer is no. Any amendments or any increases, we would want to feel 
that those would be fully funded. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I wanted to ask you about the branch of your department which has the 
conciliators. I think that’s industrial relations. I’m not sure. I see your deputy is nodding his head. Are 
there any positions vacant in this branch? If so, how many? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have three vacancies at the present time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The vacancies are conciliators themselves? How many are administrative 
staff? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Two of the vacancies are conciliators. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Have the number of work stoppages and the number of industrial disputes 
gone up or down since you assumed office? This year versus last year, have the number of work 
stoppages and industrial disputes gone up or down? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We don’t have the exact figures. We can get that information for you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I suggest to you that they’re gone up fairly dramatically. My question to the 
minister is: how are you coping with reduced staff? You’ve got a reduced number of conciliators and yet 
you have more labor disputes this year than last. I’m not necessarily suggesting that you went out with 
the intention of creating them all, but I’m wondering how you’re coping with this reduced staff. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have advertised for conciliators and we have just today talked to two 
people. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Borrowing staff, I suppose, from the women’s division and the pension 
division to assist you there. Workers’ advocates — how many vacancies do you have in workers’ 
advocates? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have two vacancies in workers’ advocates. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — How many of those are workers’ advocates themselves? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Two. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Has the number of requests for their services gone up or down or remained 
static? 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1878 

 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. King isn’t with me tonight. We’ll get that information for you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — In fact, he is here. All right, while he’s getting downstairs, let me deal with 
another issue. I won’t be long about it. I trust I’m not being facetious. I started out to ask the Premier 
this question this morning. I just got nicely started when the Speaker ruled it was 10:30. I want to put the 
same series of questions to you. It has to do with unemployment. I think we can agree in a more serious 
vein, Mr. Minister, that the unemployment rate in this province is up, and it’s up very substantially; it is 
double what it was last year. I asked the Premier what was being urged or presented at the conference of 
finance ministers to deal with this problem, which is admittedly not isolated to Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well, I’m not sure what the Premier will be saying at the first ministers’ 
conference. He hasn’t talked to me about that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m sorry. My attention was distracted through no fault of yours. What was 
your answer? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I was saying that the Premier hasn’t discussed what he’s going to be 
discussing at the first ministers’ conference. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I was inquiring about the finance ministers’ conference. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — They have not consulted me. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do you know if they’re suggesting a public works program, something that 
wouldn’t be dwarfed by your own social services payment? Are they suggesting a public works 
program? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well, we’re entering into the make-work program. Our department hasn’t 
been involved with social services or the Department of Finance except as far as the promotion of the 
plan. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that that program is just so small. It’s just so 
paltry, it’s laughable. It’s dwarfed by your own social services payments — it’s a fraction. What you’re 
spending on that job creation program is a fraction of what you’re spending on social services. As my 
colleague from Shaunavon has said, it pains to point out repeatedly. 
 
Is the Minister of Finance of this province urging at the conference any more substantial program of 
public works for this country? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I can’t tell you. I haven’t been in contact with the Minister of Finance. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — If I may say, I find it just amazing that the finance minister would have gone 
to a conference to deal with an economic situation, the most severe portion of which is unemployment, 
and the Minister of Labor was never consulted as to what should be suggested at the conference. I find 
that a surprising way to run a government . . . Mr. King is . . . Yes, he’s here. Perhaps I could have the 
answers to my questions? 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1879 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — The workers’ compensation board doesn’t keep track of the statistics of the 
claimants. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Does your official have an estimate as to whether the number of claims have 
increased dramatically? Decreased dramatically? Stayed about the same? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, he advises that it has pretty well stayed constant this year. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — How are you coping with two less advocates? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have been advertising for a workers’ advocate. We have a short list at 
the present time. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, a couple of short questions. Could the minister inform us as 
to number of people and the names of individuals who have been dismissed, either OC or otherwise, 
since May 8, in the department? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — There have been eight OCs dismissed. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Could the minister give me the names of the individuals, and you’re saying 
there were eight OCs cancelled? Any others in the department that were not OC appointments.? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, there haven’t been. You have the list. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, you have been indicating that you were considering having a wage 
differential, a minimum wage differential. That is for teen-agers entering the workplace, and I know that 
you were advertising for submission. I’d like to know whether the minister has a position, whether or 
not he is going to implement a wage differential as Ronald Reagan is considering in the United States. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have asked the minimum wage board, in their ads, to asks for all the 
various options to do with the minimum wage, as a lot of . . . Almost every province and the federal all 
across Canada do have it. But we have not taken a position on that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Can the minister indicate when we are likely to get a decision in respect to this? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I think I’ve answered that question several times this evening. We are 
getting a recommendation ready now to go to cabinet, and it’ll be up to my cabinet colleagues to decide 
on the route that we’re going to go with the minimum wage. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, you indicated that eight persons hired by 
OCs were dismissed. Was one or more of them a conciliation officer? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — There was one conciliator released in the OCs. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Was that some time ago and has he been replaced? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, it was some time ago but he hasn’t been replaced. This is  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1880 

one of the two that we’ve been talking to today. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could tell us what was the urgency to 
dispense with his services when you couldn’t get a replacement, as is evidenced by the fact that you’ve 
had a vacancy there for several months. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It’s just been the workload, I suppose, over the last several months. We 
wanted to get our ads out and have a good look at what was around the country and we’re getting to that 
point now where we are down to two people that we have interviewed. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — For how long have you been without a conciliator because you dispensed 
with the services of a conciliator before having anyone to put in his place, or her place? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I’ll get that date for you. We don’t have it with us. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — You’ve indicated that eight persons hired on OCs were dismissed. Were 
any of those workers’ advocates? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, there were two. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, there are or were four workers’ advocates. You dismissed 
two. For how long has there been a vacancy of two workers’ advocates? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: —It would be the same answers of the information that we will get for you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, is it not true that you have had vacancies 
there for upward of five months? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It could be about four, depending on the date that we advise you of. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, once again, what was the urgency of 
getting rid of those two workers’ advocates when you didn’t have anyone else to put in their place and 
thereby cutting in half the services available to injured workmen. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I’ve said earlier that we were wanting to get some of our own people in 
some of those positions in the Department of Labor. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, you don’t get any of your own persons 
into any position by firing someone, but only by hiring someone. If you wanted to hire your own people, 
given that, given this idea that you couldn’t have a workers’ advocate that isn’t your own (why I’ll never 
know), whatever that may mean, even if you did, why didn’t you hire your own person first, so that 
there wouldn’t be a break in service, and so that you wouldn’t leave injured workmen with only half the 
available services for a period of four or five months? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We’ve managed to carry on with the two. I realize that it’s been an extra 
load, but we have been working on it: we’ve got the advertising out, we’ve got the short list now. Those 
two paid positions will be filled very, very shortly. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1881 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, of course you have managed, because 
it’s the injured workmen who suffer and not the minister. The short question is whether the injured 
workmen have managed. My information is that there is a very considerable backlog in providing 
services to injured workmen and this, in fact, arises from the fact that you were in great haste to fire two 
people, and in no great haste to put as you call them, your own people in to replace them. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — You are prejudging, because certainly, we’ve had an increase of people 
coming in. I suppose, because we are a new government, they’re coming in trying again. We have had a 
backlog of that, but I don’t think that a lot of workers had suffered because of that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, there was a time when there were no 
workers’ advocates and you could then say probably that no workmen suffered. As it turned out, when 
there were workers’ advocates, a very considerable improvement in the service available to injured 
workmen resulted. Anyone who was an MLA here in the early 1970s when there weren’t workers’ 
advocates, and knew how many cases were brought to MLAs and how that system was effectively 
improved by having workers’ advocates, wouldn’t in any way denigrate the value of workers’ advocates. 
 
I want to now turn to some other aspects of the workers’ compensation board. Have there been any 
changes in the membership of the board? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, there have been no changes in the make-up of the board. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, are any changes contemplated in the 
membership of the board in the next immediate future? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Two of the members of the board are asking to be replaced. They are 
wanting to retire. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, would you advise which members are 
asking to be replaced and wish to retire? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It’s Mr. Elkin and a Mr. Bourne. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, Mr. Elkin will be what is known as the 
employee representative and Mr. Bourne will be what is known as the employer representative, I don’t 
know whether formally or informally. May I ask whether, in replacing Mr. Elkin, it is the intention of 
the government to follow the practice which has been followed on a good many occasions in the past 
and consult the Saskatchewan Federation of Labor. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Yes, I can give you that assurance, and also the building trades. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, with respect to the third member of the 
board, the chairman, are there any proposals to replace the chairman? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We are talking to the chairman at this point in time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, are your conversations  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1882 

designed to extract from the chairman a resignation, or are they designed to encourage him to continue 
the valuable work which he has rendered to the people of Saskatchewan and to injured workmen in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We are not asking for his resignation. He can work out his contract if he so 
wishes with us. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I’m delighted to hear that since it has 
been my experience in dealing with both employers and employees throughout the province that there’s 
a great deal of confidence in the current chairman. If the minister is in any doubt about that, I invite him 
to consult with employer groups. He may know a Mr. Malinowski from the constituency of Yorkton, 
who has to me expressed confidence, on another occasion in quite a different context, in the current 
chairman. I commend to the minister the current chairman. Is he able to give us any indication of who 
the likely replacement for the employer representative on the board will be? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No, we haven’t looked at either board member as far as replacements. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Just one additional issue. It has to do with accessibility. It’s an issue, Mr. 
Minister, which we’ve all motherhooding. We’re all for the handicapped, and our society wants to do 
everything for them. I’m just wondering if we’re ever going to get started doing something concrete. We 
sat on the treasury benches, we’ve moved a bill which would guarantee, in rough terms, handicapped 
accessi . . . accessibil . . . accessi . . .that the new buildings would be accessible — I’ll try that way. A 
hard way to say a relatively easy thing. 
 
That was aborted by the election and now the same bill has been standing in the name of the Minister of 
Social Services for some time. Can you tell me when we are going to stop motherhooding accessibility 
for the handicapped and start doing something about it? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have been meeting the last three weeks. We were in Saskatoon meeting 
with the accessibility committee group that were part of the report. One of the things that is holding us 
back right at the moment is the fact that we understand that the national or federal people are coming out 
with a new national amendment, or national code, and it’s our feeling that we should see that first before 
we make any changes of our own. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, you’re going to postpone the program. You’re going to 
postpone this beyond the life expectancy of this government, even given the most optimistic 
assumptions. The National Building Code is not expected immediately. I just got a letter. I may say, 
from your counterpart in B.C. They are considering revising theirs when the new National Building 
Code comes into effect, but I don’t expect that this week or this month and certainly not this year. Why 
can we not go with the bill which we have all agreed to in one form or another and then fine tune it 
when we see the National Building Code? I told the minister that I was minister of government services 
for some time and the revision to the National Building Code was ponderously slow. I wonder why we 
can’t go to the bill to which we have all agreed but have apparently  



 
December 16, 1982 

 
1883 

refused to take action when our feet are put to the fire. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Part of our problem is that some of the people who have presented briefs to 
that report, who are part of the committee, are not agreeing totally with the report. That was the reason 
that we went to Saskatoon to meet with the group. It’s our understanding that we have just got the 
federal amendments and if we are going to make changes in the code, it doesn’t seem proper to me to 
have Saskatchewan completely different or some different from Manitoba or Alberta. These people will 
be moving back and forth. If we can consolidate and get something that’s fairly standard across the 
country, to me that makes more sense than us making a bunch of changes and them not fitting in with 
our next door neighbor. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, if we go with the bill which I introduced and which stands in 
your colleague’s name, I can promise you that you’ll get every co-operation in getting that passed. I can 
also tell you that if there are changes to the National Building Code which are designed to improve 
accessibility for the handicapped, you’ll get every co-operation in making those changes at that time. 
Why can’t we go now with the bill which I placed before the legislature, which is identical to that 
contained in most provinces, and would therefore meet the goal that you sought of having uniform 
legislation throughout this country? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It’s our feeling that we will have legislation ready for the spring sitting. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That’s my next question. Do we have a commitment that legislation will be 
introduced at the next session of this legislature? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I think I can make almost a guarantee on that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I must say that I’m pleased to hear that. If it is all satisfactory, you will get 
all the co-operation we are capable of mustering to get it through the House. I would be delighted to do 
everything I can to get some good accessibility legislation in this province. If you introduce it at the 
spring session, you will get nothing but co-operation from the opposition, providing it is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . You don’t have to introduce what I introduced. If the bill which you introduced meets 
with the general approval of those organizations which represent handicapped people, it will get our 
support and our co-operation. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I have just a short question. On the severance pay, the note 
that you sent over, there’s a total of 95,983 paid out so far. There are two other people who are still 
awaiting severance. Is that correct? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I understand there’s just one more to settle with. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, does the minister anticipate that the final settlement of the 
associate deputy minister will be forthcoming relatively quickly, like before the end of the year? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It was being negotiated between solicitors at this time. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1884 

Item 10 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I wonder if the minister would undertake to supply to me a list of those 
organizations which in the 1981-82 year received grants under subvote 10, and the amount that each 
received; those organizations for which money was budgeted in the March budget and the amount which 
you expected to give to each; and those organizations under this budget which are likely to share the 
largest of a budget reduced to one-sixth of its former size. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have the lists that we can pass over to you right now. 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

LABOR 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 20 
 
Items 1 to 4 agreed to 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — We’re at the end of the labor estimates. I want to take this opportunity to 
thank the minister for the honest way in which he answered the questions. I want to thank your officials 
as well for the assistance they have given us this evening. We very much appreciate this time they’ve 
spent here and the efforts they have put into preparing for these estimates, Mr. Minister. 
 
Just one additional comment. There may have been some confusion about that last question. What I got 
in writing was not what I asked for. It is late at this point in time; let’s leave it. You will see the verbatim 
tomorrow, and you can supply the information from the verbatim tomorrow because I think I asked the 
question in a precise fashion. If you look at the verbatim and supply that information, that’s all we need. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 11:05 p.m. 
 


