






















































Hansard: July 05, 1982


(460) 461 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
July 5, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Wednesday next move first reading of a 
bill, An Act to amend The Public Service Superannuation Act. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and through you to the House, 
two young men who are on a cycling tour across Canada, guests from Great Britain and Kenya. They are in 
the Speaker's gallery. They are James Norton and Thomas Thornton. I am certain these young men will be of 
particular interest to the House. James Norton is the grandson of a former member of this House, the 
member for Biggar from 1944 to 1971, and the premier of this province from 1961 to 1964, Woodrow 
Lloyd. James Norton is Woodrow's grandson. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Premier's Birthday 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — This isn't in the ordinary way of the introduction of guests because most 
people in this House, I am sure all people in this House, already know this particular individual. It happens 
that today he is 38 years young and is perhaps the youngest premier of any province in Canada. Of course 
that gives him lots of room to expand his career. I think likely he will be probably 78 when he retires, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

First Ministers' Conference 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier. The question concerns the first 
ministers' conference which was concluded recently in Ottawa. Mr. Speaker, I wish to express some interest 
in the conference and to ask the Premier whether or not the Government of Saskatchewan entered into any 
undertakings, firm or tentative, to limit the amounts paid by the Government of Saskatchewan to its 
employees in line with the suggestions made by the Prime Minister and the Minister of Finance of Canada 
when the budget was presented last Monday. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I don't think its appropriate to comment on the details of the 
conversations that took place between the other nine provinces and the Prime Minister, but I will comment 
on the general tenor of the meetings. 



 
July 5, 1982 

 
462 

 
Like most Canadians, the province of Saskatchewan and, indeed, the Premier of Saskatchewan, rejected the 
budget and were virtually shocked at the $20 billion deficit. The budget was seen to be unacceptable because 
it did not address some very serious economic problems in the nation and there were no long-run solutions or 
planned attack, if you will, to pull us out of that recession. The Prime Minister had failed and he had to 
admit that the deficit was extremely serious. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan remains unconvinced that wage restraints, used in isolation without 
increases in productivity or jobs or investor confidence, can solve the problem. We certainly do not believe 
that it is fair to see the burden of inflation fall on the low-income people, whether it is in other provinces in 
this country or indeed the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In brief, Mr. Speaker, we proposed that the federal government pick up on our solutions to move to lower the 
cost of living, as we have done in Saskatchewan by removing the tax on gasoline, giving us the lowest priced 
gasoline in all of Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — And certainly for the immediate time period we have the lowest increase (if any 
increase at all) in the CPI. We also encouraged the federal government to make a move on both energy and 
agriculture, because we saw those as the two components that would act as the engine, if you will, to pull us 
out of this economic recession. So we encouraged the federal government to lower the tax on farm fuel; we 
encouraged the federal government to put some more money in its interest programs, particularly with 
respect to housing, and follow our suit of 13.25 per cent for all home-owners without discrimination, which 
provides not only a fight against prices on one side but encourages productivity on the other. 
 
With respect to shut-in oil, Mr. Speaker, we encouraged the Prime Minister to not import any more oil into 
Canada until every last drop of our available oil is being used here in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — These figures may not be totally accurate, but something in the neighbourhood of 
over 200,000 barrels a day in Alberta and Saskatchewan are shut in during the month of July. If we were to 
use that oil, the federal government could probably save itself in excess of $3 billion, which would be 
considerably more than it's doing in terms of wage constraints, and create some economic activity here in 
western Canada and, indeed, in all of Canada, plus provide revenue and jobs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of our dealing with the problem by making suggestions to the Prime Minister, we 
simply said that we are dealing with the problem of inflation here in the province of Saskatchewan with 
respect to administered prices. There are no increases in Sask Power rates or Sask Tel rates. We remain to be 
convinced that just looking at wages in isolation is a solution, particularly when we ought to look at the 
entire problem of creating economic activity to pull ourselves out of a recession. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, to my question of whether or not agreements 



 
July 5, 1982 

 

463 
 

were made with respect to wage restraint, I take it the answer is no. May I then ask a supplementary 
question? Were commitments entered into with respect to the budgetary policy of the Government of 
Saskatchewan? In particular, were any commitments entered into indicating that the Government of 
Saskatchewan would not run deficits of the kind which have caused such great difficulty when the 
Government of Canada runs a deficit, and which the Premier very rightly criticized it for so doing? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, what the province of Saskatchewan said it would do, and what I 
shared with the other premiers and indeed the Prime Minister, is that Saskatchewan would certainly do as 
well if not better than most other provinces in terms of inflation, and in terms of watching the big general 
price index rise here in this province. It would do as much or more as any other province in terms of creating 
jobs and economic activity. We looked at the two together and suggested, as I pointed out, that the federal 
government start to make corresponding moves that would dovetail with ours, in terms of the energy 
business and the agriculture business, to make sure that we move ahead. In terms of our general economic 
position, it is our forecast that we will have as tight a ship here as any province in the country. We'll make 
sure over the period of our tenure, for the next 2, 3, 4, 5 or 15 years, that we have a sound economy. 
 

Hospital Bed Cutbacks 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I take it again, with respect to the question of whether commitments were 
made with respect to a deficit, that the answer is no. May I direct a question to the Minister of Health? In a 
recent issue of the Leader-Post Mr. Harvey Fox, the executive director of the South Saskatchewan Hospital 
Centre, is quoted as saying that two Regina hospitals will be closing, with 68 beds closed for the summer 
months. He goes on to say: 
 

This is the first summer the hospitals have planned to shut down beds, though some beds were closed 
last summer on a less formal basis. 

 
Would the Minister of Health be good enough to advise whether or not this news report is accurate? Are two 
Regina hospitals closing 68 beds for the summer months? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, if I heard the question right, I think in the preamble the Leader of 
the Opposition said that the hospitals were closing. Definitely they are not closing. There are some 
reductions in beds. I think the Leader of the Opposition knows well that the base hospitals are funded by the 
patient-days that they will deliver in a year. Hospitals have the priority of upping that quota in the winter 
months and cutting back in the summer to facilitate vacations for staff. I don't think this is anything new. I 
believe the Leader of the Opposition, will realize that this has happened before in the city of Regina. It is 
nothing new, and that is the reason for it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As the report indicates, ordinarily nurses resign 
in large numbers during the summer months, and this is not now happening. Since nurses are available, will 
the minister make available funds to that these beds can continue operation with the nurses who are prepared 
to work, so that the waiting lists will not increase as is indicated they will in the statements by the hospital 
administrators? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the supplementary question, I think the Leader of the 
Opposition well knows that the base hospitals in Saskatchewan are operating on a budget that was 
established not by this government, but by the  



 
July 5, 1982 

 
464 

government opposite. Most certainly, the government on this side of the House, the present government of 
the province of Saskatchewan, has ongoing consultations with the hospitals regarding their needs for 
funding, and we will be looking at these areas. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — New question to the Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, I deal with the matter of 
the closing of beds in Regina, and particularly the fact that, according to the hospital administrators, waiting 
lists for elective surgery will naturally increase since the number of operations performed will be reduced; 
the comment of Dr. Ernie Baergen, the executive director of the Saskatchewan Medical Association, 
indicates that the greater problem will be waiting time for certain types of operations; the fact is that 
members opposite promised not to operate on the basis of our budget, but to do much better making 
Saskatchewan number one. 
 
My question once again is this: will the minister make available funds so that employment can be offered to 
nurses who are now available, so that these 68 beds can be opened, and so that the waiting lists can be 
worked down during the summer as we have not had an opportunity to do in the past? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, most certainly the government on this side of the House and I, as 
the Minister of Health, will be looking at the whole situation of elective surgery in his province. It is our 
guarantee that over the next four years we will improve this situation to a better situation than the one we 
inherited one month ago. 
 
I want to indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that it is not my priority to be dabbling into the internal 
operations of those hospitals. If they come and discuss with us, we will be looking at this situation. I want to 
remind you that the budget that was approved, the budget that supposedly is causing the closure of beds, was 
the budget established by the now-defeated government on the other side of the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In past summers it has been relatively difficult 
to keep hospitals open because a great number of nurses took holidays. We are finding that is not the case 
now, because of the serious economic conditions which prevail in this province, and because of the large 
increase in unemployment since members opposite have taken their seats on the treasury bench. What I want 
to know is: are we going to use this opportunity — this opportunity we have not had before — to use nurses 
who are now prepared to work in the summer? Are we going to use that opportunity to work down the 
waiting lists so that when we move into fall, after harvest, the high surgery season, we will have much 
smaller waiting lists than we now have, Mr. Minister? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — A supplementary. I think the situation is not just whether there are nurses 
available or not. That isn't the total situation, Mr. Speaker. I think the total situation is also the budget of the 
hospitals. As I've told the member opposite, we are concerned about reducing the waiting lists for elective 
surgery. I has assurance from the hospitals that all urgent and emergency surgery will be attended to. And I 
think I would like to draw to the member's attention the fact that the number of patients admitted to the 
Plains and Pasqua hospitals this year is greater than the number admitted last year. 



 
July 5, 1982 

 

465 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — In light of the previous questions which were asked concerning the 68-bed 
shut-down in Regina, I wonder if the minister could give an indication of how many hospitals in 
Saskatchewan will be closing down beds this summer as a result of lack of funding, which I am sure is a 
direct result of the decrease in oil royalties that the oil companies will be paying over the coming year? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — A supplementary answer to the question of the member. I will take notice of your 
question about how many may be closing down. I don't think you can expect me to tell you how many beds 
will be closed down across the province of Saskatchewan. I will take notice of it; I think it's a good question 
for estimates. But I would like to say that I don't think the number of beds closing down has anything to do 
with the oil royalties. As I said earlier, the budgets that the hospitals of this province are operating on are 
budgets that were established by the government that was tossed out one month ago. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister answers the question by saying 
that he's not sure how many hospital beds will be shut down in rural Saskatchewan. I would like to ask him, 
in light of the fact that he's saying some will be or admitting to the fact that some will be, whether or not the 
government is considering the introduction of utilization fees in order to pay for hospital care in the province 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to just inform the member on the other side of the House, 
who may have a bit of a hearing problem — I'm not sure, but if he has he should come and see the Minister 
of Health because we have a hearing aid plan — that I did not say there would be beds closed down in rural 
Saskatchewan. I said I would take notice of your question. And I want to inform you and this House and the 
people of Saskatchewan that this government has no intention of introducing any type of utilization or 
deterrent fee. 
 

Reclassification of Debden and Zenon Park Schools 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Education. As the 
minister may be aware, there are a number of schools that have been set up to accommodate Francophone 
students, in that instruction is primarily done in French. There are a number of schools — the College 
Mathieu, Gravelbourg, and Prince Albert. It is my understanding that these schools have been classified as 
type-A schools. Other schools such as Debden and Zenon Park are classified as type-B schools, but have 
made application to the department to be reclassified as type A in order that the amount of instruction and 
the basis of instruction can reach the standard of type A. I want to ask the minister: has he in fact received 
applications from Debden and Zenon Park and could the minister indicate if a decision in fact has been made 
to approve their applications? 



 
July 5, 1982 

 
466 

 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the question from the hon. member, yes, we have 
received applications from both Debden and Zenon Park. In the case of Debden, we have decided to go with 
the type-A designated program. In the case of Zenon Park, after consulting with the people in the community 
and working through a program, because of the fact that there was a considerable split as to whether they 
wanted the type-A designated program or the type-B designated program, it has been decided to introduce an 
experimental program with the hope of working something out that would make it possible for the people to 
be best accommodated as far as French and the study of French are concerned. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In respect to the Zenon Park School, you indicated that you 
are not going ahead with the approval of the type-A designation. I would like to ask the minister: did the 
community of Zenon Park, in making its application, meet the criteria that were requested of it in order to get 
the full consideration of being reclassified from B to A? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I guess, technically speaking, that would be so, they would have met 
the criteria to have had a type-A designation for their school. 
 
The real difficulty which presented itself in this particular community was the implication it would have had 
upon the remainder of the students in running their programs effectively and efficiently. After considerable 
discussion with both those who supported the type-A program and those who supported the type-B program, 
it was thought that a special kind of arrangement would work much better, keeping everyone's interests in 
mind. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary. The minister may be aware of the ACFC 
(Association Culturelle Franco-Canadienne). 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Very good. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Not as good as Randy Nelson. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Or Paul Rousseau. This association, as the minister will know, has been working on 
behalf of the upgrading from type B to type A. It has, from my information, requested a meeting with the 
minister. I would like to ask: has the minister had the meeting with the association and, if not, when will he 
be having one? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, first, I would have to admit that my French is equally as bad as the 
hon. member's. In reply to the question: yes, the association has asked for a meeting with the minister. A 
reply has been sent back that we would be most anxious to meet with them to take into consideration what 
their wishes would be. Unfortunately, having met with many, many groups and with time being as short as it 
was before the session started, we just haven't been able to work that meeting in as yet. But we hope to meet 
with them sometime during this summer. 
 

Saskatchewan Mortgage Interest Reduction Plan 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — A question to the minister responsible for housing. Given the comments this 
morning by Mike Young of the Canada Mortgage and Housing  



 
July 5, 1982 

 

467 
 

Corporation (CMHC) that it has not yet heard from the Government of Saskatchewan regarding the 
possibility of dovetailing the $3,000 federal grant with the Saskatchewan Mortgage Interest Reduction Plan, 
can the minister inform the House whether it is still the intention of the Government of Saskatchewan to 
deduct the federal benefit from the benefits provided under the Saskatchewan Mortgage Interest Reduction 
Plan? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the question of the hon. member for Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, I can advise the Assembly that the mortgage program introduced in the MacEachen 
budget last week wherein $3,000 would be made available by way of grants to first-time home-owners — 
that's either to buy a new home or an existing home — will be to assist in the reduction of the mortgage loan. 
Interpreting it that way, it would piggyback our 13.25 per cent mortgage; that is, both of them would be 
available to the prospective new-home buyers, so he would qualify both for the federal and for the provincial 
programs. There would be, as we understand, no tax implications to it. The new federal program is a grant to 
reduce the loan and, therefore, would not be bothered by section 4 of the 13.25 per cent mortgage program. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — A supplementary to the minister responsible for housing. Am I to understand 
then that you are saying that the regulations under the mortgage interest reduction plan will exempt this kind 
of program from that provision of reduction of the subsidy on the basis of grants from any other 
government? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Perhaps we should make it clear, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member. Number one, 
under the federal budget announced last Monday, there were two programs. The first would be a $3,000 
grant for first-time home-owners or people buying their first home. That $3,000 would simply reduce the 
cost of that house. That program is not in conflict with the 13.25 per cent mortgage program. The new-home 
buyer could qualify both for the federal program and for the 13.25 per cent Saskatchewan program and have 
no problems. 
 

Fibre Optics Cable 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the minister in charge of Sask Tel. Could the minister 
inform this House as to whether or not he will be continuing the burying of fibre optics cable in many of the 
communities of Saskatchewan, as has been the case with the previous administration? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — We have to maintain the gopher population. Seriously, we will continue the capital 
project as proposed for this year. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is the minister then saying that the burying of cable 
between Saskatoon and Prince Albert is going to be going ahead this year? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — If that is in the capital project as proposed for this year, yes. 
 

Environmental Effects of Nipawin Hydro-electric Project 



 
July 5, 1982 

 
468 

 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, I'd like to direct a question to the Minister of the Environment. In view of the 
fact that rivers, lakes and wildlife habitat will be affected by fluctuating waters as a result of the Nipawin 
hydro-electric project, particularly in areas such as Cumberland House and Sturgeon Landing, will the 
Minister of Labour, minister in charge of SPC (Saskatchewan Power Corporation), and his colleagues give 
assurance that the environmental effects will be monitored closely with the communities affected? Will he 
give assurance to this Assembly that whatever ongoing environmental safety and protection measures are 
taken they will involve people living downstream in places like Cumberland House and Sturgeon Landing? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, yes. 
 

Rural Gas Program 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a brief question for the minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. This has to do with the rural gas program. My earlier questions in this 
Chamber elicited from him the fact that the rural gas program would be proceeded with this year and that 
one meeting had been held. I wonder if the minister can give a brief update on where the rural gas program 
stands now. My particular questions are: will the program proceed this year with respect to some urban 
centres and will the program proceed this year with respect to a significant number of farmers? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we have held subsequent meetings and we have a proposal now 
before CIC (crown investments corporation). I'll be able to answer you much better in a couple of days. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move first reading of a bill to amend The Power 
Corporation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Appointments to Board of Internal Economy 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I have a message from His Honour, the Administrator. 
 
The letter reads: 
 

Dear Mr. Speaker: Pursuant to section 68.7 of The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act, 
I hereby inform the Assembly of the appointment of the following members to the board of internal 
economy, effective June 29, 1982: the Hon. Herbert Swan, chairman; the Hon. Robert Andrew; the 
Hon. Graham Taylor; Mr. Ralph Katzman, MLA; Mr. Jack Klein, MLA; Mr. Allan Engel, MLA; Mr. 
Norm Lusney, MLA. (Signed) His Honour, the Administrator. 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 



 
July 5, 1982 

 

469 
 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 
2 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act by eliminating the Mortgage Interest Tax Credit as a 
consequence of the establishment of the Mortgage Interest Reduction Plan be now read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to address a few words to the House on Bill No. 2. I 
found this bill curious, particularly the title — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act by eliminating the 
Mortgage Interest Tax Credit (that's clear enough) as a consequence of the establishment of the Mortgage 
Interest Reduction Plan. It is in no sense a consequence, except as a matter of policy. It is not required, in any 
sense, by any legal requirements that one ordinarily expects when one sees a consequential amendment. 
There is nothing consequential about this except that the government has decided that because it is going to 
offer some very significant mortgage interest reduction benefits to certain classes in society, it is going to 
withdraw other benefits from another group of people entirely. Not only that, it is deciding that because it is 
going to introduce a plan which is timed in its duration, which is a three-year plan at most and wherein the 
largest number of people will get benefits of perhaps 18 months duration or less, it is going to repeal the tax 
benefit in perpetuity for a very much larger group of the citizens. 
 
It strikes me as particularly remarkable when one says, "Because we are going to offer mortgage interest 
reduction benefits to one group in society (and a significant group, admittedly), we are going, for a period of 
up to three years (on the average, perhaps 18 months), to remove a tax benefit which people have enjoyed in 
this province for a couple or three years and we're going to remove it on a permanent basis. We are not going 
to amend the mortgage interest tax credit to make it non-applicable to people who get the mortgage interest 
reduction plan; no, we re not going to do that. We are not going to make it non-applicable even for 
everybody for the period of the duration of the mortgage interest reduction plan; no, we're not going to do 
that. We're going to remove, on a permanent basis, this tax benefit and we're going to call it "consequential." 
It is not consequential. It is consequential only as a matter of policy. 
 
Now the proposal for a mortgage interest tax credit was adopted by this House and was thought to be a good 
idea. It was particularly promoted by the Progressive Conservative Party on a federal basis. Many of you will 
remember Mr. Clark and his colleagues advocating and advocating strongly that we ought in Canada to have 
a program of mortgage interest tax credits. 
 
Our government, provincially, introduced such a plan, a modified plan, but a plan offering mortgage interest 
tax credits to lower- and middle-income people who were having difficulty meeting their mortgage 
payments. To put it mildly, I am surprised to have a Progressive Conservative administration advocating the 
repeal of this mortgage interest tax credit, the only one which exists in Canada, notwithstanding the vigorous 
support of such a program put forward by the federal Conservative Party. 
 
It strikes me, Mr. Speaker, that this bill is ill-conceived. I do not object to the government opposite 
suggesting that those who receive the benefits of the mortgage  



 
July 5, 1982 

 
470 

interest reduction program should not receive the benefits of the mortgage interest tax credit. I don't object to 
that, or, conversely to saying that mortgage interest tax credits should be deducted from the benefits they 
would get under the mortgage interest reduction program. 
 
It is perfectly reasonable for a government to suggest that it does not want to stack these programs but to 
integrate them. What is not reasonable is for it to suggest that because some people, perhaps as few as 
one-third, but perhaps one-half of the people who have mortgages, will get a benefit under one program, it is 
going to take away the tax credit from all the people who have mortgages whether the interest rate be 12 per 
cent, or 6 per cent or whatever the interest rate may be. Whether it be a farm credit corporation mortgage at 
12 per cent or 13 per cent, this will now be taken away because some other people will be getting a mortgage 
interest reduction plan benefit. This is simply not reasonable. Presumably some argument will be put up 
saying that the federal government feels that it does not wish to give a tax benefit under the mortgage interest 
reduction program while the mortgage interest tax credit is outstanding. That has no merit. The mortgage 
interest tax credit is a purely provincial program. The tax credit is a credit from provincial income tax 
payable, and the federal government has nothing to say about how the provincial government levies its 
income taxes or what benefits it gives. 
 
It is true that the federal government does administer the provincial income tax program. But they have 
heretofore not suggested that any tax credit calculated following the calculation of taxable income would be 
in any way a difficulty for them. I am unconvinced that our tax collection arrangement with the federal 
government would be in any way affected if we continued to have the mortgage interest tax credit and the 
mortgage interest reduction program operating simultaneously. Accordingly, I have heard no arguments put 
forward for this bill — none whatever. I think it is clearly unjust to say to the people who do not get the 
benefit of the mortgage interest reduction plan, "Yes, you've had difficulty with your mortgage before, and 
we had a mortgage interest tax credit to give you a little bit of assistance, but now we are going to take that 
away." That is simply without logic. It is true that the mortgage interest tax credit was not a substantial 
benefit, but it did provide $200, $300, $400 to some people, and there was legislation. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — One hundred dollars. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — No, $100 was the minimum. Please look at the act and you will see that 
people could get a very significant amount more than $100. It simply provided that the $100 was a minimum 
payment under the act. It was income related, but significant amounts more than $100 could be received 
under that act. 
 
Our position, Mr. Speaker, is this: while we agree with members opposite that it is not unreasonable for them 
to take the position that no citizen should get the benefit of both programs — the mortgage interest tax credit 
and the mortgage interest reduction plan — and while we have no objection to their structuring the act so 
that no one gets the double benefit, we say the mere fact that some citizens get the mortgage interest 
reduction plan benefit is no reason you should take away from other citizens a tax benefit they have enjoyed 
for several years. It was put there to give them some assistance with their mortgages, and that is needed now 
as much as, or indeed more than, it was in previous years. 
 
Our position, then, Mr. Speaker, will be that we will oppose this bill. We will take the  



 
July 5, 1982 

 

471 
 

position that if the bill is to be proceeded with, which we will oppose, it ought to be restricted only to people 
who get the mortgage interest reduction plan. And, furthermore, it ought to be restricted only to the 
time-frame in which they get the mortgage interest reduction program. We ought not do either of what this 
bill will do and it will do both. We ought not to take benefits away from citizens who will not get anything 
under the reduction plan. And we ought not to remove a tax benefit permanently by reason of the fact that 
the government opposite is introducing a temporary program. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, our position will be 
that we will oppose this bill, and we will seek changes in committee. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, a few comments in response to the comments of the Leader of the 
Opposition. I can advise this Assembly that this government fought an election campaign, and won that 
election campaign, basically on a commitment that we were going to help the home-owners of this province. 
The people of this province bought that proposal, and this government acted as quickly as possible in 
bringing in a 13.25 per cent interest rate. 
 
That program, Mr. Speaker, is not only the best in Canada, it is clearly the best mortgage assistance program 
in the entire North American continent. The one thing about our programs that sets them apart from the 
previous government's programs is that our programs are real; their programs were simply make-believe and 
symbolic. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition talks about the former prime minister, Mr. Clark, campaigning on a mortgage 
deductibility program. The campaign of that administration, of that party, was real. The members opposite 
simply sought to copy parts of it in a symbolic way, to say, "Hey, look what we're doing for the people." 
Well, on April 26, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, the 50,000 of them that have mortgages, looked 
at the two programs. They looked at the programs of the members opposite and they weighed them. They 
looked at the programs of the Progressive Conservative Party and they weighed them. 
 
On April 26, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan made up their minds. And when I look around this 
institution, I think the people of Saskatchewan maybe had more sympathy for the views of the people over 
here than they had for the views of the people over there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, the 13.25 per cent mortgage program was brought in by 
this government. We were concerned, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government might use its power 
(obviously Revenue Canada interprets the Income Tax Act) to impose a tax on the 13.25 per cent mortgage 
assistance being advanced. And if they in fact did — and there are differing views and thoughts within the 
accounting and the taxation communities — the leakage or the money that would otherwise simply go to our 
citizens would now, perhaps 40 per cent and 50 per cent of it, being going to the national coffers. We 
thought that was wrong. It was a $100 million program. That means Ottawa would take $25 million of it. We 
can't afford it, in our programs, to be giving that money to the national government. 
 
As a result, we undertook, when we initially took office, to investigate the taxability  



 
July 5, 1982 

 
472 

question with the national government. And the national government indicated to us a couple of provisions, 
saying that if we did not have these in our mortgage program, it would not be taxable. 
 
One of those provisos was that any other programs would be deductible from income tax. And if they tied 
together the two of them, it could create a taxability of the entire program; and once they made a decision on 
that, we were concerned that in fact they would tax the entire program. That was a lot of money, Mr. 
Speaker. And that was one of the reasons why we've now asked this legislature to eliminate the mortgage 
program of the former government. That was one reason, Mr. Speaker. The second reason is that we 
campaigned on delivering 13.25 per cent mortgage money to the people out there who are hurting. It's not the 
person with the 6 per cent mortgage who is hurting out there, Mr. Speaker. It's the person with a 20, 19 or 18 
per cent mortgage who can't make the payments. 
 
The record of the government opposite is clear for all to see. They brought in a symbolic bill, perhaps two 
years ago, the one we're doing away with today. Most people would receive $100 from it, Mr. Speaker — 
$100. That's symbolic, but hardly of any value to the person out there who is faced with a difficult mortgage 
situation. Then, come last fall, they brought in their — what was the mortgage program? They were 
somehow going to stop all the programs. Again, it was symbolic, Mr. Speaker. The one thing they failed to 
do and failed to do repeatedly, when they were on this side of the House, was put up something real, put their 
money where their mouth was, instead of doing some nice, symbolic moves to show, "Hey, we're out there to 
help the home-owner." 
 
The government came in and delivered 13.25 per cent mortgages. We are now the envy of this entire 
country; we are the envy of North America. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, this mortgage program, as brought in by the members opposite, is 
not needed now. With our 13.25 per cent mortgage money, it is now going to go by the wayside, just as the 
members opposite went by the wayside. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I listened with interest to the Minister of Finance speaking about Bill 1. I 
didn't hear him talking that much about Bill 2, which is before us. He threw around numbers, like, people 
who are paying 40 or 50 per cent income tax, Mr. Speaker. You are aware of people in that bracket, I'm sure, 
because I know the kind of farm you have. Those are the people that he's worried are going to lose some 
income tax benefits with this mortgage assistance plan. Who is benefiting from Bill 2 — those benefits he's 
cutting out? I think there's more that needs to be studied on how many are, so, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 
4 — An Act to amend the Statute Law be now read a second time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I will have a difficult time making a long speech on the amendments to the 
statute law. We are in agreement with them and, therefore, will be supporting them. 



 
July 5, 1982 

 

473 
 

 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 
6 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments in respect to An Act to amend The 
Provincial Court Act. I want to say, first of all, that there is general agreement with the basic concept within 
the act. I am concerned with the timing of the introduction of this bill. We are in a time of restraint 
throughout Canada and in the province. At this moment, this bill proposed to set up an associate chief justice 
of the provincial court. It is obviously an increase in expenditure of a substantial nature. I am surprised that 
the Attorney General would come forward with this bill to expand the provincial court and to set up an 
associate chief justice at a time when the highest court in our province, the court of appeal, recently made a 
designated appointment of two members to the court of appeal. It is my understanding that, at that time, the 
Attorney General felt, presumably, the cost would be far too high or inopportune. I think the two principles 
run contrary to each other. 
 
I also look at the concept of the appointing of the chief justice and the associate chief justice. I look at it and 
I wonder why, in fact, we are not looking at a better method, or at least exploring a better procedure, not only 
for appointment but also in respect to termination. If the federal justices are to be removed once they are 
appointed, there has to be a basic cause and not the whim of the Lieutenant-Governor. I think that we started 
with the first chief justice, and I think he has done great service to the position but I don't think we should 
necessarily jump forward in expanding the positions (including the chief justice and associate chief judges) 
without taking an opportunity to look at whether or not there is a better procedure for appointment and 
dismissal. In the federal jurisdiction, I understand that there has to be cause before a federal judge is 
removed. Recently, Mr. Justice Berger was taken before a committee for a review of his conduct. There is an 
appeal procedure. I think what we are looking at here is the provincial framework of the justice system. 
Surely, we must also look at separating it from political interference or even possible political interference in 
the judicial system. 
 
At this stage, I would urge the Attorney General to reconsider this in view of the comments I have made, and 
to take a look at other proposals with regard to the appointment and dismissal framework set out in The 
Provincial Court Act. I don't think there is a great urgency to proceed with it at this time. I would like to hear 
the comments of the Attorney General, and would like to hear some comparisons of precedents and methods 
adopted by other jurisdictions, other provinces, with respect to appointments and dismissals. As well, I 
would like to substantiate whether other provinces have expanded, say Manitoba, to include associate 
judges. 
 
As I said, with respect to the general principle of the bill, I am not opposed to what the bill is purporting to 
do. Certainly, I think there is an excellent opportunity to explore those avenues which I have suggested. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to reply to the hon. member. I was, to say the least, 
somewhat surprised when he discussed and wanted changes in the manner of appointment of provincial 
court judges. There are 42 judges of the provincial court, Mr. Speaker, all of them appointed by the members 
of the former government opposite  



 
July 5, 1982 

 
474 

and at no time was there any call or consideration for a change in the manner of appointment. I don't know 
what suddenly caused this desire for a more independent appointment other than perhaps a change in 
government on April 26, or maybe he has concerns about some of the appointments made by my 
predecessor, a member of the former government. And if that is the case I would hope that he would extend 
to me those concerns about some of the appointments. I don't share his concern; however, since I'm 
somewhat new on the job perhaps he has some inside information that I don't have. I know that the hon. 
member will give me that information in the strictest confidence. 
 
I am interested as well in the request for an expansion of the provisions for termination of provincial court 
judges — a highly dangerous proposal. If the judges are to be terminated by order in council, which is the 
logical extension, then obviously the independence of the judiciary principles is gone. I suggest, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have had some very serious concerns raised about the federal manner of appointment and 
some of the criteria established by the Government of Canada, and it would be highly dangerous to broaden 
the scope for termination of provincial court justices. I say that that proposal by the hon. member would, in 
fact, mean the end of the independence of the judiciary. 
 
I was also a little surprised when the hon. member criticized the Attorney General for the freezing of the 
positions on the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal. What he is, in fact, saying is that he endorses the manner of 
selection of federal court judges, a manner that has not obtained a great deal of satisfaction among the bar 
and those associated with the administration of justice in Saskatchewan. I was surprised that he came out in 
favour of the existing proposals because they haven't met with a great deal of support. As a matter of fact I 
suggest to the hon. member that the manner has, in fact, raised a great deal of concern with members of the 
bar and those involved in the administration of justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact, the provincial court judges have a tremendously high workload and that workload will 
be increasing, particularly on criminal matters and particularly with the implementation of the new charter of 
rights. It will place significant demands on the provincial court system. I hope I have the support of the hon. 
member as we will have to increase, perhaps significantly, the number of provincial court judges to deal with 
what we believe to be a significant increase in their workload. So I hope that at least in that latter regard I 
have the support of the hon. member because, notwithstanding that it's a time of restraint, there will have to 
be increases in the number. I suggest that we may be forced, as well, to increase salaries to make sure that 
the most competent people are attracted to what can sometimes be a very onerous position. 
 
I'm disappointed, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member wants to extend the powers of dismissal of provincial 
court judges. I think that threatens the independence of the judiciary. I'm disappointed that he supports the 
existing process of appointment of the superior court judges. It's interesting that the Leader of the 
Opposition, when he was a member of the treasury bench, and the former attorney general both took the 
position that on superior court judicial appointments there should be consultation with provincial 
governments. We insist on that consultation. We want that consultation. The Leader of the Opposition 
wanted that consultation. So I was surprised, as I say, to hear the remarks of the hon. member here this 
afternoon. 
 
I still have not, unfortunately, determined whether the members opposite are going to  



 
July 5, 1982 

 

475 
 

support the bill. We believe, Mr. Speaker, with the increased workload, that this bill is necessary. It's 
necessary now and it's our wish to pass this bill now at this session of the legislature so that the increasing 
workload can be handled to the best of our ability. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of 
the whole at the next sitting. 
 

YEAS — 50 
 

Muller Hampton Dirks 
Birkbeck Weiman Hepworth 
Taylor Bacon Folk 
Andrew Tusa Morin 
Bernston Hodgins Myers 
Lane Sauder Zazelenchuk 
Rousseau Schmidt Johnson 
Pickering Parker Baker 
Sandberg Smith (Moose Jaw South) Blakeney 
Hardy Hopfner Thompson 
McLeod Klein Koskie 
Katzman Rybchuk Engel 
Martens Caswell Lingenfelter 
Schoenhals Domotor Lusney 
Smith (Swift Current Maxwell Yew 
Boutin Embury  
 

NAYS — 0 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 
9 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act be now read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am not sure whether I understand the full import of this bill, 
but if I understand the full import of this bill I most assuredly will oppose it. 
 
Legislative secretaries were introduced a good number of years ago by the Hon. Mr. Thatcher's government. 
The idea then was that a few members of the legislature would have an opportunity to assist with the work of 
cabinet members. Cabinets were smaller then. The legislative secretary would be able to perform two, or 
three, or four different kinds of functions. He or she would be able to answer on occasion in the legislature 
for the minister. That did not happen very much in the 15 or so years that this institution has continued. The 
legislative secretary would be able to take certain public commitments for the minister — official openings 
and the like. The legislative secretary would be able to introduce and deal with some legislation in the 
House. 
 
With respect to legislation in the House, it was found on analysis that it was not possible  



 
July 5, 1982 

 
476 

for a legislative secretary to introduce legislation if it involved any spending of money. On an occasion, Mr. 
Wes Robbins, when he was legislative secretary to the minister of finance, was called to order on that 
account. So that is not open to us under the rules of this House. 
 
The idea, I think, also was that a premier might be able to a see a person perform in the role of legislative 
secretary, and get some idea of whether or not that person might perform creditably as a member of the 
Executive Council. 
 
At any rate the institution has continued, and continued without any abuse. The number was strictly limited, 
and the number would only need to be strictly limited in order to perform the functions which I have 
outlined. Only a few ministers have the heavy commitments with respect to official openings. Only a few 
ministers have heavy commitments with respect to legislation. At any one time a Premier will only be 
considering a small number of members as possible appointees to the Executive Council. There is, therefore, 
no need to have a large number of legislative secretaries. Our government, notwithstanding the fact that the 
limit was six, I believe never exceeded the number four and, for the most part, we confined ourselves to 
three. Mr. Thatcher's government may have reached the number of six, but did not exceed it. I think on a 
good number of occasions it had less than six legislative secretaries and I think it's important the number not 
be high, because it is clearly open to a major abuse. 
 
I will wish to put forward the idea that the total number of members of the Executive Council, together with 
legislative secretaries, ought not to exceed, say, 26 or 27 people. I would think that under the previous 
administration the number at no time exceeded 24 and, for the most part, would have been less than that, and 
sometimes quite a bit less than that. 
 
It is my belief that the current Premier will probably add to the number of his cabinet. One starts out with the 
view that the number in cabinet should be small, and there are clear benefits to that. But the number of 
public commitments continues to mount and, accordingly, the merit of having other people to share the load 
of the public commitments impresses itself upon members of the Executive Council, and the pressures for 
adding to the cabinet mount. And I suggest that the cabinet which now serves this province will be larger in a 
year or two. I'm not suggesting 25 or anything like that, or any larger number such as they have in some 
provinces like Alberta, but a cabinet in the 20 range. In that I may be in error, but I suspect that that will be 
the case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said earlier that the legislation was subject to possible substantial abuse. It could be abused in 
this way: it is possible for a government to appoint government backbenchers to positions which carry an 
additional emolument. And, if a large number are so appointed, clearly we have what amounts to two 
standards of members of the legislature: those who get the emolument provided for in The Legislative 
Assembly and Executive Council Act, and those who get that emolument plus an additional amount, because 
they have, as it is alleged, extra duties. 
 
This happens in some provinces where members of the legislature can serve as, let's say, members of the 
board of Ontario Hydro (I believe that's an accurate example in Ontario, but I use it as an example), and 
thereby get an additional emolument. There is no objection, I think, to having an additional sum flow to a 
person who is serving as a legislative secretary who has substantial duties and, accordingly, substantial extra 
time is involved. It is not, I think, possible for 10 or 15 people to be performing substantial  



 
July 5, 1982 

 

477 
 

extra duties on behalf of cabinet ministers if the cabinet ministers are, in any way, performing their 
functions, because I think, fairly, there are only a few portfolios where the pressures on the cabinet ministers' 
time are approaching the level of being excessive. 
 
I am greatly concerned that the legislation simply proposes to remove the ceiling — not to increase it from 6 
to 8, not to increase it from 6 to 10, but to remove it so that the number could be 20 or 25. That would be an 
abuse of the process and one for which no case has been made. 
 
I particularly feel, at this time, that the Premier has behind him a very large number of backbenchers (an 
impressive number, I may say) and will, therefore, have some difficulty keeping them all gainfully occupied. 
I am casting no aspersions on anyone. I am just saying that, while I did not have the problem (if that is the 
word) of the current Premier, we did have a caucus of 45. That was a large caucus when we started out — 10 
cabinet ministers and 35 backbenchers. The temptation to deal with that problem by appointing people as 
legislative secretaries is clearly there. It is a temptation which must be resisted, since it would, indeed, be an 
abuse of the system. I have not heard any argument which would suggest to me that six is an inadequate 
number of legislative secretaries. If an argument is put forward that six is an inappropriate number and that 
eight or nine would be a better number, we could clearly deal with that sort of an argument. But a change of 
legislation which permits a first minister to have 20 cabinet ministers (which he clearly can have, and more, 
under the existing legislation) and 20 legislative secretaries is just bad legislation and ought not to be 
permitted, as it sets up the wrong relationship between the Executive Council and the Chamber. 
 
Because I feel strongly that those views are the right ones, and because no case has been offered for an 
increase in number, and because the proposal put forward is not to increase the number from six to eight, or 
from six to nine, but to remove the limitation entirely, I think the legislation is ill-conceived. I, for my part, 
will be opposing it and I will be asking all members of the Assembly to oppose it. I will be particularly 
asking the minister if he feels that I have, in essence, misconceived the nature of the legislation. In closing 
the debate on second reading, I will ask him to indicate, in committee, whether he will be moving an 
amendment to introduce a limitation (it may well be higher than six) which will meet the points I raised, and 
which would remove the possibility of any government feeling tempted to use the legislation in a way which 
was never intended when it was first introduced by Mr. Thatcher, and in which it has never been used since 
the institution has been operating these more than 15 years. 
 
For the reasons indicated, Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing the bill and I will ask our hon. members to 
consider carefully whether or not they should support the bill in its current form. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to make a few comments on both the legislation and 
the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition. If one were to follow the logic of the Leader of the Opposition, 
he then should have proposed legislation to restrict the size of cabinet, because his justification for not 
supporting the bill is that it is open for abuse. We don't have a limit on the number than can be appointed to 
cabinet; we do have a restraint and that restraint is public acceptance. I suggest to the Leader of the 
Opposition that exactly the same restraint will apply in this case. When the Leader of the Opposition says 
that there is "potential" for abuse, because of the extra emolument, I think he knows probably better than any 
in this Assembly that that very fact is a restraint. The pressures that normally operate in a situation where 
there is no  



 
July 5, 1982 

 
478 

limit to the number of legislative secretaries are certainly both public and internal. It is obviously impossible, 
and I agree with the Leader of the Opposition it is certainly not desirable, to make every member of the 
Legislative Assembly a legislative secretary. There are natural constraints because of the process and, as I 
say, the Leader of the Opposition knows those natural constraints far better than anyone else. 
 
Certainly for the foreseeable future the government is going to be faced with not a problem but an 
opportunity, an opportunity to allow MLAs to become familiar with the operations of government and to 
allow the MLAs from the government side to participate and to make a contribution. It is the firm 
commitment of the Premier that the ministers of the crown will, in fact, maintain a close connection with the 
people of Saskatchewan. It is our belief, and it has been admitted by at least one of the members on the 
opposition benches, that the former government got out of touch with the people of Saskatchewan. I happen 
to think that that was the case. One way to ensure that the ministers of the crown stay in touch and that this 
government stays in touch with the people is to try to take some of the workload from the ministers of the 
crown. 
 
As I say, I don't share the concerns of the Leader of the Opposition. I believe that there are internal restraints 
on numbers, and there is a public restraint on numbers. 
 
I notice that the Leader of the Opposition very carefully didn't give a specific number himself and, of course, 
that leads to the need for the amendment. I share the concerns of the Leader of the Opposition that there are 
significant advantages to not letting the cabinet get too big, but to keep cabinet ministers in touch with the 
people, we must have other members who can help share that workload. 
 
Now is that number 7, or is it 5, or is it 8, or is it 4, or is it 11, or is it 2? Only the public will decide. So, as I 
say, I don't share the concerns of the Leader of the Opposition. And I also think it far more practical to take 
the ceiling off so that the leader of the government can, in fact, make reasonable decisions, knowing full well 
that he is responsible to the people of Saskatchewan and this Assembly. He must be prepared to justify the 
decisions in that regard. I urge all members to support the bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, before we vote on second reading, I think that there are a number 
of issues here. I'm pleased with the rather high plane on which the Attorney General appears to consider the 
motives for the introduction of this bill. 
 
I think that more time is required. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it is a hurried manner in which to deal 
with a problem faced by the Premier, a problem that many people would envy him for having, and that is a 
great number of members that he doesn't know what to do with. And one of the quick answers and quick 
solutions it would appear, from this bill, is to dip again into the resources of the taxpayer of Saskatchewan 
and keep some of the troops, some of the backbenchers — I don't know how many because they refuse to 
spell that out — content with an additional indemnity each year. And it is interesting to look at the economic 
difficulties Saskatchewan faces in the 1980s and at the approach of the government opposite to some of 
those difficulties. It appears to be no problem to find substantial additional payments for government 
back-bench MLAs, but it is impossible or somehow not in the public interest of the people of Saskatchewan 
to find an additional two bits an hour for those people who find themselves on minimum wage. 



 
July 5, 1982 

 

479 
 

 
We feel, Mr. Speaker, that this bill needs a great deal more consideration and more thought, and I beg leave 
to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Currie that Bill No. 10 
— An Act to amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make a few comments in respect to this particular act. I did not 
have the opportunity, because I was away from the House, to hear the Minister of Education. I had the 
opportunity read the comments of the now Minister of Health when he in this House opposed proceeding 
with the bill by the former minister of education. 
 
I am rather surprised to see the Minister of Education after less than two months in office, coming forward 
here to repeal the ward system as it applies in the cities of Saskatoon and Regina, the education divisions. 
 
I say I am surprised because a tremendous amount of work was done preceding the introduction of the bill by 
the previous minister. I want to say that throughout the province he set up advertising, inviting briefs. Letters 
inviting briefs were sent to various organizations throughout the province, and a pretty comprehensive study 
was done by Dr. de Vlieger in reviewing the whole aspect of the question of establishment of the ward 
system. 
 
I am surprised at this Minister of Education who suddenly comes to the conclusion that it should be repealed. 
I did not hear his comments, Mr. Speaker, with respect to whom his consultation was with. I presume it was 
primarily with the trustees' association. I wonder whether he went to the public as Dr. de Vlieger did. 
Accordingly, I say this is an act by this government paying its dues to a particular group in society. Also it 
seems to indicate a fear on the part of those opposite, a fear that greater democracy might be brought into the 
system of representation of people on the education boards. 
 
We had the right wing — Liberals, Tories, call them what you want — when the ward system was 
introduced into the cities in municipal elections. They showed great fears, and they put up the same 
argument — that there wouldn't be proper representation — that they put up with respect to this. I want to 
say that the ward systems in Saskatoon and Regina have worked well. I want to say that the whole concept of 
our local government, indeed of our provincial government, is established on the premise of setting up 
constituencies. At the municipal level it is exactly the same — there are divisions. If you go to the major 
cities, there are ward systems. But still they hang on and try to indicate that somehow having local 
representation will decrease the democracy and the effectiveness of the organization. 
 
I way to say that in Dr. de Vlieger's discussion of the matter there was no unanimity with respect to the 
introduction of the ward system. I want to say that in the two largest cities the opposition to the ward system 
was certainly not unanimous. In Regina, the trustees of the Roman Catholic School Division did not reach a 
consensus on the issue and declined to send a brief. In Saskatoon, two members of the school board voted 
against the board's rejection of the concept. The city councils of the two major cities did not take a position 
on it. The voluntary organizations which presented briefs  



 
July 5, 1982 

 
480 

were evenly balanced pro and con. 
 
Of the 19 briefs which were submitted by private individuals (and a significant group of them), 14 out of 19, 
favoured the introduction of the ward system. 
 
I want to say that the presentation of the ward system by the former minister of education was a thorough 
study and a thorough contact with the people that it would affect. And I want to say that all of the 
groundwork had in fact been done. The legislation was in place. Suddenly the present minister, spurred on by 
some of the school trustees, I suppose, reacted to the pressure. But I doubt very much if, in his short time as 
minister, he has made a thorough examination of the wishes of the people in Saskatoon and, indeed, Regina. 
 
You know, you hear a lot of technical objections to the ward system, objections on principle. This is the key 
one. Partisan politics is a likely consequence, and it is likely objectionable to have trustees who are linked 
with political parties. Well, isn't that too bad? Isn't that a great objection? And this is the primary one that is 
put forward by those who oppose it. 
 
I am saying that the ward system is being adopted across Canada in the major cities and it is working. I am 
saying that in Saskatoon the ward system has worked at the municipal level. And I am saying that you would 
get better representation in education. If you want to take a look at the municipal elections in Regina — 
some years ago before they had ward systems — I recall that a great number of the council members for the 
city of Regina came from south of College Avenue. Oh yes, the well-to-do, the well-educated, do have a 
capacity for coming out and taking their place in office. 
 
But I am saying that we should have a different situation; if you have an area of working class people 
presumably they might want, in fact, to be represented by one of their own. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — The ward system allows them to do this. I think, at the root of it, the Tory position is, in 
fact, that they are afraid of this democratic process. They object to the small man, representing a working 
class area, coming forward and being elected. Rather, they would have it at large. In fact, in municipal 
elections, the turnouts have been absolutely terrible. But if you could see the turnout once they have 
established the ward system, you would see a substantial increase in the electorate's interest. 
 
I just want to say that the ward system, as proposed, applied to the two major cities. Obviously, that is where 
you have the largest difficulty because of the size of the population. 
 
I just want to indicate a few of the advantages and strengths of the ward system which came out of the briefs 
and the representations of the public to the de Vlieger commission. I'll talk, first of all, about the apparent 
strengths of the ward system. Because geographically-based elections are customary for other elections such 
as the school board. Secondly, voters will have a real and not a phony choice between candidates. Board 
trustees, collectively, will have a much better knowledge of the whole city. The trustee would be the 
communication channel between the administration and ordinary citizens. Trustees would be more 
accountable. 



 
July 5, 1982 

 

481 
 

 
These are the basic reasons why we have done it on the provincial level and the rural municipality level. 
These are the same reasons why we went into the cities and established the ward system; to get better 
representation. Of course, I am convinced that you get better representation with the introduction of the ward 
system as was introduced by the former, outstanding minister of education. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Where is he now? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — He'll be here. 
 
Not very often do I agree with the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix or the Leader-Post, but here's a little article in 
"Viewpoints." I want the Minister of Education to listen to this because he's making a horrible mistake here. 
He's getting off on the wrong foot. He has probably been advised by the Deputy Premier. I can understand 
that that advice will get him into problems. Let me just quote from the Leader-Post, June 19, 1982: 
 

The most disappointing proposal revealed in yesterday's speech is the government's decision to 
repeal, even before it is tested, the ward system of school elections in Regina and Saskatoon, passed 
just a year ago and scheduled to go into effect when the school board elections are held in October. 

 
Even the Leader-Post can see the glaring errors of the members opposite. Even the Leader-Post is trying to 
help out that new minister who is getting the wrong advice from some of his senior cabinet colleagues. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I have, as I said, observed the results of elections when there are elections at 
large. We have seen that you get some 30 or 35 individuals on a ballot, and if you do an analysis of it, you 
will find that those at the beginning of the alphabet (because they are listed in alphabetical order) are in large 
measure automatically elected, just from the point of view that they appear first on the ballot. 
 
This is the type of democracy they propose. Here is the Premier who stood up and said he would allow more 
participation by people in government. The first step he took was to take his Minister of Education aside and 
say, "I want you to take away some of the freedom that those NDPers were going to give to those people up 
in Saskatoon." I want to say, clearly and unequivocally, that there is no doubt that this progressive piece of 
legislation that was proposed by the brilliant former minister of education will indeed come to pass. I think 
that the people of Saskatoon and Regina will see that the intent of the repeal of this legislation is really to 
attempt to curtail real representation within the individual wards. 
 
I can see that this group that sits across the way is inclined to promote the elite group in society. I know that 
they would obviously agree that the school board should be picked from the group from south of College 
Avenue. But I don't agree with that. I think that the workers in Regina North West, Regina North and Regina 
North East should indeed have an opportunity to be represented. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I don't think that it's possible for a person elected at large to know in detail the concerns 
of a given area. I think what is necessary is to have people  



 
July 5, 1982 

 
482 

representing both a given area and a given group of people, but who are also able to make a contribution by 
looking at the broader scene. There is no problem with that, because obviously when you're elected to the 
legislature, you're elected to a ward or a constituency. Surely you can't argue that that is going to restrict you 
in looking at the overall picture of the province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, and you know it's no 
use going back and arguing about what the legislation did not propose. 
 
The legislation really applied only to the two major cities, with populations of over 100,000. Let's start with 
the basic principles. I'll go over all of the reasons why we should have the ward system in a moment. But the 
legislation that is being repealed applied only to the two major cities. So we might as well start with that 
premise. I can take the concept and lead you back and say, "Sure, we should maybe have it in cities smaller 
than that." But we had the concept of looking at two of the largest cities in this province, and what we 
offered was a ward system in which we would have representation representing different areas of the city, 
representing different economic classes . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Well, it's no use going back to that. 
On your principle, you want to wipe it out no matter where it exists. If you want to carry the principle 
forward, then you wouldn't be destroying a start on the principles. So there's no use going back to the 
complete principle, if you're not even prepared to look at it where it is most applicable. 
 
I want to say that I must agree with the Leader-Post in saying that this is a very disappointing start for the 
new Minister of Education. There was no consultation; he was taken aside by some of his senior colleagues 
and told what to do. Helplessly he stands here, Mr. Speaker, in this House, unable to say that he had a 
consultation. I ask: has he contacted the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers' Federation)? Has he contacted 
individual ratepayers? No, of course not. 
 
I think that really what should occur here — and I say this in all sincerity, Mr. Minister — is that this bill 
should be pulled and an opportunity for the ward system to be tried should be allowed. And I'll tell you that 
once it is in place, you wouldn't have the problem of having to repeal it. I don't know what the fear of 
allowing a ward system to be established is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That is not true; I've got to run 
through those with you. 
 
All I'm going to tell you is that out of the 19 briefs that were submitted by private individuals, 14 — 14, 
that's right — voluntary organizations, equally balanced. The two largest city councils indicated their wish 
not to go on record as either opposing or favouring. I think that is accurate. This is great consultation with 
the public. Here is a consensus built on the method of contacting the public. And here we have a 
disappointing start, not only by the minister but by a government that was given such a mandate to represent 
in a very open fashion, and to provide the mechanisms for greater and greater participation in the democratic 
process. 
 
I have, Mr. Speaker, not much confidence in the members opposite, but I want to say that I think I have 
confidence in the new Minister of Education. I am urging him to take this back, reconsider it, withdraw the 
bill (do the wise thing), allow the ward system to operate. And if in fact there is a failure in the functioning 
of the ward system — give it a chance to operate — I'll guarantee you the support on this side of the House 
in its withdrawal in the future, in the introduction of a bill to withdraw it. Surely the idea has a right, after 
having been totally surveyed, to be given an opportunity, for the public to have a greater say in the 
educational system, to make it a more democratic system, just as we have at the municipal level, or at the 
provincial level, or in the larger school units.  



 
July 5, 1982 

 

483 
 

It is exactly the same. 
 
In my view there is a bit of a sinister view being held by ministers opposite. Some of them have sort of the 
sheeting of the divine right to rule and represent — no input from the public. And here was an opportunity 
where ordinary citizens might get a chance to represent an area. But what happened? They weren't even 
given a chance. And here, as Dr. de Vlieger has indicated, the overwhelming reasons for supporting the 
introduction of the ward system. There is no doubt, the evidence is overwhelming, that the ward system 
would be more effective. Maybe the body out there called the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees' 
Association) wouldn't have as much control because maybe it doesn't talk as much with the ordinary citizens 
from the working class. Maybe they want just the elitist group to represent them on school boards. Obviously 
they wanted that with the city councils, because precisely the same arguments were used when we introduced 
the ward system in the cities — that you would be better off being represented south of College Avenue. 
 
I'm going to close my remarks, but I want to say . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Just a moment now. I'm 
going to close my remarks, but I want to ask for an adjournment, because this is a highly important principle 
that is being looked at, and I am not prepared to stand in this legislature and allow it to go by without being 
challenged. So I ask the House, Mr. Speaker, to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 19 — 
An Act to amend The Wildlife Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the member for Athabasca, who would like to 
partake in this debate, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I must inform the member for Shaunavon that when this bill was read a second time he 
adjourned that particular debate, and it's not permissible for a member to adjourn debate twice on the same 
bill. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member for Athabasca, is very interested in speaking on 
this bill, and I beg leave to adjourn debate on his behalf. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg has asked leave to adjourn debate. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, during the last session of this legislature, a bill identical to the one 
before the House at this time was introduced and given first reading. During the 1980-81 session of this 
legislature, amendments were made to The Legal Profession Act on a number of matters including new 
discipline procedures. All of the amendments contained in this bill, with the exception of section 8, make 
amendments arising out of those amendments. 



 
July 5, 1982 

 
484 

 
Sections 3 and 9 correct errors made in the 1980-81 bill because only 17 benchers are elected, not 18, as the 
act now states. Section 3 amends section 12 of the act. The eighteenth member is the Dean of Law at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Section 9 of this bill corrects a form to the act to reflect the fact that the number of benchers from Saskatoon 
has been increased from three to five. 
 
Sections 4 and 7 of the bill clarify that the first or second vice-chairman has the same powers as the 
chairman of the discipline committee in sections 56 and 75. This is consistent with other provisions of the 
act. 
 
Section 5 of the bill gives the right to cross-examine and re-examine a witness testifying before a committee 
of the benchers of the law society which is primarily involved with disciplinary matters. 
 
Under 70(2) of the act, the benchers of the law society may reinstate a lawyer who has been struck from the 
roll if they are satisfied that his subsequent conduct or other facts warrant the reinstatement. 
 
The amendment contained in section 6 permits the benchers to have an investigation conducted before 
ordering reinstatement. 
 
The hon. members opposite may well know that some lawyers are, in fact, applying for reinstatement to the 
courts to get an order directing the law society to reinstate them. In fact, what this requires is that the law 
society will have an opportunity to review the matter and have a second investigation prior to reinstatement 
to make sure that it is in the public interest. 
 
Section 8 of the bill amends the boundaries of the Saskatoon district and Battleford electoral divisions to 
include Unity in the Saskatoon district division rather than Battleford. Lawyers of Unity are members of the 
Kerrobert Bar Association and have a closer relationship with the Saskatoon district electoral division. This 
was requested by the benchers, as were the other provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I would like to make a couple of comments, Mr. Speaker. I want to say that this act is 
identical to the act to amend The Legal Profession Act that was proposed during the last session by the 
Attorney General's predecessor, that brilliant attorney general, Roy Romanow. I want to say, in view of the 
fact that it was prepared by the past government, and because it is identical to what was prepared by the 
former attorney general, we will be in a position to support this bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, this bill is identical to a bill which died on the order paper at the last 
session of the last legislature. When the district court and the Court of  



 
July 5, 1982 

 

485 
 

Queen's Bench were merged by legislation, many consequential amendments were required to other statutes. 
Unfortunately, a consequential amendment to The Deserted Wives' and Children's Maintenance Act, read in 
conjunction with the existing Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, has resulted in a situation 
which was not intended by the merger legislation. In fact, because of the merger, some judges are saying that 
enforcement proceedings must be done in the provincial court. This was not intended. This proposed 
amendment ensures that enforcement will only be through the Queen's bench and the unified family court. 
 
The amendments contained in section 3 and section 4(2) of the bill simply clarify the right of appeal in 
reciprocal enforcement matters. This is required as a result of the repeal of The District Court Act upon a 
merger of the courts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have an opportunity today to speak on second reading 
of the amendment to The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act, raising the corporation's borrowing from 
$300 million to $500 million. This bill was introduced last session and died on the order paper, and it is 
being introduced again. 
 
This amendment is another indication of this government's commitment to increase the supply of housing 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. The construction of single-family housing units in Saskatchewan had 
virtually come to a halt under the previous administration. With the new 13.25 per cent mortgage interest 
program, our government plans to get family housing units under construction, not only to create new 
housing, but to create new jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
As a further extension of our efforts to create jobs we intend to stress the use of Saskatchewan products, 
particularly from the crown corporations such as Sask Forest Products. Utilization of these materials has 
never been emphasized in our housing construction as far as Sask Housing is concerned. Mr. Speaker, use of 
Saskatchewan products means more jobs and more internal income for the people of this province. We have 
the necessary products here in Saskatchewan. As well, we have the qualified people, so it is this 
government's intention to use them 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what Saskatchewan is all about: working people who deserve the right to earn their 
living, and a government which cares about them to help them initiate these programs. Our policy is to 
provide housing for the people who need housing, and those are the low income people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The borrowing limit of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation has been extended to its limit within the act, 
with the result being a huge accumulation of land sitting unused and the government subsidizing rental units 
whose occupants are high-income earners. Our government plans not only to improve the liquidity of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation and to put the funds to use where they will do the most good. 
Low-income families, native families and senior citizens — these will be the ones to benefit from our 
programs, as well as the construction industry and related industries. 



 
July 5, 1982 

 
486 

 
Following the election of April 26, we undertook a general review of the programs of the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation in order to make a preliminary assessment as to whether these programs were meeting 
the real housing needs of the people of Saskatchewan. While we may wish to look at some of the 
corporation's programs very carefully over the next few months, we are well aware that any extensive delay 
in permitting the corporation to proceed with planned projects could have a significant and adverse impact 
on the housing industry, already badly hit by high interest rates. Therefore, I have authorized the corporation 
to proceed with the planning and construction of close to 700 rental housing units under the public housing 
and non-profit rental housing programs. 
 
The corporation has just provided me with a list of a further 756 units which the corporation hopes to tender 
later this year. These projects would be more than sufficient to commit the full federal housing budget for 
Saskatchewan in 1982 and provide additional units to meet any potential increase in the federal budget. 
 
I have already noticed that we expect to announce details of a new provincial home-ownership program to 
assist those families who cannot qualify for mortgages on new housing under our new 13.25 per cent 
mortgage interest program. This program can be expected to cause a further increase in housing starts. 
 
These approvals are in addition to the 1,900 housing units currently under construction in various 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation programs already. These under construction right now are 535 
home-ownership units being built under the corporation's various home-ownership programs; 700 low-rental 
housing units primarily for senior citizens, under the public housing program; 665 moderate-income rental 
units, under the non-profit rental program. The total number of units under construction or to be tendered for 
1982, thus far, is 3,356 units. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week approval was granted to construct a 50-unit senior citizen project by the Knights of 
Columbus in Prince Albert with 20 per cent of the cost being funded by the provincial government. In 
addition, Mr. Speaker, we have approved senior citizen homes in Churchbridge, 12; Delisle, 10; Esterhazy, 
8; Hafford, 10; Kipling, 24; Lake Lenore, 10; Parkside, 10. In addition to the other one, Mr. Speaker, in 
Prince Albert, we have also approved two additional senior citizens' homes, one of 50 units and one of 36 
units. These projects will be tendered later this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is hardly an indication that the government has brought housing construction to a halt, as 
some of the members opposite have claimed. The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is proceeding as 
rapidly as possible to plan and tender housing projects and to implement its new home-ownership program, 
and that is creating jobs and homes for the people of Saskatchewan. Of course, Mr. Speaker, we have already 
announced introduction, effective July 1, of the 13.25 per cent mortgage program, which will have a major 
impact on construction across the province. 
 
Financing the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation projects that are currently under construction, as well as 
the projects that have been recently approved, requires an increase in the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation's borrowing limit. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, the objections of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation are in accordance with 
the main objectives of this government, which are to provide help to the people who need it most. Mr. 
Speaker, I move second reading of a bill to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act. 



 
July 5, 1982 

 

487 
 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, as the minister points out, the bill essentially calls for action that 
was called for by the former minister responsible for Sask Housing. However, the record needs to be set 
straight in that the minister, in outlining what he now calls his programs, plays a little game with the fact of 
the situation. The fact of the situation, particularly with regard to new housing construction, is that two of the 
programs which had been announced — the program to construct 1,000 new houses, and the accompanying 
arrangement with that program, to guarantee not only a 10 year lock-in at 16 per cent on mortgages, but to 
guarantee a subsidy to write down the interest rate of the mortgages so that the cost of housing would not 
exceed 30 per cent of the income for any family — would have provided for an effective interest rate, Mr. 
Speaker, of less than 12 per cent for those people. That program has been cancelled. However, the minister 
now indicates that he is studying it. I am sure that with the assistance of the member for Regina North West 
the study will be a successful one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was also included the proposal to construct 500 apartment units, mainly in the major cities of 
Saskatchewan. That program has been cancelled. Together, those two programs, taking an average (and it is 
a legitimate average) of one and one-half person-years of employment for each unit of housing construction, 
have eliminated for the time being, at least, 2,250 jobs in the construction industry. Now, he outlines, in 
detail, projects that will proceed and result in the construction of 2,650 housing units. Those are all units 
under long-standing programs that were all approved prior to March 1982 and would have gone ahead in any 
event. It is recognized that the housing corporation, under the provision of the bill, does require additional 
borrowing powers. We will, therefore, be supporting the bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say that this minister, unlike many of the ministers in the government opposite, has taken up our 
suggestion that, while he is studying and reviewing proposed new programs of the previous government, he 
is, at the same time, going ahead with a number of the projects and programs that had been proposed, so that 
the industry doesn't come to a dead stop. I would advise that he attempt to convince some of his colleagues 
in cabinet that that is a sound approach, and an approach for which the government need not apologize. They 
do require time to get their act together and to get input from some of the new and vigorously creative 
members whom they have on that side. But while they are doing that, it is commendable that they go ahead 
with a number of the projects that people have been waiting for. We will, therefore, be supporting this bill in 
second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly referred to a committee of the whole 
later this day. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — While I am on my feet, Mr. Speaker, in addition, I would like to ask leave of 
the House to consider Bill No. 5, Bill No. 7, Bill No. 4 and Bill No. 6 in committee later this day. 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to establish the Department of Energy and Mines and to repeal The 
Department of Mineral Resources Act 

 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Speaker, this act is not a particularly complex one. There's one thing 
about it: the members opposite will understand it without a great deal of  



 
July 5, 1982 

 
488 

difficulty. Even though it's relatively simple, we still added an even simpler addendum to it so that the 
gentlemen opposite can probably, after a couple of days of intensive study, have some insight as to what the 
intent of it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was my intention to be very brief on this matter, but in the interests of simplicity and the 
education of members opposite, I suppose we could lengthen it out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this act is to change the name from the Department of Mineral Resources to the 
Department of Energy and Mines. We believe that this is consistent with the high profile and priority that 
this government places upon energy. This name change indicates the government's intention to place a high 
priority on the development of Saskatchewan's vast energy reserves. In other words, very simply stated, I 
guess we're going to glamorize energy a little bit. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


