






















































Hansard: June 17, 1982


1 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 17, 1982 

 
This being the day appointed by proclamation of His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, dated the ninth 
day of June 1982, for the meeting of the first session of the 20th Legislative Assembly of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the Assembly having met: 
 
THE CLERK: — I would like to inform the Assembly that I have received a communication from the 
private secretary to His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, stating that His Honor will open the session at 2 
p.m. today, the 17th day of June 1982. 
 

2:06 p.m. 
His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat on the throne. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I AM COMMANDED BY His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor to inform you 
that he does not see fit to declare the causes of the summoning of the present legislature until later today 
when the Legislative Assembly shall have elected a Speaker according to law. 
 
THE CLERK: — Nominations are open for Speaker. 
 

MOTION 
 

Election of Speaker 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Gary Lane, Provincial Secretary: 
 

That Herbert Junior Swan, Esq., member for the constituency of Rosetown-Elrose, do take the Chair 
of the Assembly as Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, I beg to express my grateful thanks and 
humble acknowledgement of the high Honor the Assembly has been pleased to confer upon me. While I 
leave the floor of this Assembly to take the Speaker’s Chair, I feel that I also leave all political partisan 
feelings in order that I may discharge with impartiality to all, and to the best of my ability, the various 
and important duties pertaining to the high office of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the 
Province of Saskatchewan. 
 

2:14 p.m. 
His Honor the Lieutenant-governor entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker then addressed His Honor to the following effect: 
 
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOR: 
 
The Legislative Assembly has elected me as its Speaker, although I am but little able to fulfil the 
important duties thus assigned to me. If in the performance of those duties I should at any time fall into 
error, I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and not to 



 
June 17, 1982 
 

 
2 

the Assembly, whose servant I am, and who, through me, the better to enable them to discharge their 
duty to their Queen and country, humbly claim all their undoubted privileges, especially that they may 
have freedom of speech in their debates, access to your person at all seasonable times and that their 
proceedings may receive from you the most favorable consideration. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor to declare 
to you that he freely confides in the duty and attachment of the Assembly to Her Majesty’s person and 
government. And not doubting their proceedings will be conducted with wisdom, temperance and 
prudence, he grants, and upon all occasions will recognize and allow, their constitutional privileges. 
 
I am commanded also to assure you that the Assembly shall have ready access to His Honor upon all 
seasonable occasions, and that their proceedings, as well as your words and actions, will constantly 
receive from him the most favorable construction. 
 
His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor was then pleased to open the session with the following speech: 
 
MR. SPEAKER, 
 
MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY: 
 
It is my privilege to welcome you to the first session of the 20th legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
This legislature convenes at a time of severe economic strain for Canada and for Saskatchewan. While 
we cannot insulate ourselves from difficulties which have origins elsewhere, we can use the resources of 
our province and the energies of our people to create here a positive economic climate for growth and 
development. We can also use the resources of Saskatchewan to aid our citizens as they struggle with the 
everyday consequences of high inflation and high interest rates. 
 
In Saskatchewan we have always held as complementary the traditional values of independence and 
co-operation. As individuals, we treasure self-reliance. As a community faced with the vast challenge of 
our province, we have worked together to make full use of the opportunities Providence has given us. 
Consistent with these values, my advisers will use the resources of the government as necessary to 
protect the health and security of the people of Saskatchewan, to preserve our common heritage and to 
complement the efforts of our citizens in developing a vibrant provincial economy. New programs will 
be designed and old ones improved which will be sensitive to the needs of those being assisted and 
which will be efficient in delivery and cost. It is possible for government to be reliable without being 
remote, suffocating or paternalistic. 
 
My advisers also believe that it is the duty of government to allow a wide scope for individual initiatives 
in the provision of goods and services, and that government intervention may be counter-productive if it 
attempts to encompass too much of the activity of the modern economy. 
 
The prosperity of Saskatchewan is directly related to the prosperity of the agricultural sector. My 
advisers believe that the historic strength of our agricultural industry derives from the independent 
farmer, working land he owns and carefully safeguards  



 
June 17, 1982 

 

 
3 

for future generations. We must see any threat to the preservation of the family farms, including any 
strong and continuous drift to rented farmsteads, as a threat to the Saskatchewan way of life. For this 
reason my government is now developing the Saskatchewan Family Farm Purchase Program, which will 
promote the transfer of farmland from older to younger farmers by providing once-in-a-lifetime loans at 
low interest rates. 
 
In recent years the people of this province have been called upon to bear an increasingly heavy burden of 
taxation — taxation which has been imposed from many directions and in many guises. It is time to 
carefully assess this burden and provide a measure of relief. My advisers have already acted to repeal the 
petroleum fuel tax and during the coming session you will be asked to confirm this action by approving 
changes to The Fuel Petroleum Products Act. 
 
You will also be asked to consider legislation to establish a public utilities review commission to review 
the rates set for consumers by Saskatchewan’s public utilities. My government believes that public utility 
rate increases should be monitored and controlled by a public body to guarantee that rate increases are 
publicly justified and do not simply constitute disguised taxation. 
 
It is a primary duty of government to see that access to suitable housing is widespread and that as many 
people as possible can own their own homes. A wide variety of housing is available to potential 
purchasers in Saskatchewan, but many buyers have been artificially barred from the market because of 
the high interest rate policy imposed from outside Saskatchewan. My government therefore plans to 
proceed with the mortgage interest reduction plan in this session, so that mortgages at the rate of 13.25 
per cent will be available for mortgages on principal residences, up to a value of $50,000, for the next 
three years. 
 
My government will also be presenting amendments to the local government election act and The Urban 
Municipality Act to update and standardize procedures for urban and rural municipalities. 
 
The Education Act will be amended to repeal the ward system of elections for urban school boards. This 
legislation must be passed immediately to apply to the fall 1982 local elections. 
 
Various other legislative measures will be placed before you for your consideration. 
 
I leave you now to the business of the session, with full confidence that you will favorably discharge 
your duties and responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and guide this legislature in all its deliberations. 
 
Leaving. 
 
Prayers 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Notice from Chief Electoral Officer 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has 
received from the chief electoral officer lists of the names of such  



 
June 17, 1982 
 

 
4 

members as have been returned to serve in the legislature. 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that Blair Butterfield, Brent Christensen, and Therese 
Stecyk will be pages during the present session. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Bill Respecting Oaths of Office 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker. I, move: 
 

That a bill respecting the administration of oaths of office be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I beg to inform the Assembly that in order to prevent mistakes I have obtained a 
copy of the speech of His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor, which I now lay on the Table. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. Eric Berntson, Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 

That the speech of His Honor the Lieutenant-Governor be taken into consideration on Friday. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Mr. Andrew, Minister of Finance: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed after first having been perused by Mr. 
Speaker; that he do appoint the printing thereof and that no person but such as he shall appoint do 
presume to print the same. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Members to Compose Lists for Standing Committees 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Joan Duncan, Minister of 
Revenue, Supply and Services: 
 

That Messrs. Katzman, Baker, Hammersmith, Klein and Martens be constituted a special committee 
to prepare and report with all convenient speed lists of members to compose the standing committees 
of the Assembly, provided under rule no. 86; 



 
June 17, 1982 

 

 
5 

That the said standing committees be severally empowered to examine and inquire into all such 
matters and things as may be referred to them by this Assembly and to report from time to time their 
observations thereon with power to send for persons, papers and records and to examine witnesses 
under oath. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to comment on the motion. I rise to point out that the 
body of the motion is unobjectionable. The personnel on the committee consists of four government 
members and one opposition members, and I rise to point out that, so far as I am aware, this will be the 
first time in the history of the legislature of Saskatchewan that the official opposition, whatever its size 
may have been, will have had one representative on that committee rather than the customary two. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Election of Deputy Speaker 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Hon. Paul Rousseau, Minister of Industry 
and Commerce: 
 

That Lloyd Muller, Esq., member for the constituency of Shellbrook-Torch River, be Deputy Speaker 
of this Assembly. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Election of Deputy Chairman of Committees 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Hon. Colin Thatcher, Minister of 
Mineral Resources: 
 

That Louis A. Domotor, member for Humboldt, be deputy chairman of committees of this Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 2:32 p.m. 


