






















































Hansard: December 16, 1982


(1794) 1795 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
Thursday, December 16, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. JOHNSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night at the CPA dinner I had the pleasure of sitting 
beside a young lady who has been visiting Canada from Sweden since last August. She had never been 
to the legislature, so I indicated that I would pick her up and bring her down here and introduce her to 
you and through you to the Legislative Assembly. She is here on a working permit and works in the 
Toronto Dominion Bank downtown. As I said, she has been here since last October and is returning 
home later on in January. I would like to wish her a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year on behalf 
of all on the floor of the legislature, and a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Dismantling of Workers’ Environment Board 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I would like, Mr. Speaker, to direct a question to the Minister of Labor, the minister 
in charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Outside this House yesterday, in an interview with the Leader-Post and reported this morning, you said, 
and I want to quote: 
 

The decision to disband the board was made several months ago. 
 

I want to ask the minister if that is true. And if you have an open-door policy with unions and you want 
to co-operate with them at every level, could you advise us why you did not communicate this decision 
to scrap the worker environment board until very recently? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, The WEB board was under discussion for a number of weeks. 
As I mentioned in the House yesterday, we, in the Department of Labor, have the occupational health 
department under our jurisdiction. We have people in that department who are doing mine safety, doing 
mine inspections continuously, and the fact that we have another board and a commission, we figured, 
was just a duplication of effort. These people are available and if they’re available they can come into 
our department any time or discuss with our mining inspectors any problems that they may see at their 
mine sites. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I have here a copy of an agreement which was indeed 
signed by the participating parties on March 25, 1981. It seems to me what you have done is unilaterally 
discard that contract and have had no consultation with the participating parties with respect to your 
actions. Can you indicate what actions, what discussion you have had with the unions that were 
involved, in respect to  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1796 

disbanding this board? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we did not discuss with the board members in that agreement, 
with the union and board members, whichever . . . There is union and management on that board. It says 
in the agreement that the associate deputy minister, shall be chairman of the board, and at this time we 
did not have an associate deputy minister, so, looking at the whole board and the duplication of work 
that was being done, we want to have it all under our Department of Labor. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A further supplemental. You have indicated that there was no associate deputy 
minister in respect to the executive committee. I want to indicate to you that my information is that the 
executive board met, in fact voted to change that provision, it was passed at the executive meeting, and 
that you have unilaterally discarded the actions of the board itself. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I have said before that we figure it’s a duplication of effort. 
We are going to look after the occupational health and safety through the Department of Labor, and that 
was probably the 799th board that we’ve run across since we took office here in April, and there was so 
much duplication of work we are wanting to streamline the whole operation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — As I take it, the position that the minister has indicated is that any future action that 
he takes will be unilateral without consultation of unions, as you have so clearly demonstrated in your 
action here. Are you heading on a confrontation rather than a co-operation basis in respect to working 
with unions? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. I’ve had more co-operation in the last six or 
seven months than I think the previous administration has had for several years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — As far as the actual rank and file worker is concerned, we’ve had more to 
do with the worker in seven months than you people had before, and it’s been the leadership that you 
have been working with. The rank and file are coming into my office now. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A question, Mr. Speaker, for the Minster of Labor. Surely even the 
incumbent Minister of Labor understands the difference between the role played by the board and the 
role played by your department. The role played by this board was: it allowed worker input into the 
decision, whereas yours is an enforcement role. My question is: would you explain to me concisely and 
precisely how your department provides worker input into these decisions in the workplace? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, for several years now, in all of industry, in all companies in 
this province, there have been occupational health committees in the companies themselves. Every 
month we get minutes into our Department of Labor as to their concerns and we are on top of it all the 
time. So what’s the use of having another board on top of the occupational health committees that are 
already in existence in the province? 



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1797 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary. How many times have you been asked by management 
about conditions in the workplace, and taken time to consult the workers and report back to the 
management? You are suggesting that’s the process in your department. How many times has that taken 
place since you assumed office? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Are you suggesting how many times management have been in? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, that wasn’t my question. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Then repeat your question, please. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question. You are suggesting that your department is duplicating the 
role of the board in allowing worker input. You are therefore saying that you receive requests from 
management for advice, you consult the workers and report back to management. My question is: how 
many times has that actually happened? How many times have you taken the opportunity to consult with 
workers and report back to management on these things? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’m informed that this should probably be an estimate 
question, but the occupational health committees are the workforce in the industry. They are the ones 
that are sending the minutes to our department all the time for our inspectors, for our people to read, and 
to discover if there are inaccuracies out there. They react to that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Is there not a difference between occupational safety, which is 
enforcement-orientated, and the worker environment board, which seeks to provide worker input into 
decisions before they are made? Isn’t that the difference between the two? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, it is my experience, and I have been involved with it prior to 
getting into government, that the employees do have the right to express their opinions at their 
occupational health meetings — and that is what we are getting here — prior to any problems and 
suggestions and changes that could be made. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Isn’t it true that the occupational health deals 
with problems in an ex post factor way, whereas the worker environment board was intended to give 
workers the opportunity to have input before the decisions become final? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I see no difference in them whatsoever. The occupational 
health people will do that at the work level, also through their minutes. 
 

Economic Recovery in Saskatchewan 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Premier. I think it was yesterday in 
this House he pointed out that he was in active demand as a speaker outside the province, and it 
inhibited him from attendance in the House. I noted in the press that he had been in Vancouver speaking 
to the Vancouver Board of Trade, and the report in the Leader-Post some days ago indicated that 
Saskatchewan has decided not to participate in the current recession in Canada, the premier had advised 
the members of the Vancouver Board of Trade. 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1798 

I noted just about the same time an advertisement in the press headed, “ Repossessed Homes”, and it 
gave a list of repossessed homes, and then it says, “More homes too numerous to mention. Call for your 
list of repossessed homes. Call Jennifer Smith.” 
 
And just about at the same time I saw another ad in the paper saying: 
 

Ford Motor Credit Company repossessed trucks. We have on hand four 1980 Model Ford CLT 
trucks . . . are offered for sale prior to being sent to an auction. 
 

Now, My question, Mr. . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You should tell the rest of the province that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Members are asking for more details, perhaps they want to pick them up. 
“Phone or call at Percival Truck Centre, No. 1 Highway East, Regina.” 
 
My question to you, Mr. Premier, is this. While you may well have opted not to participate in the 
recession, some citizens of our province are rather clearly participating very much against their will. Are 
you proposing to take any steps so that citizens will not have to participate in this recession in the way 
that you are asserting that we in this legislature are not participating in the recession? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan we have initiated several 
programs which the rest of the country looks at with a great deal of envy. And when I travel across the 
country, or indeed out of the country, or our ministers travel in other parts of the world, people from all 
walks of life and from various corners of the world appreciate what’s going on in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, when we start to talk about housing, the best mortgage program in the history of Canada was 
initiated in this province to protect people from losing their homes — at 13.25 per cent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Now that may not appeal to the members opposite, but I want them to 
remember that they voted for it, and they appreciate it. It’s the best one in the country. When we’re 
looking at discretionary income in the province of Saskatchewan, something like over $100 million is 
passed on to the consumers, who are now saving in the neighborhood of about $1 a gallon over the 
province of Quebec. And it’s even getting better, because we don’t participate in federal programs that 
are passed on, and we don’t piggyback on them like the former administration did. No more 20 per cent 
gas tax. 
 
Number two, when we look at the rate of unemployment in the province of Saskatchewan, it’s the 
lowest in the nation. When we look at the rate of price increases of CPI, it’s the lowest in Canada. When 
we look at the new activity in the energy business, everybody in Canada is looking at Saskatchewan for 
investment and economic activity because of jobs, because of the service industry. They are announcing 
new discoveries, and new oil programs. When you put the thing together everybody knows, everybody 
knows that we have to cope with the national economic programs. None of us are all that happy with 
them, but the province of Saskatchewan has an attitude that we can be resilient as anybody in the nation. 
Because we’re first 



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1799 

class we’ll be first out of the recession. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a very short question. How can you be first out of a 
recession you decided not to participate in in the first place? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Maybe the member opposite doesn’t recall that we are Canadians. This 
province is part of the Canadian scene. The people in Saskatchewan under their new administration are 
going to say, ‘We’re going to have a positive attitude about dealing with economics and with enterprise, 
not a negative attitude.” It’s that change in attitude that the whole country is delighted about, and that’s 
why they’re requesting information from this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Trappers’ Association 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question will be directed to the minister for DTRR, the 
minister for DNS. It’s in regard to the trappers’ association. As you well know, the association depends 
largely on government funding for its operation and programs. In the past eight months, the association 
has been trying to get some indication from you as to whether it can receive program funding or not. The 
STA’s meeting and annual convention is coming up next month. The association is directly concerned 
that it has had no response from your administration. My question is: will the minister advise this House 
as to whether his government plans to provide the Saskatchewan Trappers’ Association with grants or 
financial assistance at this time? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I believe the hon. member is maybe misrepresenting a little bit 
about the dire concern of the trappers’ association. My ongoing discussions with them have always been 
of a positive nature. Yes, we will be providing the trappers’ association with grant money. In fact, I 
believe $25,000 is on its way (if it’s not on its way, it will be in the very near future) for the 
administration aspects of the Saskatchewan Trappers’ Association. I believe they’re aware of that. 
 
MR. YEW: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I spoke with the people of the association just as recently 
as an hour ago, and they advised me that there was nothing in the works. They’ve had continuous 
promises and commitments by your administration. However, apparently the whole executive of the new 
administration is out on Christmas leave. And they direly need this money at this point in time. 
However, my question is: if your department is prepared to give the association funds, what is the reason 
for delaying this payment until after the new year? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I’ve just said, Mr. Speaker, that we have not delayed the payment till after 
the new year. I’m confident that the money will be in the hands of the trappers’ association before the 
new year. And I’m really surprised at the information you gave the House today that they are not aware 
there is money coming, because my information is that they are aware of that. And I don’t know where 
that kind of misunderstanding could come from. But in any case I will assure you through Mr. Speaker 
that the money is coming to them before the end of the year. 
 

Absence of Minister of Agriculture 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1800 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. The opposition has noticed that 
since Monday the Minister of Agriculture and the House Leader has not been in the Assembly, which 
included the passage of two very important farm bills. Can the Premier indicate whether the minister is 
away on government business? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — The minister is not in the House. He’s on private business. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the Premier. Mr. Premier, can you indicate 
to the House whether or not the Minister of Agriculture and House Leader is away on holidays at this 
time? 
 
I would like to know whether or not it’s the intention of the government to complete the estimates of this 
year’s budget? We are now into the ninth month of the fiscal year. I’m wondering whether you can give 
assurances that we will complete estimates by the time we leave here for the Christmas recess? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, no, I can’t give any assurances that we will. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the Premier. Will the Premier give us an 
assurance that the House will diligently pursue estimates until close to Christmas so that we may have 
some opportunity of asking the treasury benches how they have spent the money over the last nine 
months? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, yes. We’ll diligently pursue it. It depends on the opposition — what 
they want to pursue and what they don’t. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to have the assurance from the Premier that it 
will depend on what the opposition wishes to do. May I assure you, Mr. Premier, that we wish to 
proceed with estimates and with the other House business, and we wish to proceed diligently. We’ll take 
a break for Christmas, and would the Premier then agree that we will carry on for some days, that we 
will take break from the Christmas and New Year and come back very shortly thereafter? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we have bills that we want to get passed, we have estimates we 
want to get through, and we’ll proceed with the normal course of events to get them finished and get 
them completed as quickly as possible. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, final supplementary. I am very pleased that the Premier has 
indicated that we’ll move quickly before Christmas. The final part to the question is whether we will 
come back quickly after the Christmas break, in early January, to complete the estimates. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — We’ll be announcing when we come back when we see how much progress is 
made in the next few days. I can’t add any more to that. 



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1801 

Nipawin Hydro-Electric Site 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I took notice of a question by the hon. member for 
Quill Lakes concerning the tendering of the security contract at the Nipawin site. I wish to confirm with 
this House that the normal procedure of accepting bids by Saskatchewan Power Corporations carried 
forth in this tender. The Fort Security Services bid of $361,700 was low bid. 
 
Base Fort Patrol Ltd., Saskatoon, after a consultation with the power corporation to finalize and upgrade 
and uniform their original bid, came to $368,238, an increase of approximately $6,000 over and above 
the Fort Security contract. 
 
Besides that, Mr. Speaker, the people who were going to be involved with the Fort Security contract 
were all from the local area. The other company, with second low bid, was a Saskatoon-based company 
with their head office outside the province. 
 
It was the decision of our board to give it to the low bid because it was the low bid, plus the fact that it 
was a local content of people in the contract. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to direct supplementary question to the minister. You indicated that 
normal procedure was followed. On the 13th of December, you met with Base-Fort Petroleum Ltd., 
representatives of them. Did you at that time indicate and acknowledge to representatives of that 
company that, in fact, their tender was lower than the one that had been awarded? Higher? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I was not in attendance at that meeting, but I have all the 
figures here. I would ask you to tender the document that you had yesterday and we’ll upgrade it for 
you. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — In order to clarify the irregularities in respect to this contract, and there were a 
number of them, I wonder if the minister would in fact, file all of the tenders and the bids that were 
submitted. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, this is not my information to hand out, but I have the final 
figures here for you. I did meet the lady in Saskatoon, that was not before the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation board, but I did meet with them and I suggested to her then that we would give them the 
final figures as to how the contract was arrived at, and she evidently met with the Power management. 
My understanding is that it’s all understood; it’s after the fact now. We’re also doing some work at the 
tendering of power corporation and potash corporation to speed up, have less paper, make it easier for 
people to tender. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — In respect to the acceptance of what you terms the low tender, I wonder if you could 
advise us whether there were any additional revisions of the contract following the tender rather than the 
initial bid that was submitted. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, the only addition to it was the fact that they were not local 
people that were going to be working at the site. They had not entered in the costs of living in camp. 
That the only difference. 

Economic Recovery in Saskatchewan 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1802 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Premier. It relates to 
our failure to participate in the recession. The question arises out of an article the other day in the Globe 
and Mail, and the headline says it all: “Prairie Boom Goes Bust.” I will not quote the article for you, but 
let me just relate a very few stats: Saskatchewan’s unemployment doubles; welfare in Saskatchewan up 
to 33 per cent more than Manitoba; unemployment insurance up 40 per cent more than Manitoba; all 
three governments face rising deficits; commodity prices down. 
 
I listened with some interest to the comments of the Minister of Finance wondering what hope the 
unemployed and the bankrupt might find in what he was taking to the conference. All I heard was a hope 
expressed by him that there might be a greater co-operation. 
 
My question is: is the Minister of Finance taking to that conference anything more useful than his 
expression of a hope for the joyous hand holding with the federal government? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the attitude coming out of Saskatchewan over the past, I 
suppose, 31 of the last 38 years has been one of negativism, a negative attitude. And people are tired of 
that. They know that the whole world is suffering from a recession, but they want to think that we have 
two things in particular: that we have the ability to produce food, and the ability to produce energy. And 
those two are in abundance in the province of Saskatchewan. And we feel confident that we can lead this 
nation in contributing toward recovery, in providing jobs, in providing energy for not only this province 
but the rest of the country and, indeed, the world, as well as food processing. We’re looking forward to 
negotiating on heavy oil, on all sorts of things that can link to this province. 
 
And what we’re saying to the rest of the country is that the sky is not falling in. In fact, we lead the 
nation in most statistical pieces of information that we can generate and that we’re proud of it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Point of privilege. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Koskie in questioning indicated 
that he had information which indicates the contact was awarded to Fort Securities for $361,700. He 
went on to indicate that in fact the Government of Saskatchewan and Sask Power had not awarded a 
contact to the lowest bidder. 
 
Today he indicated that there were serious irregularities in the awarding of the contract. Today, evidence 
was tabled by the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation that in fact the information 
was given by the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Power Corporation that the low tender was 
given. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an indication, and I suggest the record will show, that the hon. member in fact, 
one, deliberately misled the House as to the information he had; secondly, that the member gave false 
information to this Assembly. He should be, Mr. Speaker, made to account for the source of his 
information he had; secondly, that the member gave false information to this Assembly. He should be, 
Mr. Speaker, made to account for the source of his information, the information that he had which bases 
on the unfortunately untrue allegations made by the hon. member. This  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1803 

House cannot put up with any more of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to check the record and I will bring in a ruling tomorrow. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 61 — An Act respecting Local Government in Northern Saskatchewan 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I would like to move first reading of a bill respecting local government in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Report of the Legislative Librarian 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would like to move a motion, 
seconded by the Hon. Graham Taylor, the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the report of the legislative librarian dated December 10, 1982, and tabled in this Assembly 
on December 14, 1982, as sessional paper no. 55 be referred to the standing committee on 
communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Change in Membership of Public Accounts Committee and Municipal Law Committee 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, one more, I move, seconded by the Hon. Graham Taylor: 
 

That by leave of this Assembly the name Mr. Meagher be substituted for that of Mr. Hampton on 
the list of members comprising the standing committee on public accounts, and that the name of 
Mr. Meagher be substituted for that of Mr. Hampton on the list of members comprising the 
standing committee on municipal law. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Election Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I would like to introduce Mr. Keith Lanpard, chief electoral officer. 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1804 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — My question surrounds why you want to put in this envelope system for 
hospitals and nursing homes, hospitals and sanatoria, and remand centres for by-elections. I would well 
understand why you would want to do this for general elections, but I can’t see the merit of it for 
by-elections. It has some very substantial demerits. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — The basis for the change for the judgment of Mr. Justice Sirois. If I can refer to, I 
believe it’s page 36 of the judgment: 
 

There is no mechanism in The Election Act providing for inmates to vote in an election. This is a 
matter that should be looked into by the legislators, by the chief electoral office and others who 
are responsible for administering the act. A mechanism could possibly be set up similar to that 
used for hospitals and sanatoria under section 90 of the act. 

 
So we are bringing it in, I suggest, in compliance with section 90 of the legislation. That’s basically 
what we’re doing. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Let me try this again and you can correct me where I’m wrong. I don’t 
think that is the procedure for hospitals and sanatoria on by-elections. It’s only in the general elections. 
Hospitals and sanatoria in by-elections now, if I understand it right, just fill in a declaration and their 
ballot goes in the ballot box and does not go into a ballot envelope. What I want to know is: why do you 
want to change that system, which has worked well, and go to another system which has all sorts of 
dangers in it? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — We didn’t want to isolate out the remand prisoners with an opportunity to verify 
their residency requirements. I think there is a potential (and I very guardedly say that) for abuse, and 
perhaps in some cases there may not be concern about the penalties. It was felt, so that they wouldn’t be 
isolated, that all three hospital sanatoria would be brought under the same procedure. That’s what it is. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think I now understand. I’m not sure I agree, but at least I understand 
and I think it’s not completely without logic. 
 
My case is this: in a bill like this you’re asking all the people in the hospitals and the sanatoria and the 
remand centres to fill out a declaration on an envelope form, and then you’re asking them to put their 
ballot in the envelope. So during the period from the time they put their ballot in the envelope until the 
time when it’s counted, there is always a possibility of abuse, because here is a ballot in an envelope and 
it is clearly identifiable how they vote. There is a gap in the time from the time the vote is passed until 
the time it’s counted. 
 
Obviously you don’t want to do that unless you have to, or unless there’s a good reason for it, and we 
don’t do it now, with respect to hospitals and sanatoria, in by-elections. In  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1805 

order to deal with what you think is a potential problem in remand centres where people might assert 
their residency carelessly (shall we say), without heed of the consequences, because some of the people 
in remand centres are not noted for their trustworthiness (I think that’s fair), you are going to set up this 
much more complicated system and are going to require people who now don’t have to put their ballot 
in an identified envelope — you’re going to make it apply to all. 
 
I question that. I think I now understand it; I question it. I’m always nervous about this business of 
putting ballots in envelopes where you have signed a declaration. In yet another emanation of this act 
over the years, we had little envelopes in big envelopes and that seemed to offer a little more protection. 
 
Has the minister considered the possibility of having a different system for remand centres than for 
hospitals sanatoria and rejected it on the grounds of possible problems with charters of rights and human 
rights codes and the like? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — As I indicated, we would be prepared to look at it. I think we’re dealing with 
realities, probably a by-election coming up, and we felt that it was safer to comply as much as possible 
with Mr. Justice Sirois’ obiter, and that’s simply the reason for it. I’m sure that if we gave it a great deal 
more thought we could find alternative ways to go, but I think it does cover the problem that we are 
politely addressing, both of us, and should it not be workable (we think it will because it is the practice 
followed in a general election) . . . I’m sympathetic to the comments you make, but we are working 
within those constraints, and when we review it later as to the whole question of number of remand 
centres (there are well over 60) perhaps we will address it different at that time and that will be brought 
forward for debate. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I think I have made the point. I like to 
think that we have as few instances where people’s votes are in identifiable envelopes, and where we 
have them, for as little time as possible, but I see that the minister has given some consideration to this 
and has sought a way to solve the problem. I won’t quarrel with it. I ask him to consider other 
approaches as he reviews this act in particular, as he obviously is going to do because he has to grapple 
with the question of remand centres in general elections as well. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I most certainly will. I appreciate the comments, but again given the constraints 
that we’re under at this time we felt that this was the safest route to go, given the judgment. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

THIRD READING 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Election Act 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1806 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Devine that Bill 
No. 53 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act (No. 2) be now 
read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, this has to do with The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Act, and more particularly in its main thrust with the increase in remuneration to members of 
the Legislative Assembly in our capacity as members and in our capacity as person with additional 
duties. It also deals with the office of the Speaker and the succession thereof when we have provincial 
elections. 
 
We on this side of the House will be supporting this bill. We support the measure with respect to 
remuneration for members of the Legislative Assembly and the people with additional duties. 
 
I have some questions, largely because I’m not clear on precisely what is intended with respect to the 
succession of the office of the Speaker. I simply want to make one comment. The bill, in effect, says the 
MLAs will get an increase of, I think 6.5 per cent. And, while I’m not in any way thinking that that is an 
excessive increase in remuneration. I think all of us should be a little hesitant in accepting a 
remuneration of 6.5 per cent at a time when we are unable to find any basis for having any increase at all 
for people of minimum wage. 
 
It is my belief that 6.5 per cent is a reasonable increase for people in our economic bracket. I think an 
increase of somewhat more than that is appropriate for people on minimum wage, and we simply have 
not had any such increase. I again ask the government to, as we adopt this bill, similarly adopt a policy 
which would deal at least as fairly (and I would suggest somewhat more generously on a percentage 
basis) with people who have incomes much lower than ours. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, we will be supporting the bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly referred to a committee of the 
whole later this day. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill 
No. 58 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the re-alignment of 
the administration of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan be now read a second time. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. With respect to Bill 58, members on this side of the 
House will not be supporting the bill at this point in time. The bill, at this point in time, is a ways and 
means of legalizing the realignment that is presently taking place. The implications of the bill is the 
reverting back to the 1960s when decisions were made in southern Saskatchewan, southern line 
departments, with no concerns and sensitivity at all to northern residents. 
 
In terms of providing constructive criticism to the bill, I would suggest strongly that  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1807 

northern residents be involved in the planning, administration and operation of the bill in question. 
Assurances are needed that this will happen, and assurances are needed as well that that information will 
go out to the communities, to all northern residents, as to what the implications will be and what it 
means to northern residents. 
 
There is no mention, at this point in time, of what type of responsibilities or delivery services will be 
forthcoming to the communities, and all of the areas that were mentioned in the bill are direly essential 
services that are badly needed, that are direly needed such as dental care, provision of dental services to 
the young. There is mention of The Department of Health Act, the provision of food, transportation 
subsidies, etc; in terms of education, arrangements for the provision of educational support and services 
for the communities that are within the boundaries of Alberta and Manitoba. The Health Services Act: 
the provision for the employment of medical and health personnel in remote and isolated communities 
where such services are required. There is mention of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act. 
 
However, there is a principle of public information involvement. The members opposite talk about open 
government. They talk about slogans like “Trust us” and “so much more we can be”, but where do 
northern residents fit into this entire picture? We’ve had a fair amount of major announcement by the 
government, the present administration. 
 
The throne speech was presented here on June 15, with no reference to northern residents. The Tory 
budget was presented here just recently, with drastic cuts with regard to northern services and programs. 
There was a complete dismantling of DNS without fair information and involvement of northern 
residents from all sectors, various organizations. There was a complete elimination of the Saskatchewan 
Fur Marketing Service. And I find at this time that I cannot support the bill. Therefore I and my 
colleagues will be in opposition at this point in time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the 
next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill 
No. 59 — An Act to amend The Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources Act be now 
read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the committee referred to a committee of the 
whole later this day. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill No. 60 — An Act 
respecting Prairie and Forest Fires be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the committee referred to a committee of the 
whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Rousseau that Bill 
No. 54 — An Act to amend The Northern Saskatchewan Economic Development Act be now read a 
second time. 
 
MR. YEW: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I must point out that there is little or no information with regard to a 
specific regulation to govern the program at the local level. At present and in the past administration 
we’ve always had what is referred to as local economic  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1808 

development committees, and a district economic development committee . . . (inaudible interjections) 
. . . 
 
You must pardon me, Mr. Speaker. Again, as I mentioned before, I’m not all that versed on the 
Legislative Assembly as it is. It will take me at least a year before I can really catch on to the 
procedures. 
 
However, I, at this point in time, cannot provide full endorsement to the minister’s proposed bill, based 
on the fact that there is need for the people at the community level, at the local government level, at the 
industrial level, to have some input and some specific information on this bill, to provide them with the 
ability to decide whether this bill is to their benefit, is to their advantage, is to the advantage of 
promoting good, sound economic development programming in northern Saskatchewan. Also, in my 
capacity, I’m of the understanding that I am elected here to do a job, to scrutinize what is good in 
general for the people of this province, and in particular with this bill for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
At this point in time, I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, I cannot endorse the bill as presented. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and by leave of the committee referred to a 
committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Rousseau that Bill 
No. 56 — An Act to amend The Department of Revenue, Supply and Services Act (No. 2) be now 
read a second time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to make a few comments in respect to Bill No. 56, Mr. Speaker. It seems to 
me that one of the main effects of Bill No. 56 will be to replace the current system of advance accounts 
used by four agencies with a system of revolving accounts. In each case the revolving fund will serve 
the functions now served by the agencies’ advance accounts, and will assume the advance accounts’ 
assets and liabilities upon the bill coming into force. 
 
However, I am somewhat concerned, and in committee of the whole I would ask the minister to be 
prepared to address our concern. The main differences seem to be that the revolving funds would not 
have upper limits set by law on the amount of money they contain as is now the case with the advance 
accounts as stipulated by sections 36(4)(a) through to 36(4)(d) of the present revenue and supply and 
services act. 
 
The minister also, it seems to us, will not be required to provide an annual statement on the financial 
standing of the revolving fund to be included in the Public Accounts of the province as the current 
section 38 to be repealed required the minister to provide for advance accounts. The bill does provide 
for, in the proposed sections 28(11), 29(11), 30(11) and 30.2(11), orders in council restricting the total 
of liabilities and assets of the revolving funds. 
 
The bill replaces the central survey mapping agency as a branch of revenue, supply, and services. The 
agency is now a branch of highways, although this was not mentioned in the notes that we received, or 
in the bill. 
 
I think also, as another point, it seems to me that within the bill in section (4)(d.1) it may indeed 
establish (and the minister might indicate this in committee of the whole) that it may allow for the 
demise of the Saskatchewan Government Printing Company (if that is  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1809 

the intention of it, then I would like to know from the minister); a transfer of some of its capabilities to 
office services agency. I suspect there is also within the bill a transfer of the central survey mapping 
agency from the Department of Highways to RSS. It has been in the works for some time and is as result 
of a study conducted by the BMI. 
 
Section 4(e) seems to me not overly significant. It changes the meaning of office supplies and really puts 
into effect a policy that was in the past being put in place; it legitimizes. 
 
In summary, I just want to say to the minister that our essential concern is what I raised in respect to 
whether or not the minister would be required to provide an annual statement on the financial standing 
of the revolving fund included in Public Accounts. Has that been eliminated in the new amendments to 
the bill? 
 
Those generally are the basic concerns; we’ll ask the minister for the details in committee of the whole. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to underline the comments of the member for 
Quill Lakes with respect to method of reporting of the revolving funds. Where will we find what they 
take in and what they spend in a way that one can simply look up now in the Public Accounts and see 
the financial statements of each of the advance accounts and payments out and who were on the pay roll 
and how much they got, and all of the sorts of information which is readily available in the Public 
Accounts? Unless we misunderstand the bill that will not be required of the revolving funds. It may be 
dealt with in some other way but it’s not obvious from the bill, just how. 
 
The other point that I want to make is by way of rebuttal of the statement made by the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce about these deficits that would somehow have been in place. The script you 
read had a big deficit there had this system been in place. Previous governments . . . And you have to go 
back for these, lo, decades since we had advance accounts. I just wanted to question it. If anyone is 
believing that that has any reference to the last few years, and it obviously had some reference to the last 
few years, but if anyone is believing that it had any particular reference to the last few years, my advice 
to them is to ignore those comments. 
 
If we wanted to get into the spirit of this, why, we could say that there is no reason for setting up a 
separate fund as we have for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation because we could have financed that 
out of appropriations. Then we would have deficits of several billion dollars, if we want to get into the 
spirit of this. 
 
These advance accounts essentially are a way to hold assets. If you believe the assets are worth 
something, then it isn’t really a deficit. If you think the assets aren’t, then it is. I’m not at all sure that 
this way that we’re going is the right way. Not at all sure. I mean it is better for the auditing, but I’m not 
at all sure it is better for the management. 
 
I will raise a point or two along this line in committee. This is no place to debate in second reading that 
sort of thing, and so I will not be opposing the bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read, a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to ask the members when they say yes or no to please  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1810 

speak up because mumbling there is very difficult to hear here. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill 
No. 44 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly referred to a committee of the 
whole later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The Highways Act. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the amendment is twofold in this bill: primarily, 
to change the government’s method of accounting for and control over advances made to working 
capital advance accounts; and secondly, to provide the necessary authorities for activities transferred 
from one department to another. 
 
Presently advance accounts receive advances from the consolidated fund for purchases of equipment, 
supplies and/or other operating costs that are used to provide goods and services to various users. The 
costs of such goods and services are then recovered from the user. The method of accounting used by 
advance accounts facilitates accurate program costing and recovery based on use, as assets are 
capitalized and charged only as they are used. Advance accounts were used for the purpose as the 
consolidated fund does not provide this capability. 
 
However the consolidated fund’s method of accounting for these advances resulted in deferring 
expenditures, as the up-front advance was shown as an asset of the consolidated fund. 
 
The proposed amendments therefore eliminate the advance accounts and replace them with revolving 
funds, wherein any net cash outflow from the consolidated fund to the revolving fund will be a 
budgetary expenditure. While in essence the revolving fund will operate similarly to an advance 
account, the method of accounting for the cash outflow to the fund will change and, at the same time, 
will allow the government to exercise a greater degree of control over these funds. 
 
It should be noted that as of April 1, 1981 there was $164 million in outstanding advances, the majority 
of which will be written off to net assets. This means that the consolidated fund surpluses of previous 
years as reported by the former government would have been reduced, likely to a deficit situation, had 
the $164 million been counted as expenditures. 
 
In future the majority of net cash outflows to these funds will be shown as budgetary expenditure and 
will compete with other government expenditures for the revenues of the province. 
 
These amendments are therefore essentially a housekeeping item. This initiative was  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1811 

approved and started by the former government in February, 1982. However, legislative authority for 
that change had not been given to date. Accordingly, I propose that amendments be made to The 
Highways Act. The Department of Revenue, Supply and Services Act, and the Saskatchewan Economic 
Development Act, to provide for the change. 
 
I should indicate that there are at present 18 advance accounts administered by the eight departments. At 
this time four departmental bills requiring amendments are being brought forward, three by myself, one 
by the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources. The remaining four bills will be brought forward 
at a later date. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that I would really disagree so much with the revolving 
fund that the minister speaks about. However, there are sections of the previous bill. The Highways Act, 
that have been deleted: sections 21 to 30 in item 4 of the amendment. 
 
Section 21 says that the Minister of Finance may, upon the requisition of the minister, advance funds 
from the consolidated fund. Then, too, there was a limit on that fund, a limit of $50 million that could be 
advanced that way. There is no such limit that I can see in the new bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, section 28 requires the department to have an accounting and to have annual accounting 
statements of the money that they have, and the expenditures of those moneys within the department. I 
haven’t been able to find in this bill where it states that the department will still be required to have 
adequate accounting, or to provide accounting to estimates of the moneys they have spent — the moneys 
they have brought in the account — where they were spent. It just gives them a large bank account, from 
what I can see, that they can do whatever they want with, and do not really have to provide an 
accounting to the people of this province, the taxpayers of the province. 
 
The minister made a few other comments there, Mr. Speaker, that I would like to look over in Hansard, 
and to just take a look at what the impact of this new bill is going to be. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 
ask leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce my official, Mr. Brian King, chairman 
of the workers’ compensation board. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1812 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have a couple of questions. I have some amendments. I gather you don’t 
have copies of them. I’m surprised at that. Perhaps I’ll get the page to make a copy. In the meantime I 
have some questions of this that I could pursue while we’re getting the amendments done. 
 
I had a couple of questions with respect to the reports. One was: I gather these increases are based on the 
interim report or largely on what we had last spring. You have, since that time, received a final report. I 
am wondering why the amendments do not reflect what is in the final report. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, the final report, we are still reviewing that document. The 
interim report came out some time ago and should get the bill in this fall. As far as the back pension 
increase, we went with the interim report. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — When did you receive, in your office, the final report? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It was in June 1982. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: —This is a sort of a minor question. I am wondering why, as I understand has 
been the practice in the past, why the report wasn’t released when you received it, and why you waited 
until a day or so after Bill Allan featured the report in a column in the Leader-Post. I’m wondering why 
you didn’t release it immediately rather than waiting until Bill Allan did in the Leader-Post. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, it was, as I say, June 1982 when we received the report. It 
was a fairly large document. We wanted to meet with the committee that prepared the document. We did 
not have that meeting until a couple of months ago. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — How long do you suppose we will be considering the final report before we 
are able to make a decision. We have now had six months. I’m wondering what the process is and how 
long we will need to consider the annual report before we can make the decision. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — There is a considerable amount of matter in the final report, Mr. Chairman. 
I have been doing a costing of the impact of that total report. We have just received that lately. We will 
be looking at that in due course. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: —We used to be able to get all that information within a matter of a few weeks. 
I’m wondering why it takes this government a few months. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I suppose, Mr. Chairman, it is because I have three portfolios to look after 
and have to learn the whole business of government; it’s taking me awhile to do all that. Basically that’s 
the reason. But we are working very diligently on that right now. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are you saying that you have the information, that you have had the analysis 
done by the officials and it’s in your office awaiting your attention? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I don’t know which analysis you are talking about. The costing? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You wanted an analysis of what it would cost. You said, when I  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1813 

asked you why it took you so long, it was due to your inexperience. Are you saying that you have the 
information in your office but have either not had the opportunity to look at it or do not understand it? 
The question is: have you got the analysis from the officials? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I have the analysis now and we’ll be looking at it in due course. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t intend that; I’m not trying to badger the minister. I’m trying to make 
the point that I suspect. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Be nice, Joan. That’s not in my nature. Not in my nature to ever even try to 
bother a Conservative, a member of the House, and I’m not going to badger the minister about it. I do 
want to make the point that the official opposition feel that the final report should be proceeded with, 
and it should be proceeded with promptly. I would be amazed to discover that the final report would run 
a deficit in the fund, if that’s what you’re trying to find out. If that were the case, that would make a 
difference with me. I then wouldn’t be quite so cocksure. I’ll put that way, because we would then have 
to consider increases in the assessments, and that would be a different matter. 
 
The amendments, and I’m going to move them now without further ado, in fact do reflect the final 
report, and do increase the benefits along the line of the final report. I guess, Mr. Chairman, I should 
read these. Sorry, I’m not quite sure of the procedure. If you had received these I would not have had to 
file a white amendment. Now that you’ve got them, do you need a white amendment from me, or can 
you just take these as now having being received? All right. Let’s proceed then with the amendment. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, the amendment we have had passed to us is from the last 
report, and we are not in a position today to accept those kinds of amendments without cabinet approval. 
The ceiling would go from 26,000 to 29,000 under the present formula and the amendment would put it 
up over 40,000 and we can’t accept that without further study. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, just a couple of questions. I don’t intend to belabor the point. Is the 
minister saying that these amendments would run the fund into a deficit? Is the minister saying that the 
effect of these amendments would be to create a deficit in the fund? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — No. It would not. But it would certainly increase the assessment rates. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The minister has told me the matter is before cabinet. May I conclude this 
with a question as to when we may expect a decision from the cabinet? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t say they were before cabinet. I’ve got the 
amendments in my office now. We haven’t discussed it in cabinet. That’s my point. The earliest that we 
could do would be in the spring sitting. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to. 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1814 

Clause 4 agreed to on division 
 
Clauses 5 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just want to speak briefly before you make that motion. I want to repeat 
what I said. I want to congratulate the minister for having brought these forward in a timely fashion. I 
can tell the minister that if you bring forward amendments which reflect the final report. I shall be 
equally congratulatory and equally co-operative in getting them through the House. I would urge the 
minister to bring forth amendments which reflect the final report at the earliest opportunity. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 57 — an Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act (No. 2) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Will the minister of Industry and Commerce introduce his officials. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, I would be happy to, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Sitting to my left is Mr. Allan Palmer, executive director and to my right, George Todd, chairman, 
public service superannuation plan. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Am I right, Mr. Minister, in interpreting this as being in exactly the same 
terms as the bill earlier passed, except that the effective date is May 1, rather than July 8, or whatever 
the date was, July whatever it was? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, it is. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No 44 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I would like to introduce Mr. Lawrie McFarlane, the director of the 
budget bureau. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1815 

Clause 2 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, why is it thought a good idea to introduce this provision? 
What problems were associated with the previous legal position where this sort of thing tended to show 
up in appropriation acts rather than in The Department of Finance Act? What’s the problem? What are 
you aiming at? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, in reply to that question, I am advised that the authority is 
in the appropriation bill at the present time. The bill has not been passed, and we want the authority to be 
put into the finance act permanently. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — That’s just what I thought, and we would like to think that the appropriate 
bill might get through this House some time before we all grow whiskers. This then, Mr. Chairman, and, 
Mr. Minister, is a way that you can live by special warrants and virements, without ever having to pass 
an appropriation bill and without having the appropriation bill the power to move money from money 
you have raised by special warrant to other subvotes by way of virement. You don’t have that power 
except by appropriation bill. There is no evidence that we can detect that an appropriation bill is likely to 
be forthcoming, and I am curious to know why you feel that this is necessary. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman the point of the procedure, I’m told is to try as much as 
possible to avoid special warrants. I might like to just add here as well that as I understand it, this was 
initiated by your government. This was being looked at by your government. I don’t know whether the 
decision had been made to introduce it or not, but this isn’t anything new. This is something that you 
had looked at before and you would have brought it in. And I might also add, as I understand it, that this 
is really an unusual circumstance and how it came about so quickly this year is the fact that here hasn’t 
been an appropriation bill passed because there was an election called. It never did get passed. 
Therefore, we have been living under special warrants when the session isn’t sitting. I’ll leave it at that 
for now unless there are any further questions on it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I appreciate what the minister says, and 
that’s why I’m raising the question. We are now 39 days into the session. We have had about three days 
or so of estimates, which had to be some sort of record in Saskatchewan: 39 days into a session and 
having virtually no estimates passed. And very few called, I may say, and that has to be some sort of 
record. And you indeed have been living on special warrants because you didn’t bring in a budget. Fair 
enough. This has been, I think the first time that a government has attempted to operate on a budget 
which wasn’t passed for that length of time. But that was perhaps a special circumstance. We’ll find 
nothing like this in the history of our province. 
 
You may say that that was because the previous government didn’t pass its spring budget, and I will take 
that as read before you say it. But then you didn’t bring in a budget and you are living on special 
warrants. And the only possible way we can figure out what you’re doing, by way of spending money, is 
by looking at the special warrants and figuring out what money you’re raising. And that we can do. 
 
As I say, with respect to the Departments of Health or Education or Highways, the big spenders . . . 
Well, let’s talk about health and education and social service. We have not had any opportunity to ask 
any questions about those matters. As I say, I don’t know whether we are going to get a chance. 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1816 

You have been living on special warrants. Fair enough. But you now in effect want not to live on special 
warrants, but you want to live on special warrants together with virements. So as I say, with respect to 
social services, if you want to spend some more money for the minister’s office, you will certainly not 
put through a special warrant for administration. You will put through a special warrant for sort of senior 
citizens’ grants, or something which is salable to the public, and then you will vire the money out to the 
minister’s office. As I say, we don’t have any opportunity to question the minister because that is not 
called. Maybe we’ll see a virement someday . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I am told they’re in the Public Accounts. I never can find them there and if anyone knows where they are 
in the Public Accounts I’d be happy to have them pointed out. But even then I don’t think there’s any 
legal requirement to put them in the Public Accounts. If there is, I’d be happy to have that drawn to my 
attention. So, as I say, I don’t think that there is any way that anyone can figure out where the money is 
spent if you’re going to do it by special warrant and by virement and you do it by virement pursuant to a 
provision in this act which makes it permanent, and not as part of an appropriation act where the 
opposition has had a chance to ask some questions. 
 
I think it is a substantial change in the way we finance our programs and a change which makes things 
less clear for the press or for the opposition and not more clear. And I think that’s a change in the wrong 
direction. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I’m surprised the Leader of the Opposition would 
complain that we’ve been sitting for 39 days and he hasn’t had the opportunity he claims he should have 
had. 
 
Let me explain to the Leader of the Opposition that first of all, you called the election, not us. You 
called it before you passed the appropriation bill last spring. And since that time, as you well know, the 
important bills that we’ve had to pass in this House have taken up the time of this House and we’re 
coming to what you are looking for in the appropriation bill. But if you had passed your budgets and 
your estimates last year, without calling the election, there would have been no problem, would there? It 
was your decision, not ours. 
 
As for the virements over the special warrants, I am advised, as I understand it, that there is less 
infringement on the legislature with the virements than with special warrants. 
 
And finally, you did indicate that there was supposed to be in the Public Accounts. Again that was 
started, I believe, when you were still in government and I’m pleased to tell you that they will be in the 
Public Accounts this year. So you’ll have the opportunity as the opposition to question any virement that 
is issued in future years and this year. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, it’s true of course that we called the 
election without passing the budget. It’s equally true that you have run well over seven months without 
bringing one in, which as I say has got to be some sort of record for a government which . . . And I think 
that that’ll be the only time in Saskatchewan we’ve operated a government for seven months without a 
budget. If anyone can correct me on that, I’d be much surprised. 
 
But that’s not relevant to this. This one in fact gives you an opportunity to take money  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1817 

out of money which you have raised by way of special warrant which, as you know, is a cabinet decision 
and not a legislative decision . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, the whole point is that we did not 
operate for lengthy periods of time on large amounts of money by way of special warrant. It depends on 
what large is but this is . . . There’s obviously five times as much money taken out by special warrant 
this year as in any previous year in Saskatchewan history. I guess we all know that and my . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
I don’t know whether I’m making this point, but look: if you take, it you raise money by way of a 
special warrant you’ve got to do it with a document which we can look at and the press can look at. No 
way can you look at a virement until well after the event, well after the event at least now we know what 
you say you’re spending the money on, because you raise a special warrant and you say you’re raising 
the money for senior citizens hostels, subvote X of social services. 
 
You wish not to pass special warrants for purposes other than the ones which are disclosed in the 
warrants. That will be the clear effect of it. If you can pass a special warrant for senior citizens’ housing 
or senior citizens’ hospitals in social services, and then vire it out to the minister’s office, we will never 
know that and no one can ever know it until you publish the virements in the Public Accounts, if you do. 
And so as far as I’m aware, you’re under no legal obligation to do so. And while it’s nice to have the 
minister say he’s going to do it, they may decided that they want to save paper and not do it. If there is a 
legal obligation to publish virements, it has gone by me; perhaps it has. We certainly intended to do it as 
you say and it should be done. I am not aware of a legal obligation. You are wanting really to extend 
very substantially the scope of virements. My point is pretty simple . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Don’t 
shake your head and say no, because that’s the whole effect of the bill . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, go ahead then, you explain why you are not expanding the scope of virements. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, and I would like to reply to the Leader 
of the Opposition, that while you were in government you had 3,588 virements. What are you talking 
about the scope? Of course you used them all along. You used an average of 360 a year. It’s nothing 
new. You are talking about the scope of it. You’ve always been able to take virements and vire out of 
the department back into the treasury or into another department. That was available to you as well. 
 
We don’t intend to do that. I believe, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, and you will agree, that it would be 
far more advantageous or accountable to the taxpayers to have a department vire within its own 
department than to have a special warrant for more money when the money is already there. That’s the 
intent of the bill. If a department (and take any one of them you like) has in one subvote extra money 
and they need it in another one, this will give them the authority to move it. That’s the idea of it. Would 
you rather they go through a special warrant, and add funds when there are already funds in the 
department? I don’t think you would. I don’t think you would. The fact is, if they have a budget to work 
within, then let them administer that department on their own without having to come back every time. 
That will give them that opportunity. What you are talking about is, you have $100 million or whatever 
in the department, so you need more in the subvote; let’s get some more, although you may have extra 
money left over. Do you agree with that? I don’t think you would. If you do, then say so. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I do most emphatically agree with that; I do most emphatically agree with 
that? What’s the point of coming in here to say we’ll vote social services $400 million? That’s what you 
are saying? Never mind what they are doing — some is in  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1818 

corrections; some is in senior citizens. There is no reason why this legislature should have any opinion 
as to whether it should go to senior citizens or corrections. None whatever! He says, once you vote $400 
million, that’s it. If they’re spending too much on corrections and not enough on senior citizens, then by 
all means take some of the senior citizen’s money and put it in corrections. What business is that of the 
legislature? 
 
Well, I take the other view. We pass these budgets not by department but by subvote. We pass the 
estimates by subvote, not by vote. He wants to do it by vote. He says, “Whose business is it if money is 
taken from senior citizens and put over into corrections?” . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, of course 
you are! Well, let’s try it again. You are saying that it’s perfectly all right to take a special warrant for 10 
million bucks for senior citizens, pass it through cabinet, allow someone to read this extra 10 million for 
senior citizens, when not a dime of it may be going to senior citizens. You then want to vire it over to 
corrections, and you want nobody to have any right to see that virement. Once again I say the special 
warrant is a public document; the virement is not. The special warrant is a publication document before 
you get the dough; the virement is not a public document. No one will know. Maybe later, if in fact you 
publish it 18 months later, maybe we can track it. I would much prefer if you didn’t need the money for 
senior citizens that you pass another special warrant for corrections. In due course we will find out that 
you didn’t need the money for senior citizens. 
 
Sure your special warrants may add up to more money than you needed, but you are not going to spend 
it. You don’t simply by passing a special warrant, spend the money. You simply give yourself authority 
to spend the money. Now, I am asking: why, when you need extra money that you haven’t been voted 
by the legislature, do you not want to disclose that fact? Why do you want to pass a special warrant for 
one purpose, and by dark of night essentially, because no one can know, take the money out and spend it 
on another function? That’s what you are asking us to agree to. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I’m really having difficulty with your logic because you are saying that 
what we want to do is take $10 million — I think you used the example of money for senior citizens to 
corrections or whatever. Well, what did you do with the 3,588 virements that you passed? First of all, 
isn’t that exactly what you were doing when you passed 3,588 of them in your term, in your 10 years of 
tenure in this legislature? Of course you did. 
 
The only difference between this amendment is that it’s taking it from one Act to another Act. You are 
taking it from the appropriation Act to the finance Act. You have always been doing it. You probably 
have done it twice as often as what we will do it. I didn‘t know that, but 3,588 virements in your term 
are a lot of virements. That’s exactly what you were doing. So how were you accountable to the people 
of Saskatchewan that you were doing it that way? How could you have been accountable to the people if 
you were hiding them? At least now we are going to put them in Public Accounts which you never did 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I know, you can say what you like but that was a fact. The 
virements have always been . . . I mean the intent of the virements isn’t changing. You are just moving it 
from one bill to another one. You have always had it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Why are you wanting to change? If 3,588 isn’t enough for you, why do 
you want to change? What’s wrong with the system? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — The answer to your question is a matter of, I suppose, basic simplification. 
You don’t have to wait. We are having it in the finance Act for the appropriation bill to be passed every 
year. What we are saying is that we’re trying to  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1819 

streamline the operation of government. We’re trying to get the departments to run more smoothly. We 
don’t want stumbling blocks in the way. It has always been there. You used it; we’ll use it. But now it is 
going to be there on a permanent basis. It’s a matter of simplifying the whole operation and system. I 
think you understand that. I don’t know why it would bother you. It has always been available. Now, 
we’re saying: all right, there are times of the year when it isn’t. We’re saying: let’s get that stumbling 
block out of the way, or that obstacle out of the way, and do it. It’s good management. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, that’s very revealing, because that tells us the facts. Up to 
now, this legislature has said: you have the right to use virements when you pass an appropriation bill, 
when you have given the folk in this legislature a chance to debate all your spending. Now you say, in 
the interests of efficiency, no more of this nonsense about the legislature having to pass this: we want to 
use virements whether or not we have brought in a budget; whether or not an appropriation bill has been 
passed; whether or not the legislature has an opportunity to debate the spending. And there is no use 
shaking your head, because that is exactly what you’re doing. 
 
Up until now, up until now virements have been able to be used and no one denies that, and everyone is 
perfectly willing to conceded that. And if you say 3,500, you’ve counted them. 3,588 since 1971 I take 
it? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh well, he got some of his staff, who are very able staff, to count that 
high for him. And every one of them, 3,588 of them was passed after a legislature had approved a 
budget. And zero of them were passed before a legislature approved a budget. And that is obviously 
inefficient. Inefficient. 
 
He wants to pass these without the necessity of asking the legislature to approve a budget. And I just 
say, that’s bad. You have now a way to finance your government by special warrants. The only 
inconvenient factor of that is you have to say what you are going to spend the money for. You don’t now 
have to answer any questions to anyone. You can pass a special warrant. But we’re not going to pass any 
estimates. We’ve been at it seven months now. Seven months now and no estimates. No assurance 
whatever that there will be estimates passed two or more months hence. None whatever. 
 
Members opposite say we had an opportunity. I’d like to . . . I missed it. I don’t know when the health 
estimates were called. I don’t know when the I and C estimates were called in the seven months that 
you’ve been in office. But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, that is a piece of poppycock. We aren’t the 
government. At no time when we were the government did we operate for more than the time from April 
1 to, I suppose, May 15 may have been the last appropriation bill. Always busy debating the estimates 
and never more than 45 or 50 days without a budget. 
 
You people have been at it now well over seven months without a debate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
If anyone wants to doubt it, get in this debate. Well over seven months without a budget unless my 
calculations are wrong, and you still want to go on governing, not only be special warrant, but also by 
private (I won’t say secret, that has an overtone) special warrants, by way of virements, and still bring in 
no appropriation bill. That’s what you propose, and that’s simply bad. You can’t justify that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, try it. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Be happy to. First of all, again your logic escapes me. I find it hard to 
understand why, all of a sudden, after so many years here, you’re concerned about this. You’re talking 
about 12 months instead of 10 months, normally speaking.  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1820 

You’ve always had it for 10 months of the year, now it’s going to be for 12 months; we’re going to take 
it out of one and put it into the other. 
 
You can complain about no budget, but you introduced a budget last spring. You didn’t pass the 
estimates, you called an election instead. You might have been wise to pass your estimates at the time. 
However, that’s hindsight. So take whatever responsibility you like in that respect; and we’ll take 
whatever responsibility we have. At least we’re acting today. 
 
There’s no reason on earth why you should be concerned about an extra two months, that this can be 
done in the name of efficiency. I can’t understand your logic. Again I come back to say to you . . . 
Industry and Commerce. I don’t know, let’s say my budget is $12 million. One department is running 
out of money for whatever unforeseen reason; another department is not. They have extra cash; we can 
vire from one to the other. Your suggestion is, let’s go back to the treasury and get more, instead of 
using what we already have. That’s what you’re suggesting. Let’s go back and get some more, there’s no 
bottom to the barrel. That’s not good management. That in fact is not good management. If the funds are 
there, within the department . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They’re not there forever. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — They’re there when they are passed by this House, and they will be from 
now on when we pass the estimates. Why do you find that so hard to understand? You are voting on it as 
well. If you don’t want to vote, that’s up to you. But when you have the estimates in this Assembly, 
you’ll vote on the subvotes, you’ll vote on the estimates, they’re passed. The money is put into the 
department. You’ve been viring for 11 years, and the governments before you, and we’ll continue to do 
it. So what are you complaining about? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, briefly put, I agree with every word the 
minister says. We all heard the minister. We’re going to have a budget. When it’s passed, he can pass 
virements, and if it’s like every other appropriation act virtually in history, you can pass virements, but 
only if you bring in a budget; and only if you pass a budget. That seems to me to be the right rule. 
 
You want to do it without bringing in a budget. That’s what this is all about. Everybody knows you can 
vire. Everybody has done it, and the rule has always been: but only after your budget is passed. And you 
are saying, “None of this nonsense about passing budgets. We want to switch this money around, even 
though the legislature has not passed the budget.” Now, doesn’t the minister agree that that’s the effect 
of the bill? Is there any other effect of the bill? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No. The answer is no. There’s no difference. The alternative, however, is 
to raise more funds through a special warrant, and we don’t agree with that. We don’t agree that we 
should have to raise more funds when the funds are already there. The funds are there. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, what in God’s name is this man talking 
about? He takes the view that when money is budgeted, somehow there’s a great pool of money. 
Nonsense. Just nonsense . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Waiting for the chairman’s ruling. 
 
Look, let me try again. You’ve got a couple of subvotes down in industry and commerce. 



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1821 

You’ve got administration, and name me another that you know. Let’s say business promotion. I don’t 
know what the headings are. 
 
Now, if you’re voted $2 million, $2 million for each of those, you don’t have any money. It’s all over in 
finance. So it’s not a case of your having a big pool of money. That is an authority, and not a pile of 
money. That’s self-evident. So if you raise money by a special warrant for an extra half million 
administration, and you don’t spend half a million over in business promotion, you don’t have to raise 
an extra dime. The suggestion that you’re going out to get more money is sheer fantasy, sheer fantasy. 
That suggests that there’s a pile of money over there. All you’re doing is telling the press and the public 
that you’re spending an extra half million dollars on administration when you pass a special warrant, or 
at least you have the authority to. That’s all you’re telling. Not spending a penny more. 
 
Now what you want to do is say, “All right, we’re not spending that money over in business promotion. 
We are spending it in administration. We’ll simply move it over.” Fair enough. That’s the virement 
process in the past. But that process has only been available to a government that brought in a budget 
and faced the legislature. Now you want to make that process available to any government whether it 
ever brings in a budget. And I just suggest that that’s bad. I just suggest that if a government doesn’t 
bring in a budget . . . This happens in Ottawa. Heck, they’ve gone for years without a budget sometimes. 
And I don’t know whether we’re starting down that road here in Saskatchewan. 
 
If a government doesn’t bring in a budget, then I think it shouldn’t have the right to vire. It should raise 
its money by passing special warrants so that at least the press and the opposition can see what it is 
asking extra authority to spend money for. And I don’t think that’s an unreasonable position on the part 
of any opposition. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I think we could go around and around and around on this 
all day. The only comment that I can wind up with, or try to make the member understand, is that it’s a 
question of one or the other; either special warrant of virements. We happen to think that virements 
create better management and more efficiency. You’ve used them. We’re using them, perhaps a little 
extended from what you had. 
 
You talk about approval of money. We well understand the money comes from the treasury. However, 
it’s matter of authority, it’s authority that you’re doing when you’re doing special warrants. We prefer to 
work within the budget of the department to vire from one to the other. As I said, the authority has 
always been there in the appropriation bill. We’re transferring that authority from one Act to the finance 
Act. I’ve repeated that time and time again, Mr. Chairman. I don’t know what else I can say. That’s the 
way it is. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I have a couple of very specific question then. Would the minister agree 
that under the appropriation act, the authority is effective really only for 12 months? Would he agree that 
under this act, he wants to make it effective permanently? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, to both questions. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, would the minister agree that if a 
special warrant is passed, more information is available to the public about the prospective spending 
proposals of the government than if the money is provided for that  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1822 

purpose by virement? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No. But, let me say that may or may not be true. What you’re suggesting, 
as the better route to take, under special warrants is encouraging in fact . . . What it does is encourage 
management of the department to go asking for more money from treasury board rather than trying to 
straighten out their problems which they may have created within their department. Again, I come back 
to you and I say it’s for efficiency and better management. It forces management to improve on their 
performance and the operations of their department. We say: that’s better. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I think the minister wishes to keep diverting this issue to 
the question of whether or not virements are a good idea. No one is questioning that. The issue is 
whether or not virements are a good idea when there isn’t a budget. When there is no budget — that’s 
what we’re talking about here. And that is the question because the tradition of this House has been 
unvaried that virements are used. We have always used virements and provided for it in the 
appropriation act. 
 
The legislature has protected itself against this use of money by the government, which was not voted by 
the legislature, by giving it limited approval. And as the price, the legislature has insisted that it be in a 
budget. If a government doesn’t bring in a budget and get it passed, then it does not have the approval to 
spend money that is not authorized by the legislature. 
 
Now, you are saying that that custom which has been here since the dawn of time, is a bad one. And you 
are saying that, notwithstanding the fact that a government doesn’t bring in a budget, it ought to be able 
to raise money by special warrant and vire the money for another purpose, undisclosed to the public. 
 
Do you not agree with me that that is the effect? One, you do not bring in a budget so that there is no 
opportunity debate. That is our situation now. And, there is no point in arguing why we got here. That’s 
where you are. Two, you want to raise money by special warrant in accordance with past practice. You 
want to disclose one purpose in the special warrant, and you want to move the money over to another 
purpose without any public disclosure of any kind. Is that not true? Without any vote, without any 
opportunity to debate, and without any public disclosure — is that not true? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Since when? I’ll just turn that around and reply to your question in this 
way. Since when have we debated in this legislature special warrants? They’re not debated here. Special 
warrants are only for when the House is not sitting. So, while you’re arguing about debating an 
appropriation, or a virement, or a special warrant — you don’t. You never have from the beginning of 
time you know. I mean that’s another point. Special warrants are for the time when we aren’t around 
here to make those decisions. You know that. So there is no debate. 
 
This year is an unusual year admittedly. And I agree with you on that. The budgets are usually . . . it’s a 
matter of two months when we don’t have the approved budget. Hopefully it will be the same in the 
future. So, what’s the difference between 10 months, 12 months, for the sake of efficiency and good 
management, and accountability to the taxpayers? And this is what we’re saying. 
 
The virements will appear in Public Accounts where you can question them. You’re not going to 
question the special warrant. You can see it but you’re not going to question it  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1823 

in this legislature until after the fact. So, you have no different options or problems or solutions for that. 
It’s the same thing. 
 
And, if you’re looking, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, we’re looking, as I have repeatedly said today, to 
efficiency, good management, accountability. We believe that’s very important to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan and that will allow us to have that. What you’re suggesting isn’t going to give us any 
more, because we can’t debate it any more than we can the virements. But the management will be 
better. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, that indeed sounds ominous. Keep in 
mind that none of this has any effect unless there’s no budget. All this efficiency that you speak of can 
be achieved and has been achieved in the past whenever there’s been a budget. The minister is coming 
in here and saying he needs this authority in order to get efficiency. He only needs it, and I underline 
this, he only needs it if there isn’t a budget, if there isn’t an appropriation act with all the authority in it. 
And yet he is standing here and saying he needs this for efficiency. He is in effect telling this house that 
we are going to have long stretches without appropriation acts; long stretches which we haven’t had in 
the past but which we’ve had now for seven months. And this is not an exception but the rule. Otherwise 
he wouldn’t need this for his efficiency. 
 
He admits freely that it only has relevance for those days when we don’t have a budget. It only has 
relevance then, because the appropriation Act when we have a budget contains this authority. He wants 
an additional authority for those few days in April when it’s possible I suppose for some agency to 
spend its 12 months money in one month. It’s possible. Or two months. But we just never had an 
occasion, I think, when we’ve ever gone beyond the end of June, not in the history of this province, 
except this year. 
 
And it is very, very clear that the minister is saying that he needs this, and he needs this because it is not 
going to be the practice of this government to bring in regular budgets with appropriation acts with the 
power to vire. He wants it, budget or no. And I say that no legislature should willingly give up its right 
to have that much pressure on a government to bring in a budget, by simply giving a free right to vire 
with no appropriation Act. I don’t think that any legislature ought to be asked to do that, and I don’t 
think we should be asked to do it. And I say again the minister has made it abundantly clear, because his 
argument makes no sense otherwise, that there are going to be long stretches when this power is needed 
in order to achieve efficiency. A new power. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, would the minister agree that this additional power is effective, is 
needed, only when there is no appropriation Act? Will he concede that? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Will you concede therefore that if you need this power it is because you 
anticipate periods when there is going to be no effective appropriation Act? 



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1824 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What periods does the minister anticipate there will be when there is not 
an appropriation Act? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, to your question. We’ll only need it when there is no appropriation 
bill passed. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, the question again. When do you 
anticipate there will be no appropriation Act passed? At what period of the year in your normal 
administration? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I suppose on the average it would be two months after the budget till the 
appropriation bill is passed — I think you agreed with that awhile ago — except in unusual 
circumstances, like this year, when you called an election before you passed the appropriation bill. We 
can do as you did. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So that what we’re dealing with . . . We’re not dealing obviously with the 
past, because you have managed quite well under those exceptional circumstance, and I don’t know 
whether it has caused great inefficiency in your government. Have the circumstances which you say 
contribute to inefficiency caused inefficiencies in your government between your taking office and 
today? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I’m advised that yes, indeed we’ve had problems. And if we continue to 
operate with special warrants, it could even get more serious. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t make my question clear. I didn’t ask whether you 
had problems. Nobody promised anybody in politics a rose garden. I wasn’t asking about whether you 
had problems. I was asking whether there were any inefficiencies arising because of the fact that you are 
unable to vire money out of money raised from special warrants. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, I would say that they created some inefficiencies. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, in the Department of Industry and 
Commerce? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I would reply to that on the basis of across the board through the 
government we’ve had problems. They could get worse, as I said, if we allowed this to happen. As I’ve 
said before, it efficiency that we’re trying to improve on, and better management. We hope that we can 
accomplish that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, just so that we have some idea, would 
you give a little outline of the inefficiencies in the Department of Industry and Commerce which have 
been occasioned by this very difficult legal situation? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I’m advised that we don’t know about the Department of Industry and 
Commerce as such. But there have been cases within the government, I’m told, that we’ve had to raise 
larger special warrants, larger than would have been required under virements. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, that is blindingly obvious.  



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1825 

What I want to know is, how did that contribute to any inefficiency? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I think that seems to reply to why you had such inefficiency in your 
government, perhaps. We have said before, and I indicated earlier as well, that had we had the 
opportunity or the ability to vire, instead of raising larger amounts of money through special warrants, 
management would have worked it within their department to better improve and operate their 
department. They would not have gone back to treasury and said, “Look we’re short $1 million, so pour 
more in.” They would have found it. They might have been able to find it within the department and 
improve the efficiency and the management of that department. That’s where inefficiency comes in. 
That’s where bad management comes in. Under your previous administration you encouraged your 
managers to be bad mangers, by saying, “Well, if you’re short over here, just come back and we’ll give 
you more instead of trying to solve the problems that you’ve got in your department.” 
 
We’re asking our department heads to solve their problems, and not to come back for larger sums of 
money than what they have had appropriated for their department in total. All you’re doing is saying, for 
example, if I had a $12 million budget in my department and somebody was short, I don’t go from $12 
million up. We work it out within the department, be more efficient and manage our affairs better. I 
can’t understand why you don’t see that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we have already established that we are 
talking about periods only when there isn’t an appropriation Act . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Exactly, 
when there isn’t an appropriation act. You’re telling us about the inefficiencies in our government. 
 
Now, for the argument to be logical, you have to apply it to a period when there wasn’t an appropriation 
Act, and when we were passing special warrants. You have to find a period from April 1 to June 1 or 
thereabouts when there wasn’t an appropriation Act, and when the legislature wasn’t sitting because if it 
was sitting we couldn’t pass special warrants. If you can find a half-dozen days in the last 11 years when 
that was true, I’d be mightily surprised. That just makes no sense at all, none at all. None at all. 
 
I want to say again, the minister is making it blindingly clear, although he won’t admit it, that he is 
gearing his government up to operate without appropriation Acts, otherwise this means nothing. 
Otherwise this means nothing, because when else do you need this? You only need it when you don’t 
have a budget. If you don’t have a budget from until April 1 to June 1, and the legislature is sitting, you 
can’t pass any special warrants anyway; you can’t vire anything out anyway. The hang-up is that you 
people want to operate this House without bringing in your spending estimates. That’s the hang-up. 
Otherwise, this makes no sense whatever. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You’re filibustering. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Look, if I am filibustering, will the hon. member please get and tell me 
why these arguments aren’t logical. Why do you want the right to say to this legislature, “We can’t 
spend money, and we can move money around by virement, which is not a public document, without 
you having any opportunity to pass a budget.”? That is not reasonable. I am registering our firm and 
strong objection to the proposal of members opposite to set themselves up to operate without any 
budgets being passed  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1826 

through this legislature. I’ve said my piece. I’m not going to try to make that point again. The arguments 
put by the member are nonsensical in the sense that — unless they make a great deal of sense if you are 
not going to bring in a budget. But if you are going to bring in a budget like all other governments have 
in the past, then these arguments make no sense whatever. I say that you ought not to be asking the 
legislature to adopt that sort of a practice which permits the government to operate without an 
appropriation Act. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 3 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, the minister has been free to suggest 
that the list of virements would be published in the Public Accounts. Is the minister prepared to bring in 
any statutory requirement that he virements be published if there is any that is lacking? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised that that can be taken into consideration. 
We’ll consider it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I thank the minister. If he is going to be 
consistent with his allegations that this was not attempt to make information more difficult to obtain, 
then I know he will urge upon his cabinet colleagues the statutory provision calling for the publication 
of virements that are passed. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 36 
 
Devine Schoenhals Martens 
Birkbeck Boutin Rybchuk 
Taylor Weiman Young 
Rousseau Sutor Gerich 
Sandberg Sveinson Domotor 
Hardy Sauder Embury 
McLeod Petersen Hepworth 
McLaren Glauser Folk 
Garner Meagher Myers 
Klein Schmidt Zazelenchuk 
Katzman Smith (Moose Jaw South) Johnson 
Duncan Hopfner Baker 
 



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1827 

Nays — 8 
 
Blakeney Lingenfelter Shillington 
Thompson Koskie Yew 
Engel Lusney  
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources Act 
Clause 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Does the minister have any officials? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would introduce to the House Lyle Lensen, the 
assistant deputy. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, I only have a few questions on this bill for the minister. The 
definition of a minister is now being changed where it will not longer be just the Minister of Tourism 
and Renewable Resources; any minister will be able to make decisions on behalf of your department. 
I’m just wondering what your opinion is of this; do you not feel that you should be the only minister 
making these major decisions on behalf of the department, rather than any minister within the Executive 
Council? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — No, I don’t believe that’s what the change would indicate. I think what the 
change says, it assigns the definition: “Minister means the member of the Executive Council to whom 
for the time being the administration of this Act is assigned.” Under the present circumstances this Act is 
assigned to the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources, so in that case I am the only minister 
that would be acting under this. And if this Act is assigned to another minister, well then it would be that 
minister that would make those decision. So I don’t think there’s a change there. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, I didn’t really hear your answer there 
with all this commotion going on. My question was: we feel that these major decisions for tourism and 
renewable resources should be made by the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources, and I just 
didn't quite get your answer there. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — That’s right. They should be and they will be. This doesn’t change that at all. 
What it says is that the minister means the member of the Executive Council to whom this Act is 
assigned, and under the present circumstances this Act is assigned to the Minister of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources. That’s the minister it will be. It doesn’t indicate, as you seem to suggest, that any 
minister, any member of the Executive Council, could be making decision under this Act. That’s not the 
case. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Minister, could you explain the reason for making the grants of up to 
$10,000. Previously all grants required an order in council and now you have the authority to expend 
$10,000. Is it without an order in council? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, the simple explanation of that, and I might add I think that same 
proposal was coming for amendments to this act from the former administration and the former minister 
. . . Basically it’s exactly for the same reasons that I saw many Acts go through for the same thing, and 
that is that there are a good number of grants under the Department of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources to tourism organizations and so on, a great number of grants throughout the province to 
promote tourism, those kinds of things, one of the other grants that your colleague was asking about in 
question period today in support of the trappers’ association, those kinds of things. It’s  



 
December 16, 1982 
 

 
1828 

just a matter of the efficiency when they are under $10,000 — small grants, to be able to get them out 
and moving and into the communities and wherever they will do the most good. So it’s just a matter of 
getting those out without having to go through orders in council for the smaller grants. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — The limit was always $10,000. Am I correct on that? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — That’s right. Any grants up to $10,000. The limit is $10,000. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Before agreement to do clause by clause, I wonder if you could make it clear; 
the bill does not make it clear that a report on the revolving fund will continue to be included in the 
Public Accounts. Could you explain the reason for this on the revolving fund? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I’m sorry. I couldn’t hear your question. I didn’t hear it really. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — In clause 25 it requires the minister to consult with the industry before making 
regulations. The change from advance accounts to the revolving fund dropped the requirement 
concerning the audit by the provincial auditor. The bill does not make it clear that the report on the 
revolving fund will continue to be included in the Public Accounts. Would you clarify that for us? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I believe that goes along with the same clauses that have been going on in 
various other bills here already in various other departments: the changing of the advance account 
system to what will now be called revolving funds. I believe that has been clarified as well: that they 
will be considered in the Public Accounts or reported in the Public Accounts. As far as I’m concerned, I 
believe that is the case. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, my colleagues have a few more questions that they want to ask 
on this, but if you want to go down to the clauses that they’re interested in we could proceed with that. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 7 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — I’m through with this bill and my colleagues are through. If you want to just 
take them by numbers . . . If it’s agreeable to you and the minter, we can just go by the numbers and get 
this thing through. 
 
Clause 7 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 8 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 51—An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979 

 



 
December 16, 1982 

 

 
1829 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions Act (No. 2) 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance Act 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division and bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources Act 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

GOVERNMENT SERVICES 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7:00 p.m. 


