






















































Hansard: December 03, 1982


1277 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 3, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I introduce to you this morning, and to 
the members of this legislature, a class of grade 11 and 12 students sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. I 
believe there are 22 students. They are accompanied by their teacher, Glen Hymers. The principal is also 
with them, Allan Fitzsimois (I hope I am pronouncing that right), also the bus driver, Darwin Taylor. 
 
Now this is a real pleasure, Mr. Speaker, for me to introduce this class this morning from this particular 
school because it is the school I graduated from in 1949. Now I didn’t say what age I was when I 
graduated though. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand they are going to be visiting Agribition today. I wish them a very good day 
and a safe journey home. I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them to the legislature. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Unemployment Statistics 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — My question is for the Minister of Labor. It has to do with this morning’s 
alarming unemployment statistics. Just before I start I am going to issue a fervent prayer. Would you 
spare me the speech about how Saskatchewan’s unemployment insurance rate is the lowest in Canada? 
Would you spare me that sermon? It is cold comfort, I say, to someone in P.A. who is out of work that 
there are others in Newfoundland who are equally as miserable. 
 
My question to the minister is this: Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate is 7.1 per cent. That’s up from 
5.5. per cent a year ago and it is up from 6.7 per cent one short month ago. That’s an additional 9,000 
people from last year and 3,000 people in a month. My question is: what is your government going to do 
to bring some relief for these people? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I am quite aware of the unemployment rate, and I won’t spare 
you the sermon that we are the best one in Canada. I think we have done a lot this past summer as far as 
the creation of jobs is concerned. I am fully aware that it is 7.1 as of today, and that bothers me also; but 
we are working very hard at reducing that figure. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’d be delighted with a bit of detail as to exactly what you are doing. You 
announced a program that’ll provide 2,500 new jobs. Would you explain to 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1278 

me (and you may want some assistance in mathematics, like the member for Rosthern) how 9,000 
people are going to share the 2,500 jobs that your job creation employment program creates? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I did a little research. I looked at the figures as of April 17, 
1982 when your administration was in government. On April 17 there were 455,000 people in the 
workforce in Saskatchewan. On April 17 your administration had 29,000 people unemployed — a 6.3 
per cent unemployment rate. On October 17 we had 466,000 people in the workforce in Saskatchewan 
— an increase of 11,000, which indicates to me that the people are coming back to Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — And if you will look at the unemployment figure on October 17 you will 
find that it was 28,000 — 1,000 less than when you people were in office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yet another new question to the minister. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m sure it’s going to be a lot of comfort to the 3,000 additional people who 
are unemployed that you people feel that somehow or other you are only slightly worse than you were 
last April. I’m sure that’s going to be a lot of comfort. I say to the minister that the information which 
your colleague in the Department of Social Services . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a supplementary? This is not a time for speeches. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The information which your colleague has shows that between 900 and 
1,000 people a month are losing unemployment insurance benefits and going into the social welfare rolls 
because there are no jobs. Do you really claim that your job creation program is going to provide any 
relief to those 900 to 1,000 a month who are going on the rolls? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we haven’t got our work program implemented totally yet, 
but you will see that 5,000 people come on with jobs during the winter months. You’re going to see us at 
least holding our own or coming down as far as the unemployment figure is concerned. And looking at 
next summer, with all the construction that is going to take place, you’re going to see a vast reduction in 
the amount of unemployment in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Labor, and I direct it in 
connection with the figures which were recently released by Statistics Canada with respect to 
unemployment in Canada and particularly Saskatchewan. I note that the number of people unemployed 
in Saskatchewan, according to Statistics Canada, is 31,000 in the month of November. I ask the minister 
whether he has any knowledge of any time in the history of Saskatchewan since records were kept by 
Statistics Canada that the figure has been higher than 31,000. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1279 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well, I wasn’t that old, Mr. Speaker, back in the 1930s. I can remember 
part of it, but maybe they were that high back in those days. I can’t answer your question, sir. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. The minister is clearly reaching back to 
the last Conservative government to get a parallel. After the Conservatives left office in 1934, is the 
minister aware of any time since records were kept by Statistics Canada that unemployment has been 
higher than 31,000 in this province? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, as far as the hon. member opposite is concerned, I don’t 
know. I’m not aware of those figures. But I wold probably think that maybe the figures for all of Canada 
weren’t as high as many of the other years as they are right now either. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Transfer of Harry Van Mulligen 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you. I have a question for the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation. This morning we seem to have experienced another one of those unfortunate 
coincidences. Two days after the alderman for the city of Regina moved a motion opposing the wage 
control program, which you people set up, he was moved to Prince Albert. If you don’t have the 
humanity to allow him to act as an alderman, do you at least have the integrity today to admit that you 
moved him to get him our of your hair? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to the hon. member’s question, as you and the 
opposition are well aware Mr. Van Mulligen, to who you are referring, had had political affiliations with 
the New Democratic Party, and he is in a very sensitive position. Instead of asking for his dismissal, all 
we have really done is ask to have him transferred up, and place him in a less sensitive position. There is 
a job to be done in the North. As you know, Mr. Speaker, we took over northern housing. Northern 
housing was in just one terrible shape. We are going to send him up there into the North to bring back 
information to help us and in fact to help the northern people. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That is, Mr. Speaker, an amazing admission: that you moved him because of 
his political belief. Is it the new policy of the government that no member of the public service may 
serve as an alternative unless he clears every issues with the transition team first? Is that the new policy 
of this government? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, no. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Then how is Mr. Van Mulligen to interpret what you have just said: that you 
moved him because of his politics, and because he was in a sensitive position? How else is he to 
interpret that? If he had run for the position in P.A. presumably he would have to clear all of his votes 
with your first: is that the policy? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — No, Mr. Speaker, that is not the case. We moved him up to Prince Albert 
because there’s a position open as an information officer. We have moved him up there to fill that 
position. Probably had it been the other administration they would have fired the gentleman. We don’t’ 
feel that that would have been right. We have 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1280 

compassion, and instead we have transferred him to P.A. to, in fact, go up there to do a job first. We feel 
he can do it, we feel he is qualified to do it, and we are sending him up there. 
 

Salary of Acting PCS President 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I took notice of a question by the 
Leader of the Opposition concerning the salary of the acting president of the Saskatchewan Potash 
Corporation. I answered several times that that salary was lower and I promised to bring you those 
figures today. 
 
The former president of PCS had a salary of $140,910. The acting president of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan is under the contract that you people signed with him. He is still at $130,000 a year and I 
am pleased to tell this Assembly that that salary is frozen. He plus some of the other senior management 
in PCS voluntarily froze their salaries, and the $10,000 that the acting president now was to get under 
your contract was also not taken. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Minister of Labor, for simple clarification. Is the Minister of Labor 
stating that at no time while he was chairman of the corporation did the acting president receive a salary 
in excess of $140,900 a year? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The acting president, in excess of $140,910, that is correct. 
 

Transfer of Harry Van Mulligen 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I do not blame that on the good 
citizens of Turtleford but on those of Qu’Appelle-Lumsden. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. 
Since he has admitted that Mr. Van Mulligen was transferred because, apparently, of his political 
beliefs, I ask the minister whether or not he is asserting to this House that Mr. Van Mulligen in any way 
was anything else but an exemplary employee of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation during the 
period when he was minister? Do you have one instance where his alleged political leanings colored his 
judgment and his performance? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to that question, I have a letter here that was circulated 
around during the civic election campaign on behalf of Mr. Harry Van Mulligen. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Read it to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — I could read it to the Assembly or I could table it. But I could read one quote 
out of it, Mr. Speaker. I’ll just read one quote out of it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Read the whole letter. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1281 

HON. MR. HARDY: — I’ll read the whole letter then. 
 

I’m writing to ask you for financial contributions and your help in re-electing Harry Van Mulligen to 
city council. Harry has worked hard to represent ward 6 and he has worked hard for the New 
Democratic Party for many years. 
 
The Tory land developers have a well-financed machine at work trying to defeat Harry who has fought 
them at every turn. If Tories defeat New Democrats on council like they did in the recent provincial 
election we are all in big trouble. We need your help and your cheques. Remember, when we work 
together we win. And we need to win now more than almost at any time in the NDP’s past. 

 
It’s signed by Greta De John, campaign manager for Harry Van Mulligen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just to say that as Mr. Van Mulligen is an information officer on behalf of the 
Sask Housing Corporation, I would find it very hard to personally have him working with me over there 
with his attitude such as this. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, am I now to understand from the minister that if campaign 
funds are raised on behalf of a person running for civic office, indicating his or her allegiance to any 
party other than the Progressive Conservative Party . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will repeat my question. Mr. Speaker, my question, through you, is to the minister in 
charge of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in this case. Is the minister asserting that if funds are 
raised on behalf of anybody who is contesting a civic election declaring the allegiance of that person to 
any party other than the Progressive Conservative Party, that person is subject forthwith to transfer and, 
accordingly, subject to being able to perform his civic duties? Is that your position? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — No, Mr. Speaker, that’s not our position. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we now have it rather clear, from the minister, that it is 
because of the letter that he is being transferred. Am I correct, Mr. Minister, in saying that it is because 
of the letter, which was sent out by someone who was signing herself as his campaign manager, that he 
is being transferred and it has had nothing to do with his performance on city council? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — No, Mr. Speaker, I didn’t say that. He’s in a sensitive position, we felt, and 
because of problems we thought might arise, we have asked to have him moved to Prince Albert in a 
less sensitive position, and still retain his full pay, his full wages. We feel that’s a very, very 
acknowledgeable thing to do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. My question is this: in view of the fact that you knew that Mr. van 
Mulligen had been elected by his fellow citizens to serve on the Regina City Council, did you seek a less 
sensitive position (to use your words) in 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1282 

Regina, where he could continue to serve the people who elected him, or did you purposely seek a 
position outside Regina, so as to thwart the desires of the people who elected him? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, we didn’t have a position open in Regina that we could move 
him into that would be less sensitive. So we felt that with his knowledge and ability he’d much better 
serve the people of Saskatchewan who pay his wages in Prince Albert to in fact identify some of the 
problems in the North and to help northern people. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. This concerns people who are in 
the employ of the Government of Saskatchewan and who may be elected to civic office. There are rather 
an impressive number of them from time to time, including numbers on the current city council. If they 
perform on the city council in a way which appears to upset the direction of your government, are they 
gong, similar to Mr. Van Mulligen, to be subject peremptorily to transfer outside of Regina? 
 
HON MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, as any professional knows, hi s first responsibility is to his 
employer. People who are employed by the province of Saskatchewan in this government know that 
their first responsibility is to this administration If they are going to be elected to other kinds of things, 
that’s fine and in many cases it won’t bother anybody. But if they have sensitive responsibilities and 
they are blatantly in disagreement with government policy, with the people who are employing them, 
then he should either say, “I disagree as a professional,” or say, “Look, I just can’t handle this position 
because I can’t provide the professional advice because I absolutely disagree with it.” In those 
situations, because his first responsibility is to the employee, then I would expect him to resign. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Premier for that forthright statement. I am going 
to ask him again, since he has made it very clear: people who work for the Government of Saskatchewan 
under his administration and who are elected to civic tasks, be it on school boards or elsewhere, are not 
— and I correctly phrasing it? — to take positions contrary to the position taken by the Government of 
Saskatchewan because that represents a derogation from their responsibility to your government. Is that 
the accurate statement? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — No, Mr. Speaker. What I’m talking about is fundamental policy — 
fundamental policy for the province of Saskatchewan. For example, when we’re looking at fundamental 
policy we’re talking about our recovery program that the people of this province elected us to provide. If 
a senior civil servant in a sensitive position disagrees with fundamental economic or social policy, then 
as a professional he should come out and say, “I cannot agree with it” and resign, or else do his job and 
agree with the policy and promote it. But if he’s in a sensitive position, obviously he can’t if he 
disagrees with it fundamentally or politically or anything else. You would expect that as a premier and I 
expect not less as premier. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — New question, Mr. Speaker, and this is directed to the Premier. This is a 
very fundamental issue that the Premier is raising and I want to pursue it but I want to pursue by 
analogy. There is a federal public servant, a Mr. Fraser, who has 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1283 

been discharged because, as a tax auditor for the federal government, he was speaking out of turn in 
terms of the federal government’s “fundamental policy” on (a) the metric system and (b) the 
constitution. And he was discharged. I think he was discharged wrongly, and I am asking the Premier 
whether he is following the policy of the federal government to discharge people who speak out of turn 
on “fundamental issue” like the constitution? Or is he following the policy advocated by Mr. Clark, 
which says that these people should not be discharged? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already stated my case with respect to the performance of 
professionals. This specific question is, I believe, better answered by the Attorney General because I’m 
not as familiar with the details. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — There is no doubt that the Federal Court of Canada has upheld the dismissal of 
Mr. Fraser, and I believe that the court made it quite clear that an employee has a duty of loyalty to this 
employer has a duty of loyalty to his employer. If he cannot carry out or support the policy of that 
employer, the employer has grounds for dismissal. I suggest as well that the proper course of action for 
senior civil servants — and I don’t believe this is different in any jurisdiction — is that if they have a 
fundamental disagreement with government policy, the proper course for a professional to follow is to 
resign. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I have a question for the Premier, and I would remind you that in your 
initial answer to the question by the Leader of the Opposition, you indicated that you felt Mr. van 
Mulligen could not give you proper advice. I would remind you that that was not his role. It is not Mr. 
Van Mulligen’s role to give you advice. He is an information officer. Do you have a single, solitary 
incident where, as an information officer, he was in breach of his duty to the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation? Can you name a single incident? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, if you have somebody who is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll 
answer the question. If you have somebody who is in a sensitive position . . . We are developing a 
fundamental position on economic recovery in this province. If we have somebody in charge of 
information for a major department like Sask Housing who obviously disagrees with our recovery 
package as he is promoting Sask Housing, professionally there is conflict. What we are saying is that his 
first responsibility is to his employers — to the employer who is paid for the taxpayers. Taxpayers don’t 
pay people in this province not to do the kinds of things the administration wants them to do. So clearly 
in this province and in every other province the first responsibility is to the employer. If he disagrees as 
a professional he should resign. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would remind the Premier that this individual has no responsibility for 
developing new programs or new policies. He explains old ones. I repeat my question: do you have a 
single solitary incident where in explaining a program of SHC he was in derogation of his duty to SHC? 
Can you name a single incident? You’ve been in office seven months. A single incident is all I want. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker let me give you an example. If this person is . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I am answering the question. If this person is clearly in the media saying that he 
disagrees with the program, and at the same time he is going out trying to promote Sask Housing, I 
would think, Mr. Speaker, that somebody might ask him: what do you think of government policy on 
recovery and how does it fit with your housing program? What is he going to say? Is he going to say that 
he likes it? No. So how can he carry out his responsibilities as professional when he publicly disagrees 
with 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1284 

the administration? As a professional he can’t do that, and he knows it. And as a result of that he should 
resign. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. With respect to this, what 
evidence does he have that Mr. Van Mulligen disagreed with your policy? That’s the question. What? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I would just turn to the media. I think it is common knowledge that the 
employer disagrees with our recovery package. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — The employee. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Pardon me, the employee disagrees with our recovery package. It’s in the 
newspaper. It’s all over the place. It’s common knowledge. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Taylor that Bill 
No. 34 — An Act to amend The Marriage Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, in rising on second reading of The Marriage Act, I would just 
like to tell the minister that we do have a number of questions that we will be raising in committee of the 
whole. I don’t believe we have any great difficulty with the bill. There are a number of clarifications that 
we will ask for. I leave it at that for now. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Conflict Act of Interests 
Act 

 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, as I move second reading: it is a simple amendment recommended 
by the board of internal economy expanding the number of positions. It will clarify that those 
individuals holding those positions may receive remuneration without giving up their seats in the 
Assembly. Those position that have been created since the 1971 amendments to the conflict of interests 
act are the deputy chairman of committees, deputy vice-chairman of crown corporations and public 
accounts committees for which allowances are to be paid. As I indicated, it’s an amendment proposed by 
the board of internal economy, and I urge all members to support the proposed amendment. 
 
I move second reading of An Act to amend The Members of the Legislative Assembly Conflict of 
Interests Act. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1285 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity to review this act. It is primarily a 
housekeeping amendment, and accordingly we will support it. 
 
Motion agree to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 — An Act to amend The Statutes Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — The proposed amendments to The Statutes Act will give authority to the Deputy 
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly to record the date of assent on the bills, which is a function which can 
now only be performed by the Clerk of the Assembly. 
 
The proposed amendment to section 10 will eliminate the requirement that the Clerk of the Assembly 
charge a fee by providing certified copies of acts. This amendment has been recommended by the board 
of internal economy because the board finds it is difficult to administer this requirement, and there are 
very few requests for certified copies of acts. 
 
The amendment to section 11 will give authority to the Deputy Clerk to authenticate certified true copies 
of acts, which is again a function presently done solely by the Clerk of the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The Statutes Act. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Similarly, Mr. Speaker, we have had an opportunity . . . We are in basic agreement 
with the act. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 — An Act respecting Power of Attorney 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, under the existing law, when a power of attorney is terminated, any 
act done after that time by the attorney is invalid even though the attorney or other person receiving a 
document signed by the attorney does not know that the power has in fact been terminated. 
 
Section 2 of this bill provides that even when the authority of a power of attorney is terminated by the 
grantor, an act done by the attorney is valid if the attorney or other person does not know of the 
termination of the authority. The attorney is not liable to the grantor for acts done if he did not know of 
the termination of his authority. 
 
At present a power of attorney is terminated if the person giving the power of attorney subsequently 
becomes mentally infirm. In most cases, the reason a power of attorney is given is because the grantor is 
elderly and wishes to have someone care for his or her affairs in the event that he or she becomes 
affected mentally by illness or advancing age. 
 
Therefore this bill in sections 3 and 4 provides that where a written power of attorney provides that it is 
to continue notwithstanding any subsequent mental infirmity of the grantor, it shall continue until the 
appointment of a committee of the estate of the person granting the power of attorney. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1286 

Mr. Speaker, this bill is based largely on the work of the uniform law conference, which recommended 
enacting of an enduring power of attorney in the legislation of 1978. Several other provinces, notably 
British Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario, have recently enacted legislation in this form. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act respecting Powers of Attorney. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to have a further look at it. There are some powers being 
extended to the power of attorney. I want to look more fully at the details of that. I would beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 44 — An Act to amend The Department of Finance Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this amendment is to transfer legislative 
authority to vire funds from the appropriation act to The Department of Finance Act. Members of this 
Assembly will know a virement is a mechanisms whereby funds can be transferred between subvotes 
within the department’s appropriation. The purpose of this mechanism is to allow departments a limited 
degree of flexibility to manage their budgets more efficiently as the year progresses. In effect, what a 
virement does is allow a department to use underexpenditures in one part of its operation to finance 
approved overexpenditures in another part. Naturally, overexpenditures in a vote itself for the 
department — that’s the overall expenditure of a department — as a whole will continue to require 
special warrants and subsequent approval by the legislature through supplementary estimates. 
 
So what we are dealing with here is not being able to spend more money within the department than the 
legislature allocated to that given department. For example, the Department of Social Services would 
still have to have a special warrant and would still have to bring in supplementary estimates if they 
overspent the total amount in the appropriation. But within a department it allows for virements to move. 
 
While the authority to vire funds is such an important housekeeping mechanism, there are at present 
several situations where it is unavailable. These all derive from the same basic problem: that the 
authority to vire resides in the appropriation act rather than The Department of Finance Act. As a 
consequence of this the department cannot vire funds within their vote until the appropriation act is 
passed. 
 
In a situation like the present one, where the appropriation bill has not been passed, the authority to vire 
is unintentionally held up. The result is that departments are forced to request additional funds by way of 
special warrants, even though they may have more than enough money in their subvote. This is clearly 
an undesirable situation since special warrants should be used only when other avenues have been 
exhausted. 
 
Accordingly, I am proposing an amendment to The Department of Finance Act to transfer authority to 
vire funds. This will put in place a standing authority, no longer requiring the legislature to review this 
authority each and every year. 
 
I should indicate that the amendment does not in any way change the way budgets are approved or 
controlled. The use of virements will continue as before. All that will change is the source of the 
legislative authority. In this sense the change is purely of a housekeeping nature. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1287 

So what I am talking about, Mr. Speaker, is this: while a department must have a budgeted item and it 
must go through the committee of finance to approve the total amount of that budget, it does allow an 
opportunity within a department to vire money from one subvote over to another subvote. Revenue 
supply is an example. 
 
In revenue supply, let’s say that the interest rate would be 16 per cent across the year. That interest rate 
drops down. There is excess money left in that particular subvote. There could be pressure on the other 
side, let’s say, to put more cash flow into building a building. It would allow the department to manage 
that dollar within the department which has, in fact, been done in the past, but it does not allow them to 
overspend their particular budget without coming for a special warrant and without coming for 
supplementary estimates in the House. 
 
I move second reading of a bill to amend The Department of Finance Act. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I understand from the minister who is moving the 
amendment to Bill 44, An Act to amend The Department of Finance Act, that what we are talking about 
is an amendment that would allow money to be moved from one subvote of estimates to another if there 
was shortfall. In the example he used — I suppose it’s the positive side — when you have money left 
over in one area you can use it without coming back to the legislature and to get approval for that change 
in the budgeting process. 
 
But I do have some problems. On the other side we can use the case of the Department of Social 
Services, for example. Here again, where you would have a shortfall in the subvote for the 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan and you wanted to use the money out of the day care area, and you sue 
that without any scrutinizing by the legislature. I see some difficulty arising from that. Therefore I do 
want to take some time to study the proposed amendment and have a look at it. Therefore I beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and to this Assembly a group of 
grades 7 and 8 students from the Radar hill School at Dana — from the Canadian forces radar site. They 
are accompanies by their teacher, Mr. Gary Mashinski and their principal, Mr. McLeod. They have 
come to Regina today to tour the Legislative Building and see some of the other sights. Their visit today 
will hopefully be educational and entertaining. I look forward to meeting with them a little later. I ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 48 -- An Act to amend The Liquor Act 
 
HON. MR. SANDBURG: — Mr. Speaker, this bill amends The Liquor Act of 1979. It removes the 
limit on the number of special liquor vendors in this province. The bill will allow a greater number of 
municipalities the opportunity to have a special liquor vendor, if the community so desires. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1288 

The people of Saskatchewan are demanding to be heard, Mr. Speaker. The people who overwhelmingly 
voted for the new Premier, a new government and a change on April 26 have confidence in the new 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe the people of Saskatchewan have the wisdom to choose what is right for 
themselves. The people of the province rejected the previous government with their legislative and 
regulatory programs. We believe that the municipalities should have the right to act on the wishes of the 
people. Before appointing a special liquor vendor, the community, as in the past, Mr. Speaker, votes on 
the question of establishing a special liquor vendor. These special liquor vendors will sell liquor in part 
of their regular premises considered suitable and made available for this purpose, just as they do now 
and as they have in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, years ago special liquor vendors were established to give service to the rural areas. People 
in rural areas of our province were neglected by the previous government. Just because the live in 
outlying areas of the province doesn’t mean they do not deserve service much in the same way as the 
cities. The present legislation takes business away from villages and towns that are now struggling and 
have been struggling for viability. For example, if they drive 30 miles or so to buy their spirits, wine or 
beer, they most often do their shopping for groceries, clothing and other items at that distant town, thus 
taking dollars way from their own community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with your permission, I would like to read a couple of letters that have been sent in as an 
example. This is dated recently: 
 

Dear Sir: I have had an application for a liquor vendor for the village of Small Town for the past eight 
years. Hopefully your government will approve my application, as this town really needs a special 
vendor. The population of about 300 is mainly made up of senior citizens who must either get 
someone to purchase the spirits for them at Small Town or Small Town, or hire someone to drive them 
to one of these centres which are considerable miles away. 
 
Once they arrive at one of these centres they usually buy their groceries, hardware or whatever else 
they need outside of their home town, thus hurting us small business people. I have been in the grocery 
business for almost five years, and am finding it very difficult to make a go of this third-generation 
family business. I feel a vendor could increase my customer traffic and improve sales, thus preventing 
bankruptcy. I am still very interested in getting a vendor licence, therefore, please consider my 
application. 

 
This is one letter of many hundreds that have been received, Mr. Speaker. And another says, dated 
September 20, 1982: 
 

In April of 1975, my husband and I wrote our first letter to the Saskatchewan Liquor Board inquiring 
about the possibility of obtaining a special liquor vendor in our store in Small Town, Saskatchewan. 
As you know, we were informed that the present legislation allows for only 135 in the province. We 
have inquired about the special liquor vendor every year since 1975, and have received the same reply. 
We are still very interested in the special liquor vendor and now hope that you will be able to give us a 
more positive answer 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1289 

this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 141 towns, 336 villages, and 279 unincorporated areas in this province with a 
total population of approximately 970,000. Mr. Speaker, this province is starting to grow with this new 
government and the best Premier Saskatchewan has ever had, and will have. The point is that out of a 
total of 856 towns, villages and unincorporated areas, there are at present only 135 special liquor 
vendors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a strong demand for special liquor vendors in our province. In the past, 567 
applications and inquiries have been received on liquor vendors. The answer is, and has been, “Sorry, 
the Quota is full. The act says 135.” There have been numerous applications and inquires over the past 
few months, since the people elected a new government. Mr. Speaker, the NDP ignored these requests. 
The limit of 135 special liquor vendors has not been changed in 12 years. The previous administration 
was petitioned to increase the limit but did not do so. The last change or increase was back in 1970. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the liquor board has never had a special policy on where special liquor vendors should be, 
or could be, established, other than what the board deemed desirable in relation to distance between 
special vendors, or distance from the nearest government-operated liquor board store. 
 
The province of Manitoba has, in the past, been a reference point on these matters. There they have no 
legislative limit. Ontario and British Columbia have the same policy. It has been the experience of the 
liquor board that these outlets have been almost, without exception, in demand over the years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill is in accord with the government policy of deregulation and better service, and I 
commend the bill to the consideration of this House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, this is a bill dealing with the regulation of liquor. It has been 
customary in this House to permit members on both sides of the House to speak on issues dealing with 
the regulation of liquor without reference to the position of their colleagues in the same party, since I 
think this is not an issue that divides us on a party basis but on other bases. I now speak as the member 
for Regina Elphinstone, and I speak on my own behalf and not on behalf of my party. My other 
colleagues will either participate or vote as they see fit, as I propose to do. 
 
The bill before us deals simply with increasing the number of special liquor vendors, and in that regard I 
do not suppose is particularly objectionable since there is no magic in the number of 135. I am of the 
view that there ought to be a limit; that governments ought not to be pressured, as they inevitably are, to 
have special liquor vendors in every community in Saskatchewan. And I am concerned at some of the 
comments of the minister indicating (if I caught his words right) might hundreds of letters of 
application. 
 
I for my part would regret any development which would have spirits available at every store, or at one 
store in every possible community in Saskatchewan. We have to recall that this is not the only place 
where alcoholic beverages are available. Virtually every hotel in Saskatchewan sells beer on an 
off-premises basis, as well of course as on premises. But my point is that one can go to your 
neighborhood hotel and pick up a 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1290 

case of beer. This deals primarily with spirits and wine. Most of the special liquor vendors have little or 
no business in beer, have small business in beer and deal with spirits and wine, primarily because of 
limitations of space and the fact that hotels are fairly widely distributed across this province. 
 
I see this as move in the direction of making liquor substantially more accessible, and I see that as a 
direction of which I do not approve. The figures are really quite overwhelming, and have been gathered 
in many, many places, that consumption of alcoholic beverages is very closely related to the 
accessibility of alcoholic beverages. And the figures are equally clear that as the consumption of 
alcoholic beverage increases, the number of road accidents and crimes related tot he consumption of 
alcohol increases, and the rate of alcoholism in our community increases. There is no question on those 
scores. With a simple look at a comparison of countries, one can illustrate that the country of France 
consumes more absolute alcohol per capita than any other country and the alcoholism rate is highest in 
France. You go down and Italy is second. The alcoholism rate is second highest in Italy. One can go 
down the list and the correlation is almost complete. The consumption of absolute alcohol and the 
spread of alcoholism as a disease is almost of total correlation. 
 
One can similarly see that the increase in the consumption of alcohol and the increase in crime and auto 
accidents — and some of those have criminal consequences and some do not —once again, the 
correlation is almost complete. Our colleague in this legislature, the Minister of Highways and the 
minister in charge of the highway traffic board, is quite rightly taking a strong view with respect to road 
accidents associated with alcohol. 
 
If he is to be consistent, he will also have to take a strong view with respect to the general accessibility 
of alcohol. Here I do not wish to tie in necessarily the number of special liquor vendors but I see this as 
part of a general policy being adopted by the government opposite, and I think acknowledged by the 
minister, that they are gong to deregulate and that they are going to have much less regulation. 
 
This particular instance, perhaps not as objectionable as other deregulation, would in my judgment be 
making alcohol much more freely available, and, as I say, therefore making the crimes related to alcohol 
much more likely, the road accidents related to alcohol much more likely, and the increase in the 
alcoholism rate much more likely. No one I think can dispute the massive evidence, which has been 
gathered which confirms those facts. 
 
I believe that we in this Assembly ought to address this question as one of the most urgent social 
questions facing our society. No one I think can necessarily distinguish between cause and effect, but 
whenever one discusses the problem of accidents on the highway we begin to discuss alcohol and the 
consumption thereof. Whenever we discuss problems with young people, and it is customary for older 
people to do that every generation, I am aware of that, but none the less when we do that we tend to 
discuss the consumption of alcohol and, in this case, drugs. Whenever we turn our mind to the special 
problems which seem to surround the lives of people of native origin sooner or later the discussion turns 
to alcohol and the consumption thereof. Whenever we turn our mind to the rising incidence of family 
break-up, and particularly of child abuse, then almost inevitably the discussion turns to the consumption 
of alcohol and the increase thereof. Whenever we turn our mind to another social problem of spouse 
battering, wife battering, and these sorts of things, 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1291 

and you analyze why those circumstances take place, sooner or later, and usually sooner, you discuss the 
matter of alcohol and alcohol consumption, indicating, I think, that this is a real problem in our society. 
 
I’ve been reading not the book but some reviews of the book by James Gray, author of Red Lights on the 
Prairie, and Booze — but now I think that this one is Baccanalia Revisited. 
 
But talking about the consumption of alcohol and the fact that wherever the consumption is high the 
social problems of the kind that I have related seem to increase. 
 
No one suggests that there is any easy solution to this problem, since it obviously surrounds our way of 
life, and all of us are perhaps participants in this: a much more free and easy way of life, one much less 
regulated by the constraints that used to perhaps constrict us or as at lest guide us (pick your word), 
constraints that came from the smaller communities in which we lived, the religious communities of 
which we were a part, and the social communities of which we were part. These ties are clearly much 
less, and we are living a free, easy, relaxed, or less strenuous life, depending upon one’s selection of 
terms. 
 
The results however are the same. We are seeing mounting social problems and the great bulk of them 
are associated with an increase in the consumption of alcohol. I cannot help but feel that while we ought 
not to dictate to our people, “Thou shalt not,” we ought to do nothing to encourage the further 
consumption of alcohol. There is clearly a line to be drawn here. A prohibition mentality is unacceptable 
to our people. On the other hand, it seems to me that we as legislators ought to do nothing to encourage 
increased consumption. 
 
We ought not to encourage the advertising of alcoholic beverages, and we ought not to encourage the 
consumption of alcoholic beverages in association with sports activities and other activities where young 
people frequently gather. We ought not to encourage the consumption of alcoholic beverages at 
functions of which we are a part. Once again we are not now talking about a “Thou shalt not,” but we 
are at least attempting to give some guidance. That is my view. I have held this view for a goodly 
number of years, and on that account I have, on a personal basis, tended to be apprehensive about 
proposals that, in my judgement, would likely increase the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
 
We have before us one of those . . . The particular provision itself to raise the figure from 135 does not 
particularly disturb me; the proposal to remove it altogether does disturb me. And I wish, if they don’t 
like 135, they would put in 140 or 145 so they will have some basis for restricting the inevitable pressure 
for special liquor vendor in every store in Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan which feels it could use 
some additional business. Here I think we have to face that fact that many stores in rural Saskatchewan 
are under pressure and they will inevitably look to see that the special liquor vendor might offer them 
respite from difficult economic times. The pressure then will be on the government to respond. I well 
understand that but I think that the government should give itself some protection. 
 
I understand that the votes in the local communities will be promoted or will be conducted really on the 
basis of the local merchant in many, many smaller communities saying, “I need the special liquor 
vendor; otherwise I can’t stay in 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1292 

business.” And what you’re voting for is whether or not you want your local store to remain in business. 
It’s pretty difficult under those circumstances to vote against that, even though you may have some 
misgivings about it. 
 
For all of those reasons, Mr. Speaker, I am apprehensive about the direction undertaken by the new 
government. I am concerned that they propose in a major way to deregulate which, in my judgment, 
would be wrong policy in view of the mounting and overwhelming evidence of the connection of 
alcohol with many of our social problems. 
 
I am, as I have indicated, not particularly concerned if they wish to increase the number of special liquor 
vendors by a modest amount in order to deal with some pressure points. I find myself therefore 
ambivalent about this bill, but certainly opposed to the direction indicated by the minister that his bill 
was leading us. I propose therefore to reserve judgment on how I will vote but want to put on the record 
these views which I feel ought to be considered by this legislature, because I think they indicate some 
real problems that our society is facing. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to say a few words, Mr. Speaker, with respect to his bill. I would draw to 
the attention of the members who were not here before that, with respect to addressing the question of 
further distribution of outlets and liquor relaxation laws, in the past what we did was to establish a 
legislative committee that was known as the Don Faris committee. That committee made an extensive 
review throughout the province and I think one of the overwhelming pieces of evidence that it brought 
in was that increasing the availability of alcohol increased the consumption. 
 
I want to say that what is happening here, as the Leader of the Opposition has indicated, is we are not 
concerned as to whether 135 is the magic number. But I think what we have here is a signal from the 
opposite side, not in a comprehensive way but in a piece by piece way, of a relaxation in the liquor laws. 
I say that because first, they are introducing this amendment, and second, they have already amended the 
regulations indicating that it’s quite all right to go into a pub now to treat a friend. 
 
They said that was archaic. It is indeed, but I say that that has a much broader implication. The 
implication is that liquor reps, representing breweries, go from hotel to hotel throughout the province. 
One of the things they do, in selling their product is to buy a round for the house. Under the previous 
law that was prohibited. The removal of that particular provision was not to address the problem of two 
friends going in, and one throwing $5 down to pay for the two drinks. That was never a problem. There 
were no records ever of anyone being fined. Granted, maybe it shouldn’t have been on the books as a 
regulation. But the regulation did serve a purpose: that was for major treating and the promotion of 
products by the liquor reps and brewers’ sales representatives. 
 
Now that has been relaxed. The representatives of Labatt’s and the various companies can go into a 
hotel with immunity. I say that that is a further relaxation, an encouragement of drinking and an 
encouragement and promotion of the product. 
 
In want to say that, also, there is another point. I know that the members opposite have been flying the 
prospect of whether or not liquor should be in every corner store. They had it run through, I think, the 
Young show, in order to get a consensus, because that’s usually the Tory party method of finding out 
whether they should proceed or not. There 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1293 

is certainly some discussion within the government about going another step into corner stores in the 
cities and larger towns. 
 
I want to say that it is evident here that there is direction for greater relaxation in the liquor laws by the 
government opposite. I think that we will be seeing, not too long the future, further relaxation in respect 
to Taylor Field football games. I think that’s in the mill also. 
 
I’m saying that there is clear evidence that what the government is doing is not merely addressing a 
number of little demands from people writing in asking to have liquor in their corner store in a smaller 
community six miles from a liquor stores. I don’t think that is the burning issue here. The issue really is: 
do we in fact want to increase the availability which indeed has a very close correlation with 
alcohol-related problems. 
 
I want to continue my remarks. I want to draw to the attention of the minister some of the findings of the 
legislative committee that we had set up a few years ago in the mid-seventies. I want to draw to his 
attention the dangers that relaxed liquor laws can result in. I notice that the government is sending out a 
white paper in respect to whether or not the police or, through the medical association, the doctors can in 
fact have the right to test the fluids of the body in order to determine whether the individual is impaired 
or not. They area testing that. I would have thought that on the question of relaxation, since they’re 
testing some of the other things and they say they’re consulting with the public, perhaps they might have 
also consulted in respect to the overall question of relaxation and the availability of alcohol beverages to 
the public. 
 
As I say, Mr. Speaker, I am going to be having more to say on this topic and I beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION 
 

Standing Committee on Estimates 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Berntson: 
 

That the estimates and supplementary estimates for the Legislative Assembly, subvotes 1-3, 607, 17, 
and 20-23 of vote 21, be withdrawn from the committee of finance and referred to the standing 
committee on estimates. 

 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes, on adjourned debates item two, in checking the record and the vote 
21 item, we find that we have no problem with this and therefore we’ll let it go. 
 
Motion agree to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. Before commencing with our review of the estimates and 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1294 

supplementary estimates which have been referred to the committee of finance, I would like to make a 
brief statement of explanation for the benefit of the members of the committee. 
 
The committee has before it three different sets of estimates: the main estimates for the fiscal year 
ending March 31, 1983; supplementary estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1982; 
supplementary estimates for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1983. This latter set of supplementary 
estimates are composed of the special warrants issued in the absence of an appropriation act during the 
first part of the 1982-83 fiscal year. These amounts which provided interim funding are incorporated 
into the main estimates for the fiscal year needing March 31, 1983 rather than being supplemental to 
these estimates as would normally be the case. They therefore do not need to be voted on separately by 
the committee, but are provided for information only. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ENERGY AND MINES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 23 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce the senior officials of energy and 
mines to this Assembly. On my immediate right is the deputy minister, Don Moroz. On my immediate 
left, the assistant deputy minister, or assistant deputy in charge of administration and finance, Bob Reid. 
Directly behind me is Doug Gillard, the executive director of the petroleum and natural gas division. 
And immediately behind me is Steve Zurawski, the director of mineral revenues. As the rear of the 
Assembly is Les Beck, the executive director of geology and mines. In the middle, Bruce Wilson, 
director, fiscal analysis branch, and next to that gentleman is Doug Patriquin, the assistant deputy 
minister of energy. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve discussed it with Mr. Minister of Finance. The Leader of the 
Opposition will be here momentarily. He wants to commence it, and it will only be a moment. So if we 
could just wait two or three minutes, he should be here . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, he may 
want to praise them. So I would beg leave of the committee just to wait two or three minutes and he’ll be 
here. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I suggest to you that I think it is being a little presumptuous for the 
opposition to allow this amount of time to go by. There are some rules of protocol in which I believe we 
have accommodated them by waiting. But it is getting down to that point now where I suggest that 
House business should not be held up any longer. If they have some comments or questions, we are 
delighted to handle them. But I think we have reached the point where propriety demands that this 
House proceed. 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I wonder if we could begin with an explanation by the minister on one of 
your startling successes and that is the upgrade at Moose Jaw. It began with a sure thing and it has 
managed to snatch defeat from the jaws of victory. 
 
I wonder if you could tell us the current status of that project and if you cold tell us how many of the 
partners haven’t been frightened off by the government opposite. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — Mr. Chairman, the member well knows the progress that was 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1295 

made by the Plains consortium on the upgrader. He knows very well how much basic work had been 
done. And if you care to pursue that particular point, I can send to my office and find a few memos from 
my predecessor that somehow escaped the paper shredder and which are dated about a year ago, which I 
think will settle once and for all the progress his government had made toward an upgrader in Moose 
Jaw. 
 
The status is simply this. The Plains consortium as it would pertain to the Archydal and Cloan sites is no 
longer viable, if in fact it ever was, if in fact the economics ever were. It is public knowledge that Husky 
has withdrawn from that consortium as well as Shell. That amounted to about 40 per cent withdrawal. 
The Plains consortium still remains active with the remaining members, Gulf Canada, Petro-Canada and 
Saskoil. The present operator is Petro-Canada. This consortium still is active. They are still working on 
the concept of an upgrade. Beyond that I have no intention of making any comment because it would 
simply not be in the interest . . . 
 
As far as the two sites mentioned by the member, I believe I was informed that the options for purchase 
of the land were allowed to lapse the end of September. I’ve forgotten my source on that, but I believe 
I’m accurate. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The media reports indicate that other members of the consortium are about to 
pull out. Does the minister have any indication that any other members of the consortium are about to 
abandon the project? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I have not information that anyone else is about to pull out of the 
consortium, certainly not Saskoil and certainly not Petro-Canada. Gulf indicated some time ago that they 
wish to re-evaluate their position. I have had no indication of what they are going to do. To the best of 
my knowledge, and that goes back to two or three weeks ago, the last time I met with the consortium. 
Gulf was still active in it. I am unaware of any changes at this particular moment. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Does the minister have any written reports or studies at economics of this 
project? Two questions: do you he any, and would you be prepared to table them for the benefit of 
members opposite? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — Would I be prepared to table them for the benefit of members opposite? 
The answer is” absolutely not. Frankly, members opposite wouldn’t know what to do with them; you 
would know how to evaluate them. You’ve had your change. You had the good years of the oil industry 
when this should have been built. You had your opportunity and you blew it. It’s not very tough to do 
things when times are good, when markets are expanding. When things are difficult that’s when they’re 
a little tougher. And we accept that; we accept the challenge. One way or another we’ll get the job done. 
 
No, I have nothing that I would care to table. I am not going to do what my predecessor did. I am not 
going to raise the expectations to an unrealistic level in any community in this province. When we have 
a deal, when we have a sound, viable financial deal, there will be a proper and appropriate 
announcement with all the details for you to scrutinize. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Just one additional question to the minister. It doesn’t strike me that tabling a 
report indicating that a certain site isn’t economically feasible is going to raise anybody’s expectations. 
Are you prepared to give us the reason why you won’t table the study? 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1296 

HON. MR. THATCHER: — Would you be more specific? What study are you referring to? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You implicitly indicated that you had a report or study which indicated that 
the site at Moose Jaw was not economically viable. I asked you if you would table that. You indicated 
you wouldn’t because you didn’t want to raise anybody’s expectations. The logic of that was somewhat 
fleeting, I may say. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I think the member is misinterpreting me. I did not say there was any 
particular study. Of course, I could invite you people to table the study that says Moos jaw was 
economic. That would be an intriguing one, because it really didn’t that when one really gets down to 
reading it. 
 
But the whole point is academic. A couple of members of the consortium came to the conclusion, on 
their own without consultation with this government, that those two sites were not viable. I’m not 
professional on site evaluation; these people are. If I had such a report I would not table it, but the sad 
fact of the matter was that two members of that consortium came to that conclusion based on their 
professional analysis. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wonder if I might pursue the matter of an oil 
upgrader in a slightly more general way. The general opinion has been that in order to make an upgrade 
viable there would have to be a spread in the prevailing market price between light sweet oil, syncrude 
or some high quality oil, and the heavy oil that was the feed stock for the upgrade of a given number of 
dollars. Pick your figure, $12 a barrel or whatever. What is the view of the minister and the department 
about the approximate spread that is needed between the value of the feed stock and the value of the end 
product on a per barrel basis to make the upgrader economic? And I’m not asking for any particular 
figure, not $14.23 or anything, but what is the range? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I think the Leader of the Opposition is basically correct in his assumption 
that $12 is a realistic figure. I have heard some opinions that go as low as $10, but probably the $11 to 
$12 range is realistic. The Leader of the Opposition, I know, is aware of the difficulties of putting 
together an oil upgrader. Obviously concession have to come at all levels of taxation. For instance, it is 
basic to the project that the finished product is gong to get the world price. This is just basic to it. And it 
would appear that the federal government ahs accepted that concept. 
 
Many of the projections that have been put toward the upgrade are modelled on the attitude that the 
federal government took toward the Alsands project. The feed stock going in obviously must have some 
selective taxation, probably from both levels of government. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is fully aware that the economics are dicey; they are difficult. And 
probably if we knew that we could sell all the crude we could produce during this decade, we wouldn’t 
look at an oil upgrader. If we could take all our low quality crude and if we were reasonably certain that 
we could compete against the light, sweet crudes elsewhere . . . Probably the economics aren’t there. But 
that’s an assumption which is not valid any longer. 
 
If we’re going to have an oil industry in this province, the sad fact is toward the end of this decade we’re 
going to have to upgrade it. That’s just a fact of life in our view. Therefore an upgrader is certainly a 
priority with this government. But no question, the economics are dicey and that’s why we’re 
proceeding so cautiously. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1297 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, the minister will be aware of some recent press reports 
coming out of Alberta, where statements are attributed to the chairman of the Alberta Petroleum 
Marketing Commission, Mr. Wayne Minion. The report seems a little garbled to me: 
 

The economics won’t support a heavy oil upgrader in Alberta or Saskatchewan. I haven’t yet seen any 
project that you could justify on the basis of economics alone. (I understand what he’s saying there.) 
The market for heavy oil produced in Alberta is already filled. The cost of upgrading heavy oil feed 
stock into light crude products would be too expensive to compete with other oil without government 
help. (I understand that statement.) It is questionable whether governments should subsidize such 
projects when markets are stabilized and there is a substantial surplus of heavy crude oil. (That was a 
straight non sequitur to me.) 

 
Do we agree then, that if there was a ready market for the Lloydminster heavy crudes and the sour 
medium crudes that might be the feed stock for such an upgrader, then nobody would be talking about 
an upgrader? But it is because of the likelihood that there is not a market for the heavy crudes that we 
could produce that we are now talking about an upgrader to make the heavy crudes which could produce 
a marketable product. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — In answer to the Leader of the Opposition, I’m not convinced Mr. Minion 
was reflecting the views of the Alberta government. I have heard Mr. Minion, in consultation with 
Alberta officials and Saskatchewan officials, reflect that identical view. I am not convinced that Mr. 
Minion is reflecting the views of the Alberta government. It certainly would not appear that he is. I 
confess that I have not talked to the new Alberta energy minister, but I would be very surprised if there 
is a change in position by the Alberta government. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition recalls the reason that his government started looking at a heavy oil 
upgrader, and probably the reasons that this government continues to look at it are not all that different 
than the logic which your government applied. 
 
Under an upgrader . . . Well, let’s say in the industry we have two choices. Right now we are selling 
everything that we can produce We’re pumping at 100 per cent capacity and if we were certain that this 
would continue, that we could market everything that would like to pump, probably an upgrader wold 
not be viable. So the choice we face is really pretty basic. We can assume that we can market all the 
heavy oil, low quality oil, that we can produce and we’ve got market with Koch and with Mobil, or we 
can produce a syncrude and put it on the Canadian market. 
 
My own view is that we are, in both cases, too dependent on the whims of the federal government. For 
example, the Leader of the Opposition is aware of some of the difficulties that producers of crude have 
had with the federal government in entering into long-term commitments with American refiners, and I 
refer, for example, to Koch. These refineries need commitments. They need long-term contracts in order 
to schedule their refining processes. Because of the export position of the federal government, many of 
these refineries which would buy Saskatchewan crude have looked elsewhere. They have alternatives — 
from offshore, from Mexico — because they don’t view Canada as a completely reliable supplier. So, 
you get into an oversupply situation, and marketing becomes very keen. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1298 

I guess my answer — and I’m not trying to be wishy-washy — is that I think the way we must go is to 
do the additive here, have the upgrader here, the value-added product here, and if we can make the 
numbers crunch — and I emphasize — if we can make the numbers work out, it is my view that we 
should go the upgrader route. 
 
At the same time, I want to emphasize that the priority of marketing has been taken far more seriously 
by this Department of Energy than I think has been in the past. We intend to make every effort to market 
the production. We are going to do our darnedest to minimize any shut-in oil in the coming few months. 
I believe that we are meeting with some success, but we are aggressively gong after every potential 
buyer. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has raised the prospect of shut-in oil this 
winter, and he may have had drawn to his attention a report attributed to the federal Department of 
Energy and some comments by one John Beddome, who is the crude oil committee chairman of the 
independent petroleum association, indicating that the federal figure showed that we were likely, and 
now I am talking about western Canada not Saskatchewan, to have 95,000 barrels a day of light and 
medium crude and 20,000 barrels of heavy crude shut in in the first three months of 1983. This is just 
one-half of what we had shut in last winter. 
 
The reason is the one which has raised, I’m sure, your ire as much as it raised ours. The shut-in capacity 
is caused from central Canadian refineries using imported oil which is priced lower than its Canadian 
competition due to the structure of Ottawa’s import compensation charges. Is it the present view of the 
department that we are likely to have shut-in oil, wells shut in, to an extent of perhaps one-half what it 
was last winter, or not? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I can assure the Leader of the Opposition these games by the federal 
government raise our anger just as, I am sure, they raised yours. That whole structure of that game is just 
as absurd down there. I’ve reflected these views to the federal government as, I am sure, your people did 
when you were the government. You just have to wonder about what the thinking is of a government 
that’s committed to energy self-sufficiency by 1990. You would never know it by their actions in 
western Canada. 
 
The new story that the premier, or the Leader of the Opposition . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, 
that’s right I must say. I’m rapidly becoming accustomed to the view from this side. I can’t 
overemphasize how superior the view from this side is versus the one over there. 
 
The figures in the story are about a month old. Since that time the situation has improved rather sharply. 
We have additional nomination from refineries, several in the East and I believe another one or two in 
the United States. It does appear that for the first quarter of 1983 there is going to be very little shut-in 
oil. Now, how the economy goes is probably going to have some indication as to how much that is, but 
we are optimistic that it is going to be minimal, certainly nothing like the problems that were face din 
early 1982 or the magnitude that is indicated in the story. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I would like the minister to comment a little bit on this. I 
think we all understood the box that the federal government was in at the time that the energy 
agreements were signed, during the period between 1980 and when the energy agreements were signed, 
when there was an effective battle between Ottawa and the producing provinces, when Alberta shut in 
production which was a 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1299 

tactic in the fight, which tactic we agreed with, notwithstanding the fact that I had substantial 
consequences for us. The federal government, to protect itself, made a bunch of contracts, as it is 
alleged, with Mexico and Venezuela. Then when the contracts were signed, those contracts were to run 
out and it was out understanding that we were not going to be faced with this inflow of foreign oil to 
anything like the extent that we are still, and that we wouldn’t be running into shut-in oil problems 
because of imports. The problem, as I now understand it, does not revolve around their pricing policy 
which has certain averages or pays out compensation charges based upon certain averages and allows 
people to go out and buy a lower grade oil cheaper than Canadian oil. 
 
I keep having that explained to me; I keep being unable to believe it, because it sounds so devoid of any 
rational content. I have it explained to me again. I just want to know whether that is still your analysis of 
it or not? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — To the Leader of the Opposition, I think it is essentially correct. I join 
with him in having some difficulty in understanding the logic of the federal government in this area. The 
sad fact is when the energy agreement was signed the federal government got everything they wanted. I 
don’t say that to cast any aspersion on the Government of Alberta or this government at the time. They 
were negotiating with a gun at their head. There is no question that the federal government was prepared 
to shut down the western oil and gas industry to get what they wanted. There is no question. I 
acknowledge that probably you made the best deal that you cold, generally. That would appear to be the 
position of the federal government. They are prepared to shut it down if they have to. 
 
It does appear to me and to this government as a complete inconsistency, on the part of the federal 
government to talk energy self-sufficiency by 1990 and yet make it profitable for eastern Canadian 
refiners to import crude oil from offshore or through a pipeline to Portland, Maine. I point out to you 
this is something we are going to have to live with. The pipeline from Portland, Maine to Montreal is 
built into the system. It is something we’re going to have to live with indefinitely. I don’t understand the 
logic in subsidizing eastern Canadian refiners to refine offshore oil at the expense of western Canadian 
oil. 
 
Our position to the federal government has been (and we are supported by Alberta) and is that if the 
federal government is going to allow central Canadian refiners to import lower prices offshore crude, 
subsidize them to refine it . . . In other words, if they don’t want our crude, they should allow us to 
export if we wish, and they should allow us to discount if we have to, to whatever the market will bear. 
That’s in the case of shut-in to discount if we have to, to whatever the market will bear. That’s in the 
case of shut-in oil. The federal government to this point in time has not accepted the validly of that oil. 
The federal government to this point in time has not accepted the validity of that position. We think it is 
totally unreasonably on their part. We are saying, “If you don’t want our oil, let us sell it where we can, 
at whatever we have to, in order to move it.” 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I commend the minister for pursing that with the federal government. It 
seems to me that it’s just going to be difficult enough for us to get a solid economic basis for developing 
the heavy oil in the Lloydminster area. If we find some light sweet it will look after itself somehow; it 
just will. But in the Lloydminster area, we either have to deliver a market through an upgrader or a 
market based upon some consumption from eastern Canada and some from the upper-tier states — Koch 
and the others in the Minnesota and Chicago area. We just have to have either the upgrader 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1300 

or a solid market base which has some ability to project more than a month ahead. 
 
It seems to me that the federal government is being grossly unreasonable in this, unless they feel that 
that oil is in the ground and will be good enough in the next century of something. That’s an ice 
specious point of view from their perspective, but I think Saskatchewan needs the development of the 
heavy oil resource in west central Saskatchewan. It has a very, very heavy economic impact, you know. 
A lot more dollars are spent producing a barrel of that than a barrel of light sweet. It is virtually a 
commercial operation or industrial operation. It seems to me that it should be pursued with vigor, and 
I’ve no doubt that that the minister is pursing it with vigor. I compliment him for doing it. It’s not easy, 
always, to deal with the federal government. One must bite one’s lip from time to time. Some of us are 
not perhaps well-suited to that, but I commend the minister for pursuing that. 
 
I would like to ask the minister just some questions for sheer information with respect to the year that 
we are reviewing, up to March 31, 1983. You can give it to me either in the fiscal year ‘82-83 or the 
calendar year ’82, however your statistics are. What are our projections for light oil production, medium 
oil production and heavy oil production” What are our projections for natural gas production? If you can 
give them to me both in barrels and cubic metres, I would like it. The barrels are the only ones I 
understand, and the records were all in cubic metres. I just have that problem, as I suspect a lot of us do. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — While my officials are finding that, I’ll just make a couple of general 
comments. Perhaps rather than just reading these things into the record, I have no objection to simply 
sending you this chart over. I’m sorry, this is in cubic metres. If you’d like it converted to barrels, I’ll 
have one of my officials take a moment convert it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right, I’ll have 
them convert it, and I’ll send that over to you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — As I say, all the records are in cubic metres. My memory only operates in 
barrels. 
 
Basically, are we expecting that production this year would be 50 million or 60 million barrels, low 
fifties, I suppose? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I am prepared to say that it’ll be in the fifties. To the Leader of the 
Opposition, it would appear that it’s gong to be higher than last year but less than 1980. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’ll just look at this figure. My colleague has some questions directed, I 
think, to southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I know that there was a great deal of anticipation in the last couple of years 
in the drilling program in southwest Saskatchewan with Dome Petroleum moving in, in a relatively 
aggressive way, to the Shaunavon are. We’ve noticed since spring the lack of activity in that area in 
terms of drilling and I’m just wondering how long these people are going to be kept on hold in 
anticipation of having an upgrader that would make use of that oil as feed stock, be it at Moose Jaw or in 
the northwest area. Can you give us the number of wells drilled in the Swift Current area so far this year 
as compared to last? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I would have to concede to the member for Shaunavon that the southwest 
is our weakest area in terms of drilling. The member for Shaunavon 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1301 

mentioned Dome Petroleum. Very respectfully, I would suggest to the member that the upgrader has no 
connection with Dome’s lack of drilling. You’re aware that major land base down there is Dome 
Petroleum. I mean, Dome is broke. 
 
In fact Dome has just created chaos in the energy industry because, quite frankly, they have been a total 
waste. They have so monopolized the Department of Energy in Ottawa that they have been unable to 
deal with anything else. Their deputy minister, Mickey Cohen, instead of running a department, ahs 
been working on the bail-out of Dome for I don’t know how many months. In fact Dome Petroleum is 
probably an indictment of the Canadianization of the oil industry that we couldn’t afford. Dome is a 
prime example. I suggest to you that Dome isn’t waiting for an upgrader down in your constituency. 
Dome is broke. 
 
I’m not sure whether the member is aware that Dome has not yet accepted the offer from the federal 
government. The shareholders and the board of directors who have made all of these wonderful 
decisions that have put Dome in that position have not yet accepted the offer. They’re still up in the air. 
But that Dome thing has had ramifications far beyond. It has unfairly monopolized the federal 
department that has been the focal point — -the Department of Energy. It brought chaos in our banking 
institutions. They have just been a disaster. And I suggest to the member that an upgrader has had no 
impact whatsoever on their decision as to whether to drill in your area. It has been their financial 
situation. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the example I used of Dome Petroleum was just that 
— an example. I now that other companies who have drilling programs in the area . . . I suppose, using 
that example, if that was the only reason, their drilling programs would be going ahead. But I know that 
the people who purchase Marathon Petroleum (I believe it’s Abbotsford Petroleum) also have their 
drilling program cut considerably back, I believe in large part because of the fact that an upgrader to use 
that type of oil from southwest Saskatchewan is not proceeding. But I would like to follow up. I am not 
sure whether you said you would get me the number of the drilling programs to date in the Swift Current 
area in comparison with last year or not. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I would like to re-emphasize to the member for Shaunavon that the lack 
of drilling activity in this are has no relation and no connection to an upgrader. Obviously an upgrader is 
not going to be on stream. Even if I announced today, “Look, we are doing an upgrader. It’s on stream. 
We’ve got it,” it’s a good five to six years before it’s in place, before it’s probably accepting product. 
 
The fact of the matter is that a couple of the companies in your are looking very seriously at enhanced 
oil recovery projects — EOR experimental projects. They are working internally to decide whether or 
not they are going to proceed with them next year. I guess I shouldn’t name the companies. It would be 
inappropriate. But they are looking very seriously at EOR and that could account for some of the 
hesitation. 
 
It is our view that there is going to be greatly increases exploration in that are next year. We are 
optimistic. As far as the number are concerned, in 1981 in the Swift Current are the number of wells 
drilled was 56. This year it would appear we are going to be down to 36. That’s a drop of 20 wells in 
your area. I repeat, the southwest area is our weakest area. I can rattle some numbers off here for the rest 
of the province 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1302 

showing some places where we are up but I am not going to take the time of the House to do that. 
 
I acknowledge that we are not doing well in our area. We are doing our darnedest to get some activity 
down there. WE are optimistic that some promising EOR projects are going to be started down there 
next year. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — One more question on the topic of future development in southwest 
Saskatchewan and the relationship to an upgrader. Can the minister give assurances to the oil industry in 
southwest Saskatchewan and the smaller contractors that any consideration of an upgrader being made 
by this department, or any agreements that he is entering or talking about entering into, will include 
using the feed stock from southwest Saskatchewan as part of that arrangement? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I am sure the member can appreciate that this would depend on what 
region of the province the upgrader is built in. Now, if the upgrader is built in southern Saskatchewan 
obviously Fosterton and Dollard is going to play a very significant role in that. So the answer would 
certainly be yes. Now, should the upgrader be built in Lloydminster, and I am giving no indication plus 
or minus whether that is true, obviously crude from southwest Saskatchewan is not going to play a very 
significant role up there. So I answer that question by saying that it is going to depend on the geography 
or the location, and I want to emphasize that I am giving no indication where those potential sites may 
be. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I noted with a great deal of interest that if an upgrader were 
negotiated and an agreement reached, however that were to come about, and if it were to be built in 
northwest Saskatchewan, that the southwest crude would not be a part of the feed stock. It’s a little 
amazing. I don’t think it’s difficult to put a pipeline in that would take the crude from southwest 
Saskatchewan to an upgrader in the Lloydminster area. And I would just like clarification, if that is in 
fact what he is saying. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — The member for Shaunavon, I think you would be erroneous to interpret 
that southwest crude would not play, that I am telling you that southwest crude could play not role in an 
upgrader in the northwest. I think I indicated it would not play a highly significant role, and I think 
that’s probably true in the economics. I think when the member looks at the cost involved in a pipeline 
to take that crude as well as acquiring diluent to make it go through a pipeline up to Lloydminster, the 
value-added cost is pretty significant. So in a very general sense, I’m saying the role would not be 
significant. At the same time I do not exclude it. I don’t intend to exclude it. Obviously it’s the objective 
of this government to ensure that, wherever an upgrader is built, maximum utilization of Saskatchewan 
crude will occur. That’s an objective. Obviously some is going to play more of a role than others. And 
that in no way should be interpreted. And I want to make it very clear that that in no way should be 
interpreted that northwest is a preferred site. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chair, I have several questions I would like to ask the minister. In your role as 
Minister of Energy, is you department looking at the potential that coal has in southern Saskatchewan. 
And are you doing some studies of related projects that could be developed from that source? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — The best answer I can give to the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is 
that presently a study has been undertaken on behalf of CIC by a 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1303 

consulting firm on the overall use of energy. Coal is include din that study. It slipped my mind who the 
consultant is at the moment, and I’m not sure when he is reporting. The whole study is being handled by 
CIC, not by energy and mines, so what information I can give you on that would be basically second 
hand. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — So that if letters go out from the government as such, they would necessarily come 
from the Department of Energy. 
 
I just have one example. In the recent rail line abandonment hearing there were two lines in question: 
one line from Coronach going east, and another line from Rockglen going south. When the Rockglen 
south hearings were being held two of your colleagues delivered a secret document to the 
commissioners who then made an immediate decision that that line would stay in place. Can you 
comment as to what the potential of that coal development would be? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I am totally unaware of that situation. I don’t what colleagues you are 
referring to, and I have no idea of what document. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Somebody from the government must have had some pretty conclusive evidence that 
there would be development taking place south of Rockglen. They gave us the amount of millions of 
tons of coal that are there, and the locations. Something is happening, and you have raised the 
expectations of the people of Rockglen. 
 
When I first got elected to the House, Coronach has 300 people; today it is the second largest town in 
my riding. Rockglen, which is the neighboring town, is looking for that same kind of development. So, 
can you give us some information that would cause both the CPR and the commission to agree that that 
line would be worth keeping there? Or should I ask: where are you planning to haul the coal? Is it going 
to stay within that immediate area or are you taking it further north? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I have just been informed who the colleagues might have been, but I have 
not consulted with them. I have no idea what was in the document, and I cannot answer your questions, 
as I have no information that is not in our department. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Sounds as though you are getting some information. Maybe I can give you a minute 
to bone up a little bit. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — With all due respect, information that I may be receiving right now — 
like that — I am not prepared to comment on without getting a technical evaluation on it. We have no 
information that is outside this department, and I think it is fair to say outside the estimates that we are 
talking about. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Are you saying that the Department of Energy, which is responsible for the natural 
resources of this province, non-renewable resources like coal, oil and other energy sources like that, care 
you saying they can be developed by another department of the government without your department 
knowing what is happening? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — Nobody can develop resources without our department knowing it. 
Anybody can have clients, SPC can have clients, private companies, private individuals. Before they 
become a reality, obviously our department must be involved in licensing and regulation of royalties. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1304 

I repeat again, I do not know the specifics of what you’re referring to. If there is some plan — there may 
very well be some concept or plan circulating out there that we have no knowledge of — before it 
became a reality, certainly we will be totally involved. AT this point in time we can’t comment on what 
you are referring to because we don’t have specifics. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Further question, Mr. Chairman. If someone does drilling in an area and comes up 
with concrete evidence that there are so many million tons of cola, can they get that information without 
getting a permit or having any correspondence with your department at all? Can they make those kinds 
of statements? You mean to say that somebody can come into Saskatchewan and drill holes in every 
section of land and every quarter-section — eight or nine in a quarter — and determine how much coal 
is there without your department knowing how much is there? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — If the land is crown land, yes, they must get a permit from us, and we 
would be aware. If it is freehold land and the mineral rights are owned privately, they could proceed and 
do what they want and we would not be are of such. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Specifically, is the area of land that surrounds the rail line from Rockglen to Killdeer 
private or freehold land? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I cannot answer that question. If you would like our officials to check a 
map, we would be happy to send that information to you. I don’t know offhand. If you require that 
information . . . Do you want it? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Yes, I’d like that information please. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — The department will prepare that information and we will forward it to 
you. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, I just want to go back one step to a statement you made 
earlier on the number of wells drilled in southwest Saskatchewan or in the Swift Current area. Can you 
give me a date that we’re comparing? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — . . . (inaudible) . . . calendar year. Now I want to re-emphasize, I think I 
gave you the figure of 36 for 1982. That is our estimate. That’s what we think it’s gong to end up at. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Would you have a number of comparison from January 1, 1981 until 
October 30, 1981, and the same for 1982? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — If you would allow me to use November 27, or the end of November as 
the base date, I could give you a comparison. It is 50 in ’81 versus 30 in ’82. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the table which the minister provided to 
me, a table marked no. 19 up in the corner — Crude oil production by area — it has calendar years. 
With respect to the deep exploratory and deep development wells, can the minister give us any 
indication whether there are deep exploratory or deep development wells now being drilled, or about to 
be drilled? Have drilling permits been taken out and can he give us a little report on what’s happening in 
that area? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — One company is already drilling. Four or five have indicated 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1305 

that they have plans for deep exploratory wells next year. I have some hesitation about naming the 
companies, but yes, there are some plans in that area. It looks like about five. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — You have one drilling. With respect to something called a deep 
development well, is there any (and I’m referring to the press release in July which referred to royalty 
tax holidays of five years and three years for deep exploratory and deep development wells 
respectively), are we producing from any pool to a sufficient extent that you could say that another is a 
development well? Do we have any deep horizon production? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I am advised that there is one well right now that is a deep development 
well. It’s very minimal and it’s in the southeast part of the province. I am advised the opportunities are 
not that great for deep development wells, as it now stands. What we do need is new discoveries and 
that’s one of the reason that that particular incentive is in our royalty structure — to get some companies 
to take the chance and go after that deep one. That’s what we need more than anything else — some new 
ones. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, we’ve been teasing by deep 
development wells for a fair number of years. Is the primary interest in the are that I might call the 
Ratcliffe-Beaubier area just north of the U.S. border where there has been some interest before or is it in 
another different area? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — I am advised that the area is much larger than what the Leader of the 
Opposition questioned. It is primarily in the Williston basin which is basically in the southeast part of 
the province. We also have an indication that there is some interest in the Swift Current Area — how 
much, we don’t know. It’s one thing to talk; it’s another thing to put your money and up and drill. There 
apparently is some interest in the Swift Current area. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, I will want to ask some question with 
respect to royalty rates on various class of oil. My question to the minister is: should I be asking them of 
him or of the Minister of Finance? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — You may as well ask them right here. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — How many classes of oil do we have for the purpose of royalty rates? 
Could you give me the names of old, new-old oil and NORP oil? I’m quite lost. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — Well, we have old oil, we’ve got old-new oil . . . 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Old oil is defined as pre-1974? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — Yes. Then we have old-new and then we have NORP, and all of these are 
divided into light and heavy. SOOP is a special old oil price which is basically old-new oil which played 
a significant role in our new royalty structure on July 6 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What is the break — January 1, 1982 for NORP? Now is the ’74 to ’81 
stuff, which I used to call new oil at one time and then old-new oil, now called SOOP? It’s the same 
thing. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — The federal government calls it SOOP in its infinite wisdom. 



 
December 3, 1982 

 

 
1306 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Special old oil price. These are divided between light and heavy? 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — Yes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think things are not going to be quite this simple. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — If I can facilitate this to the Leader of the Opposition, if you want 
information we are quite happy to get a package with the curves and send it over to you. There’ no 
secret. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m obviously going to ask questions in trying to calculate what you 
expect to get in oil royalties. I tell you that. Therefore, I am going to ask much light oil production, old 
light, old heavy. SOOP light, SOOP heavy, NORP light, NORP heavy, and what your effective royalty 
rate is for each to see if I can total it. There is nothing very fancy about it. Doubtless there are some 
qualifiers there. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — We do not have that information totally with us. We have no objection to 
providing you with the total package and sending it to you. It is certainly no secret. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think it would help. It is the sort of information which I would like to 
have and which I think is perfectly reasonable for me to have. It is difficult to get question by question 
in this way. I’ll just take up a lot of time of people who probably . . . 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — We will provide you with that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I have other questions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:22 p.m. 


