






















































Hansard: March 22, 1982


(718) 719 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 22, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
MR. MUIRHEAD: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition I want to table in this House this 
afternoon. 
 

The residents of the town of Elbow and district would like to petition the Government of 
Saskatchewan to put Douglas Park east of Highway 19 into permanent controlled grazing. 

 
I also would like to say that the four people who brought it are sitting in the Speaker's gallery. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and through you to the 
Chamber, 20 adults from the Regina Plains Community College, who are here today hopefully to see some 
of the debate. They are sitting in the Speaker's gallery. I think we would want to wish these people double 
congratulations. They just officially opened their new community college centre this morning. I think 
members would want to join with me in congratulating them not only on being here but also on their new 
centre as well. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. BANDA: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and members of the Assembly, I would like to 
welcome and introduce to you, on behalf of the member for Weyburn, Mr. Auburn Pepper, who 
unfortunately is unable to be here today, a group of grade 8 students, approximately 54 in number, from the 
Weyburn Junior High School. These students are sitting in the west gallery. They are accompanied by their 
teachers, Jim Nedelcov and Sid Trepoff. I'm sure it is our wish that their visit here in their provincial capital 
and the Legislative Building will provide them with knowledge and will be pleasant. I look forward to 
meeting with you at 2:45 in room 218. I'm sure, Mr. Speaker, all members of the legislature would want to 
welcome them here and wish them an enjoyable day and a safe journey home. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and to the members of this House a group of 
23 grade 8 students from Rosetown. They are accompanied today by Mr. Cranston and Mr. Ford. I hope they 
will have a very enjoyable time in the Chamber and will learn something about our legislative process. I will 
be meeting with them later for drinks and to answer any question that they may have. 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
720 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Alleged Interference Concerning Egg Marketing Board 
 
MR. ANDREW: — I direct this question to the Premier in the absence of the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. 
Premier, I've obtained a confidential file regarding a producer, the Bouffard Brothers, in Kincaid. They are 
allegedly involved in some illegal activities regarding the egg marketing board. Indications from the file are 
that the Minister of Agriculture and perhaps the Minister of Social Services were personally involved and 
took action to try to prevent these charges from being laid, and after the charges were laid before the court 
became involved in attempting to try to have that action stopped. 
 
First I have a copy, Mr. Premier, of an information laid against one Joseph C. Bouffard. I also have a copy of 
a letter directed to the Minister of Agriculture from the Saskatchewan Commercial Egg Producers' 
Marketing Board, and with the indulgence of Mr. Speaker I'd like to read a clause from that letter: 
 

This board has been concerned over the recent apparent political persuasions that have been used 
by members of your ministry in attempting to keep this issue out of the public forum and before the 
courts. 

 
Now this letter was written after, Mr. Premier, the charge was laid before the court. I wonder if I could direct 
this question to you? Is it the practice of your government, in marketing boards, to interfere, or to have the 
minister interfere with matters that are before the court and before the judicial process? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The answer to that is no. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — The supplementary question to that, Mr. Premier, is this. When you have a letter from 
the chairman of a marketing board, in this case the commercial egg marketing board, alleging political 
interference by one of your ministers, does that not concern you, and do you think that calls for investigation 
by you, as Premier, as to potential charges of interfering with the administration of justice? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of the letter from which the hon. member 
is quoting. It may well have been directed to me. I don't know. But it certainly has not come to my attention. 
Accordingly, I wouldn't be able to respond to the contents of the letter or to any questions which are framed 
by reading the letter which the hon. member has and I do not have. 
 
MR. LANE: — I'll direct a question to the Premier. This is a confidential memo to the board of directors 
from the manager of the Saskatchewan Commercial Egg Producers' Marketing Board referring to this 
particular matter, and referring to the actions of both the Minister of Social Services, the member for 
Shaunavon, and the Minister of Agriculture. Referring to departmental officials, Department of Agriculture. 
They were concerned and were reacting to concerns of MLA Dwain Lingenfelter. 
 

Our premeeting research (this is internal of the board) indicated he won the seat in the last election 
by less than 400 votes on a split vote. 



 
March 22, 1982 

 
721 

I wonder of what concern it is to any marketing board as to the plurality of any government members? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I haven't the slightest idea. I don't know who the marketing 
board is that you refer to and I wouldn't be able to possibly speculate on what may have gone through the 
mind of whoever the hon. member says wrote that memo. 
 
MR. LANE: — Would the Premier agree that it is no concern of any marketing board in the province as to 
the plurality of any cabinet ministers or members of the government? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The hon. member is asking a great number of hypothetical questions and I 
suggest that he let me have the material from which he and the hon. member for Kindersley are quoting. I 
will ask the Hon. Minister of Agriculture to look at the material and have a more comprehensive answer in 
due course. 
 
MR. LANE: — Is it a matter of policy of the marketing boards to do premeeting research into the pluralities 
of cabinet ministers or government members? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — If it is, I have no knowledge of it and so I very much doubt whether it is the 
policy of the boards, but once again I invite him to let us have the material and the Minister of Agriculture, 
the responsible minister, will, I am sure, reply in due course. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A new question to the Premier. The information from this file, Mr. Premier, indicates 
that about two years ago this particular egg marketing board did some investigation and this particular farmer 
was well over his limit and therefore was required to have a licence. For a period of two years they tried to 
bring this man before the board to have him buy a licence and pay his dues, etc. Now this matter dragged on 
as late as November 1981. The RCMP was present at this particular man's farm and did the count to lay the 
charge. The marketing board, in a confidential memo, indicates that they obtained a letter from one D. 
Krueger, solicitor for this particular person, admitting that he was in fact over the limit and in violation. The 
people, again from the marketing board, requested and requested these people to come in and each time they 
didn't show. In January they decided to lay charges in this particular case and in fact charges were laid 
against this particular person. 
 
Now I also have a letter signed by Mr. MacMurchy, Minister of Agriculture, to the marketing board, after the 
matter is before the court which says: 
 

In this particular dispute I am disappointed that the board proceeded with court action. 
 
He also goes on to say that he would urge the council in effect to reconsider and try to settle the matter. Now 
this is at a time, Mr. Premier, when information has been sworn before the court, when these particular 
people are before the court on a charge of violation of the particular regulations of that act. Now do you 
think that it is proper of a minister, once a matter is before the court, to interfere in that particular regard, to 
try to talk the people who are prosecuting into stopping the prosecution and trying to get a settlement? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I simply do not know the facts that the hon. members rely upon 
and accordingly simply cannot give views as to what is proper and to what is improper. He has had the 
advantage of looking at the file. I have had the 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
722 

advantage of looking at nothing, and I suggest that he make the material available. I will see that the Minister 
of Agriculture looks at the material and responds to the hon. member. 
 
MR. LANE: — A question to the Attorney General. Can the Attorney General advise us whether or not he 
or his officials have any knowledge of the prosecution itself, or was it taken without your knowledge or the 
knowledge of your department? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I have no personal recollection or knowledge of the file. Again, 
I would want to make absolutely certain by checking with my own office on this, but just sitting here 
listening to the question, I have no recollection or knowledge of it. As for the officials in the Department of 
the Attorney General, of course I can't answer that. I haven't spoken to any of them about this, this having 
been the first time that it has been brought to my attention. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A question to the Premier. Reading again from the letter to Mr. MacMurchy from the 
Saskatchewan Commercial Egg Producers' Marketing Board, it goes as follows: 
 

The entire situation has been prolonged and muddied by his (the accused's) conversation with 
members of your department. They, in turn, have informed us that this case is in political hands. 

 
Can you tell me, Mr. Premier, in what situation, when a matter is before the courts, does a matter all of a 
sudden fall into political hands? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The hon. member is busy taking one statement and applying it to another 
situation. I don't know the facts, but just hearing the man read it, there is not a shred of evidence to suggest 
that anyone . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Those are pretty serious allegations, Al. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — If there were serious allegations, you would have given the facts to the 
minister and allowed him to respond after he had seen the material, as you have seen the material. 
 
MR. LANE: — It's unfortunate, and I'm not imputing anything from the fact that the minister is not here to 
respond. We had hoped that he would be here. I fail to see why the minister has need of copies of 
correspondence which he has signed, when they make for what could potentially become very serious events 
here. In fact, I think the Attorney General and the Premier know full well the consequences if these letters, 
which are confidential to the egg marketing board, are verified as being accurate. The charges are serious and 
involve at least two cabinet ministers in the government opposite. 
 
I'm asking the Attorney General, the minister responsible for the administration of justice, will you 
immediately undertake an investigation to review this correspondence and the material thereon? 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will not undertake that to the hon. member at this time. I 
think the responsible and reasonable answer is the one the Premier has indicated in response to the questions 
from the member for Kindersley and 



 
March 22, 1982 

 
723 

the member for Qu'Appelle. I think the government (or at least the Premier or I) has to see the file. I can't 
give any answers or responses based on what obviously are, as the Premier has described it, selected — I'm 
not saying anything is particularly improper about it — quotations. I just simply want to keep my options 
open until, and unless, this matter is brought to my attention and to the department's attention. 
 
MR. LANE: — A question to the Minister of Social Services. A confidential memo from the manager of the 
board to the board of directors makes reference to concerns that the Department of Agriculture was reacting 
to concerns of MLA Dwain Lingenfelter. My first question is: what concerns did you express to the 
Department of Agriculture with regard to the Bouffard Brothers' investigation and charges? Secondly, did 
you supply the Saskatchewan Commercial Egg Producers Marketing Board with political information as to 
your plurality and your concern about this matter? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I must tell the member that I gave no such information 
about plurality and vote, or any such information, to any board or anyone. As to the first part of your 
question, I don't know from what letter you are quoting, and I would like to see a copy of it before I would 
make any comment on it. 
 
MR. LANE: — I asked you a very simple question. Did you express your concerns . . . 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Are you asking me or the Premier? 
 
MR. LANE: — I am asking the hon. member. What concerns did you express to the Department of 
Agriculture, or to anyone else in government, with regard to the prosecution of the Bouffard Brothers? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, in my duties as an MLA for the constituency of 
Shaunavon I have no responsibility to answer the member for Qu'Appelle on a problem which is brought to 
me as an MLA. I think the member realizes that. When the appropriate minister is in the House to answer it, 
I'm sure he will do so. 
 
MR. LANE: — You're refusing to answer the question. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — A question to the Minister of Social Services. Are you suggesting in this House, Mr. 
Minister, that as a member of the treasury benches, when there are allegations that you have in fact interfered 
with a court process, you do not have to stand in your place and answer before this Assembly? Is that what 
you are saying? 
 
HON. MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, what I am saying to the member for Kindersley is that the 
simple fact is we are discussing a matter that has to do with an egg marketing board. That is the 
responsibility of the Minister of Agriculture and henceforth I will await his reply to you on that question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! I want to keep the question period going on the right track and in order. I 
want to refer to one of the rules which govern the question period. I am quoting from Beauchesne’s and the 
ruling is: 
 

To ask a solution of a legal proposition such as the interpretation of a statute or a minister's own 
powers . . . 

 
I think we don't want to get into that area. That's information that is equally accessible to all members of the 
Assembly. We can't question the member for the actions of a private 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
724 

member of the Assembly. Only members of the Executive Council can be questioned at this time. If the 
member is questioning the minister in charge of the department on the basis of his department, that is quite 
in order. 
 

Provincial Auditor's Statement 
 
MR. SWAN: — My question is to the Minister of Finance. Mr. Minister, the Department of Finance 
complains loud and long about the lack of federal government funding and yet according to the provincial 
auditor's statement, the government neglected to apply for a $1 million from the disaster aid fund of the 
federal government. What is your department doing to assure that the Saskatchewan government indeed does 
receive all moneys owing to it by the federal government? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, I know of the provincial auditor's report. I can assure 
members that we have had discussions between federal and provincial officials and to date there is every 
indication that, in fact, money will be coming as a result of the claim which we have put in. The provincial 
auditor has indicated that there need to be some other systems in place. We can't put them in alone. It take 
the federal government to put them in as well. We have taken the advice of the provincial auditor and are 
proceeding to do what we can about setting those systems in place. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, the consolidated fund exceeded its borrowing authority set by cabinet in 1980 
and a number of other departments of government have spent beyond the authority given to them by the 
legislature. What is your department doing, really, to see that the different departments of government stay 
within the spending limits and the borrowing limits set by this legislature and by cabinet? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — The departments have not exceeded the expenditure limits that have 
been set by this legislature, as the member well should know. There are expenditures that sometimes 
departments make which come out throughout the period of the fiscal year. Those, then, become 
supplementary votes. They are then brought to this legislature and they are then voted by this legislature. So 
overexpenditures in the way that the member opposite describes them do not happen. 
 
MR. SWAN: — Mr. Minister, indeed the overexpenditures have happened and the auditor's report shows 
them thoroughly. Is the Minister of Finance prepared to support the legislation requested by the provincial 
auditor to set up a separate office as a provincial auditor, independent of you? 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, there now is a separate office of the provincial auditor that 
has always existed as long as there have been provincial auditors. The request by the provincial auditor is to 
establish separate legislation, removed from legislation which is quite adequate but which is incorporated 
into The Department of Finance Act. I have indicated already in this House, Mr. Speaker, and in other places 
that we are reviewing the legislation that applies to the provincial auditor. I have asked the provincial auditor 
for some suggestions. He has provided me with those suggestions and when we have had an opportunity to 
consider all of them we will announce in due course what our proposals will be. 
 
MR. ANDREW: — Supplementary question to the Minister of Finance. This matter has been, of course, 
before this Assembly I think every year for the last four years. And every year when a request is made for 
independent legislation to cover the office of provincial auditor, the same answer is always forthcoming 
from either you or your predecessor:  



 
March 22, 1982 

 
725 

that we are having this under investigation, we are studying it, and perhaps down the road we might look at 
introducing legislation that would make the auditor not only be but manifestly appear to be independent of 
the Department of Finance — a situation that exists in every other jurisdiction . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member's giving information. He's supposed to be seeking it. 
 
HON. MR. TCHORZEWSKI: — Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt in my mind, or in the mind of anyone 
who wants to look at it objectively, that the office of the provincial auditor has been, and is, independent. He 
has never questioned it. It is true that there have been suggestions that we should change the legislation, that 
possibly it needs some amendment. I have never disagreed with that. In fact, as I have indicated, I am in the 
process of reviewing that legislation. It has also been suggested that that legislation should be separate 
legislation. It has nothing to do with the independence of the provincial auditor or his office. That has always 
been clear to everyone, but certainly the question of whether, when we change the legislation and bring in 
the amendments, we will make it a separate legislation is one that I'm prepared to look at. In fact, I'm doing 
that now. 
 

Athletic Awards 
 
MR. PICKERING: — Mr. Speaker, I will direct my question to the Minister of Culture and Youth. The 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan in Saskatoon have patiently waited for some 
announcement in the budget as it relates to athletic awards. Would you inform the Assembly today why such 
awards were not announced in the budget? 
 
HON. MR. WHITE: — Mr. Speaker, no final decision has been made one way or the other on the question 
of athletic awards or athletic assistance. There have been requests made of the department from certain 
individuals and groups outside. I took the matter to the special select committee of the legislature, which has 
been arranged under the new rules, to have a select committee set up to examine the desirability of instituting 
a system of athletic awards or athletic assistance in the province of Saskatchewan. I will be urging that 
committee be set up as early as possible, that it fully examine the matter (there are a number of questions 
which I think should be looked into), and that it report to this Assembly as soon as possible. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Supplementary question to the Minister of Culture and Youth. I'm interested in the 
minister's comments regarding requests made to the government from outside this Assembly (I know that is 
the case), not only to you but to your predecessor in your department. Requests have come from this side of 
the House. In the four years that I've been here, I know there have been three for sure. The requests have 
been made through all avenues open to us: in question period, committee of finance, culture and youth, in 
the form of a motion and amendments to your motions. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Does the member have a supplementary? I'd like to hear it. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Minister, my question to you is this: will you not admit now that this committee you 
made reference to is nothing more than an election ploy to try to appease this group when, in fact, what you 
should be doing is putting money on the  



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
726 

table for our student athletes in this province because the other provinces in western Canada that they are 
forced to compete with all have a system in place? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. WHITE: — Mr. Speaker, I certainly would not agree with the position of the member for 
Meadow Lake that this is an election ploy. I just picked up the matter after I took charge of the department. I 
have been examining it very carefully, meeting with people who are interested in the matter. I came further 
and further to the belief that there are a variety of questions that need to be examined in respect to this 
matter. One is that there are a number of provinces that have set up an awards system. They have picked 
certain amounts of money as the suitable size of awards — out of the air as near as I can see. I am not certain 
that those are the right amounts. There are other matters that have come to my attention. I could go through a 
whole lot of them. When I look at the distribution of awards it is about one-third female and two-thirds male, 
and I think it is worth while looking to see if that is the right distribution. 
 
There are matters as to what sports should be included — in the CIAU (Canadian Interuniversity Athletic 
Union), non-CIAU, and so forth. There is the question of where awards should be tenable — simply at 
educational institutions and, if so, at university, at technical institutes or what? Should we also be 
considering awards to people who are working — take a very good athlete and perhaps pay him to learn 
welding or something at some industry in the province? So there are a variety of things like this. There is, I 
think, too, if you set up a system that helps athletics in the cities, the problem that it could potentially lead to 
raiding. So I think there are these and a variety of other questions that certainly merit study before a system 
of awards or assistance is brought in. Thank you. 
 
MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Minister, very shortly, can I take from what you say that you are in fact against the 
system of awards that is in place in the other three western provinces? 
 
HON. MR. WHITE: — Mr. Speaker, if the member understood English he would see I am not certain that 
those are the best systems, and I think if we establish a system in Saskatchewan it should be the best. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan-Ottawa Energy Agreement 
 
MR. ANDREW: — My question is to the Premier. Mr. Premier, on two occasions last week I raised with 
you the concern with regard to the Saskatchewan-Ottawa energy agreement and the impact that it was in fact 
having, along with other events, on the oil industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The southwest field, as you know, is closed down. The papers today are indicating that the southeastern field 
has not been moving at all since your energy agreement. It is still remaining at about 50 per cent production, 
and the rumors around the northwest area of Lloydminster are that there will probably be a further cut of 20 
per cent of production in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Premier, are you not prepared now to admit, as the Premier of Alberta has, that perhaps the energy 
agreement is not what it should have been and probably requires renegotiation at this point in time? 



 
March 22, 1982 

 
727 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think all of us are fully prepared to admit that the development 
of the oil industry has not proceeded up to this time as was anticipated when the agreements were signed last 
autumn. For the most part, it does not appear that the difficulties stem from the agreement but rather from 
circumstances throughout the world in the oil industry. No one, I think, suggests that something might not be 
done under the agreements which would assist the oil industry, but basically the problem stems from the 
much publicized oil glut throughout the world and the purchases made by the Government of Canada in 
order to assure itself of oil at a time when the oil glut was not appreciated. 
 
Certainly those are real difficulties for the oil industry, but are unlikely to be in any way ameliorated by a 
renegotiation of the oil agreements. However, I noted the comments of the Premier of Alberta before the 
Progressive Conservative Party convention with interest and will have an opportunity to study his views on 
this matter when more detailed reports are available. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Tchorzewski that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the committee of finance. 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is the third time I have had the honor to 
stand in this Assembly as finance spokesman for the opposition and reply to the budget of this province. 
Next year, Mr. Speaker, I am certain that will be the responsibility of some member opposite. The budget 
speech itself will have been delivered by a member from a Progressive Conservative government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Last Thursday, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance delivered his budget speech, a 
speech which contained many Conservative promises, or so it appeared. "People come first," he claims. "Our 
society was built on co-operation and sharing," he expanded. These, Mr. Speaker, are noble thoughts clearly 
reminiscent of our program for economic common sense, which I outlined last year in reply to the budget. 
 
People come first — that was his claim, Mr. Speaker. The budget delivered here last Thursday is sheer 
hypocrisy and sheer deceit. What really did we get in the budget? Well, first of all a $200 million increase in 
personal income tax. That is the reality of this budget. Personal income tax increased from $409 million to 
$597 million, a 46 per cent increase — $800 for every family in this province. What did the people get in 
return for this rip-off which the minister did not even have the courage to mention? First of all, $2 a month, 
if you are a renter. That's 7 cents a day. If you own a home, $3 a month, Mr. Speaker, that's 10 cents a day. 
Even a businessman got $40 to $60 a month if he owns a business. And, Mr. Speaker, $1.50 to $2 a day for 
small businessmen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people did not come first in this budget. Rural families were ripped off, and if that were not bad 
enough, the NDP family of Crown corporations got $2 billion —  



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
728 

salt on the wounds of every person in this province. 
 
There is no cohesive plan in this budget. People come first — that is the claim of this budget. I agree that 
people should come first. However, it is not the reality of this budget. The reality is that once again the 
family of Crown corporations comes first. Where is the challenge, the incentive, or the opportunity? I see no 
co-operation or sharing with real people in this budget. 
 
In addition to all that, Mr. Speaker, it was the most mishandled and misrepresented budget ever presented in 
this legislature. It would have been mishandled if only one leak of its contents had occurred. The fact that 
there were two leaks demonstrates just how much contempt the NDP government has for the traditions of 
this legislature. However, I have no intention of dwelling on this issue. The people of Saskatchewan will 
judge for themselves the incompetence of this government in allowing this travesty to occur. They see the 
leaks; they know the ship is going down. They know that the NDP ship is going down. 
 
The budget read by the government is deceitful and dishonest for many reasons. The highlights of this 
budget were ideas stolen from the Progressive Conservative platform. However, what they stole were simply 
the concepts of our platform. While they were at it, they omitted the blueprints. In fact, what it was was a 
bungled burglary, even to the degree of stealing our theme. Our "People Count" become "People Come First" 
in the budget document. 
 
They have stolen the trappings of our platform but not its substance. The Progressive Conservative platform 
was developed with a true sense that people count, that people must be relieved of the excessive burden of 
taxation and mismanagement, that people must be encouraged to develop this province for themselves and 
their families. That, Mr. Speaker, is what we mean when we say that people count. 
 
The NDP does not trust the people. It relies on its family of Crown corporations. This is a budget of deceit 
and members opposite must be warned that the seeds of deceit will lead to a growth of cynicism. 
 
This budget, Mr. Speaker, represents the worst kind of hypocrisy — hypocrisy befitting Pierre Elliott 
Trudeau. How well we remember Trudeau's position on price and wage controls. How well we remember his 
position on an 18-cent increase on gasoline. He said he would not do that, but he did. Now, we see the 
Premier of Saskatchewan using the Trudeau trick. 
 
How well we remember members opposite last year criticizing, ridiculing and voting against rural 
gasification, mortgage assistance for home-owners, removal of sales tax on children's clothing, a public 
utility freeze, use of purple gas for farm tandem trucks, and a public utilities review commission among 
others, Mr. Speaker. This year these concepts are in the NDP budget. They are philosophical friends, 
Trudeau and the Premier. Mr. Speaker, this is Trudeauism at its best, or perhaps I should say, at its worst. 
 
Speaking of the Trudeau-NDP philosophy, the people of Saskatchewan will not forget that Mr. Trudeau and 
our Premier removed the rights and freedoms of individuals — the rights of individuals to own property — 
from our bill of rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, allow me to put into perspective the highlights of this budget and what it really means to the 
individual, the citizen, the taxpayer of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 22, 1982 

 
729 

First of all, there is the mortgage interest relief program. To begin with, it does not apply to those people 
who renewed their mortgages last year at rates of up to 22 per cent interest. They have been left out. These 
people, Mr. Speaker, don't come first. It states in the budget speech (and I quote), "beginning with the 
anniversary date of their mortgage in 1982-83." Mr. Speaker, who is to know what mortgage interest rates 
may be in one year's time? Is the minister thinking of people first? Hardly. There is no long-term 
commitment in this plan. Then it states (and again I quote), "to existing home-owners." In other words, new 
home-owners or buyers do not qualify. They pay the going rate. Will that help to increase house-building? 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, new home buyers do not come first. Then it states, "Eligible home-owners will 
receive up to $2,400 in benefits." But what it doesn't say is that, in reality, if you qualify for that $2,400 
because of your income, you wouldn't have a $50,000 mortgage in the first place. And if you can afford the 
house because your income is $35,000 (which is the amount that one needs in today's economy), then you 
don't qualify for the program. The minister states that 25,000 home-owners will benefit. Well, I say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the conditions of assistance have been set so that no one will receive $2,400. The government 
does not mean to provide anywhere near $2,400 in help, and deceit should not have been used when 
addressing this very serious problem. In contrast, Mr. Speaker, our proposal would include all those people 
who had to renew their mortgages at rate of 19 to 22 per cent, in addition to those who renew in 1982. In 
addition, we have proposed assistance to those first-time home buyers who would be allowed to receive 
assistance at the same rate. 
 
People need assurance, Mr. Speaker, not uncertainty from month to month. Anyone can see that this simply 
is a plan to get the NDP through the upcoming election. Mr. Speaker, I repeat that anyone can see that this is 
simply a plan to get the NDP through the upcoming election. If it is fortunate enough to be re-elected, it 
would then revert to sloughing the problem off to Ottawa. 
 
The full details of our plan, Mr. Speaker, will be announced at the appropriate time, and the people of 
Saskatchewan will then see a plan where people truly count, where people do come first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another budget highlight is a freeze on natural gas and electricity rates until a report from a 
one-man review committee is received. What hypocrisy! In January and February of this year both of these 
rates were increased by large amounts — 18 per cent on natural gas alone. There was a further 
announcement by the minister that natural gas would increase by another 18 per cent in August. It's a safe bet 
that the report from Mr. Justice Culliton will be received before August of this year. It's also interesting to 
note that the freeze does not apply to telephones, that one could expect a telephone increase in the very near 
future. 
 
In his budget, Mr. Speaker, the minister argued that public utilities are accountable to the legislature of this 
province, and the reality of that is that they are not accountable. The standard answer, Mr. Speaker, to 
questions concerning the operations of public utilities is that it is not in the public interest. That is not a 
people-first attitude, not a co-operative attitude. That is the attitude of distrust so consistently shown by this 
government. 
 
Speaking of a public utilities review commission, here again the NDP gives everyone the impression that it 
has adopted our proposal. But let's look at what they propose, and I quote: 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
730 

. . . a one-person commission to undertake a comprehensive review on natural gas and electricity in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
They've argued for years and they still argue that it would require an army of people to properly fulfil this 
function. They've called it another bureaucracy. If they believe that, then why a one-person commission? The 
terms of reference, Mr. Speaker, you can rest assured will be predetermined to produce a report favoring the 
government's opposition to a review board. Finally, regardless of the findings of Mr. Chief Justice Culliton, 
there is no assurance given by the minister that this government would give his recommendations the 
consideration they deserve. That is a glaring example of an election bribe. 
 
If they had been really serious about their review process they would have rolled back the February increase 
of 18 per cent in natural gas rates. They would have revealed plans to use more Saskatchewan gas. That 
would begin to resemble a policy where people count; a policy that fights inflation, provides jobs and that 
makes sense. 
 
The Premier indicated, just last week, in this House, that he had done his best in the energy negotiations with 
Ottawa. Well I say that his best is a failure. The oil industry is closing down all over this province. The 
weekend reports in the newspapers say we are down to 14 per cent production in the Southwest and that 
there has been a 50 per cent reduction in the Southeast. Now that isn't a "people first" policy. Jobs are being 
lost and it is up to the Premier to anticipate market changes, not use them as an excuse to cover his failure. 
 
Item 3, we have the highlight for senior citizens — a new shelter allowance program. Let me state what it 
says, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Starting in July our new shelter allowance program will provide financial assistance to 20,000 
senior citizens. 

 
The first thing I would ask the minister is: why July? Why not now? Secondly, why 20,000? Did someone 
forget to tell the minister that Saskatchewan has 120,000 senior citizens, most of whose shelter costs exceed 
25 per cent of their income? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let's talk about people first — about senior citizens, the people who built Saskatchewan, the 
pioneers of our province. Thousands of senior citizens are alone and lonely, and why? A very good reason — 
their children had to leave this province to find jobs. Mr. Speaker, in the last 40 years a million of them have 
left, 89,000 of them in the last 11 years since this government has been in power in Saskatchewan. Many of 
our senior citizens were left without the comfort of their children or the joys of their grandchildren. If people 
really counted, if they were first in the NDP scheme of things, there would have been jobs for their children 
and there would be less loneliness for our senior citizens. As I said a minute ago, Mr. Speaker, 89,000 people 
have left this province since 1971 because the NDP didn't care. The population in Saskatchewan 40 years 
ago, Mr. Minister was 9 per cent of the Canadian population and today it is under 4 per cent — 3.9 per cent. 
That's what we have left in this province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I am shocked that the Attorney General cannot add up one and two. Well, let me explain that to you, Mr. 
Attorney General. When there are 115,000 people born in this province 



 
March 22, 1982 

 
731 

and the population only goes up by some 20,000, that means that 89,000 people left here. That's what 
happened to the people of this province. The NDP didn't care enough, Mr. Speaker, to create the jobs that 
were necessary to support a family. Protest as they will, the actions of the NDP betray their words. 
 
I want to go on to the fourth highlight of the minister's budget; nursing home beds. I am intrigued by the way 
the Minister of Finance announced that his government was going to finally add more beds to 
Saskatchewan's nursing home system, and I quote: 
 

I am pleased to announce that in 1982 we will provide funds to build 133 new nursing home beds. 
 
I just heard the Minister of Finance say that they add some every year. I would like to tell the Minister of 
Finance that they haven't added one single bed in the city of Regina since the last election in 1978. So how 
does he figure that they are adding every year? However, I did notice, Mr. Speaker, in the budget, that they're 
going to be building some new hospitals, but do you know where they're going to build them? In those 
constituencies where members are in trouble, where their ministers are in trouble. I'm thinking of Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, of Melfort, of Yorkton. Those are the places in which they'll be building hospitals. The 
Minister of Social Services, when questioned about nursing home beds, named several towns where new 
beds would be built. It is his intention, as seems implied by his answers, to include one community in every 
NDP constituency as another election bribe. That raises the spectre of nursing home beds scattered 
helter-skelter in communities across our province. As I assume that is not likely to be the case, I imagine 
instead that the minister is intending to either build or supply 133 new beds — I certainly hope they'll have 
rooms to go with them — at existing homes across this province. How callous can a government be, Mr. 
Speaker — 133 new nursing home beds for the whole province of Saskatchewan? 
 
I mentioned this a minute ago, and I'll repeat it. In the city of Regina alone, this government has not added 
one nursing home bed since the 1978 election — not one single bed. Yet I know, Mr. Speaker, of one 
nursing home alone in this city which has a list of 890 people waiting for admission. I know of patients who 
desperately need these facilities. They have become heavy burdens on their families because of badly 
deteriorating health. People with Parkinson's disease, unable even to get to the bathroom by themselves, have 
been waiting for years — years, Mr. Speaker, not months — for a place in a nursing home. Then, even when 
they're finally lucky enough to get a place in a nursing home, they or their family must pay over $390 a 
month to keep them there. And that is almost double what a senior citizen would have to pay for a similar 
bed in our sister western provinces. Money for uranium and line-ups for our senior citizens — now what 
kind of a social justice is there in that? I ask the minister: is that people first? "A new deal for senior 
citizens," the minister says. Well, I think it is more appropriately called a rotten deal for senior citizens, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I will move on to the fifth highlight of the budget: property tax relief. 
Well, what can you say about that one? I think those figures speak for themselves. This new deal for the 
property owner by the NDP means that he gets an extra $3 per month. Ten cents a day! This would not even 
cover the interest on the increase in his municipal taxes. The renter didn't even fare as well. While the renter 
has faced steadily escalating rents over the last year, the NDP government in its generosity has decided to 
give him rent relief to the degree of $2 per month. That is less than 7  



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
732 

cents a day. 
 
Yet is has allocated land bank and Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation (SMDC), two of its 
family of Crown corporations, $40 million and $108 million respectively. I think the NDP will soon rename 
the land bank. The next step may be a Crown corporation to make them all the more state farms. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, depending on where you live, the NDP has decided to give you an election present — let's 
call it a bribe — of $3 per month — 10 cents a day or even less. That's some bribe — 10 cents or less per 
day. 
 
Then we come to another highlight, the elimination of the sales tax on children's clothing. Now, this is a step 
in the right direction. We believe that all sales tax can be removed in due course in this province. However, 
to remove only the sales tax from children's clothes translates into a saving of $3 per capita in Saskatchewan 
— $3 per person per year. This was another idea stolen from the Conservatives, but not in its entirety. 
 
What happened to the suggestions which we put forth to you, Mr. Minister, of removing the sales tax on 
utility bills to assist all consumers? What happened to our suggestion to rebate the sales tax to our senior 
citizens? What happened to our senior citizens . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I may add, Mr. Attorney 
General, who suffer the most in these inflationary times? What happened to the removal of the sales tax on 
school supplies? Today, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce, as well, that a Progressive Conservative 
government will remove the sales tax not only on children's clothing but on all clothing. A generalized 
reduction or elimination of sales tax is the only equitable means of helping those hardest hit by inflation and 
high interest rates. Only then, Mr. Speaker, will senior citizens, families with children, families without 
children, farmers, and small and not so small businessmen benefit. Believe me, they are all hurting. 
 
Now, we come to the item which the budget was trying to cover up with splashy but hollow promises — $2 
billion for the family of Crown corporations. That family is the inevitable hornet in the bouquet of roses. 
This is the sting, Mr. Speaker. Right now at this very moment, every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan 
is carrying a public debt of $3,500 per person or $14,000 per family of four to pay for the past debts of this 
NDP government. In one fell swoop, one stroke of the pen, the Minister of Finance is going to increase it to 
$5,500 per person or $22,000 per family of four. This debt, Mr. Speaker, will be created to expand the 
corporate family, the huge business empire of the NDP. 
 
The Minister of Finance is devious. He figures that he can't just push $2 billion of extra debt on the people of 
Saskatchewan. He thinks that he will have to buy them off. It's a very feeble attempt indeed. He promises to 
give $3 extra per year per person. Then he promises another $3 a month if you own a home. Then he 
promises $2 a month if you rent an apartment. This is in exchange for an additional debt of $8,000 per 
family so that the family of Crown corporations can be expanded. 
 
I don't know about you, Mr. Speaker, but that does not seem like much of a deal to me. How in good 
conscience could he claim that people come first? The NDP government has offered the people of 
Saskatchewan a bribe of $3 per month for their votes. In return for this bribe, Mr. Speaker, it will increase by 
$8,000 the public debt for every family in Saskatchewan. That doesn't seem like a very good deal to me — a 
$40 gift in exchange for a $22,000 debt. Does the government really believe or think that the  



 
March 22, 1982 

 
733 

people of this province will be duped by its ploy? 
 
But getting back to my main point, Mr. Speaker, this further investment of $2 billion in taxpayers' money for 
our Crown corporations will only accomplish two things. First, it will increase the degree of state control and 
ownership in this province that we see growing at an already alarming rate. Second, it will further reduce 
people's expectations regarding fair treatment from this government. There is almost no place left for private 
investment in Saskatchewan that is not subject to excessive government meddling. I find it absolutely 
incredible to visualize an additional $2 billion for Crown corporation expansion when these corporations are 
being overloaded with political appointees who cannot properly manage what they currently control. 
 
The advertising bill will be phenomenal. Tens of millions of dollars will no doubt be spent to create a false 
image of the performance of public enterprise under NDP management. Right now, Mr. Speaker, the Crown 
corporation sector has over $1 billion in advances from the Government of Saskatchewan, and these 
advances, Mr. Speaker, have been given interest free. In reality, that means that the taxpayers of this 
province are carrying the interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the current interest rates, the interest alone on these advances is $160 million out of the 
taxpayers' pockets. If this interest saving were transferred to the taxpayers of this province, many things 
could be done to relieve some of the pressures of inflation on the citizens of this province. 
 
Let me give you some examples, Mr. Speaker. If the government had this $160 million it could cut personal 
income taxes by 40 per cent. If they had this $160 million, Mr. Speaker, they could reduce sales taxes by 40 
per cent. That's only on the interest on the money that they have loaned interest free to the Crown 
corporations. They could offer a long-term mortgage assistance program — eight times what was in the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the trouble is that the NDP believes that only the government and the Crown corporations 
sector are capable of economic development in this province, that only a few people in Saskatchewan are 
capable of thinking, and that they inhabit cabinet ministers' offices and Crown corporation board rooms. I, 
for one, strongly disagree. It was individual initiative and freely co-operating citizens that built the economy 
of this province and not government policy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — For the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan to believe that it has been and will 
continue to be any other way shows just how much out of touch with reality it really is. The Premier recently 
revealed his solution to the economic ills of Canada: public sector investment, he calls it; it's state capitalism 
in reality. That he could summon enough gall to suggest such a plan is inconceivable. The NDP has been in 
power for the best part of the last 40 years. Yet one million people left this province during those years 
because they couldn't find jobs. This is a province blessed with the widest variety of resources in abundance, 
and yet one million people left because there was no opportunity for them under the NDP. The Minister of 
Finance would have better summed up the NDP record as "people go first," and not, " people come first". 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
734 

MR. ROUSSEAU: — Low-interest loans for small businesses is another highlight. Speaking of individual 
initiative, which is the essence of small business in this province, brings me to the next highlight of their 
budget. Does the government really think that $40 to $60 per month will really assist small businesses in 
Saskatchewan? It was this government that loaned an eastern developer, a large national corporation, $45 
million at nine and five-eighths per cent, locked in for 35 years. That is the position of the NDP government 
with respect to small business development. That is not a people first policy. 
 
We are of the opinion that if we can subsidize large out-of-province corporations to that extent, we can do 
far better than $40 to $60 per month for our small business sector. Today, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 
announce that a Progressive Conservative government would make available to small businesses a $45 
million loan program for inventory, financing and modernization of equipment and premises. Loans of up to 
$25,000 would be available at nine and five-eighths per cent. This, in my opinion, constitutes real assistance 
for small business development in Saskatchewan. That is people first. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The final budget highlight to which I want to refer relates to agriculture. I am 
surprised that the NDP government has finally awakened to the fact that there are farmers in this province. 
Why the sudden interest? Why at this time, after 10 years of neglect? Could it be the imminent election? I 
want to say at the outset that I find all the commotion, all the postures and speech-making, all the fuss and 
bother made by the NDP on the issue of the Crow's Nest Pass freight rate to be somewhat ironical. A quick 
glance at the agricultural scene in our province over the last 10 years under the NDP presents an interesting 
picture. This posture by the NDP stands out as being very peculiar in light of its past performance. 
 
Let's consider the following facts: 
 
1. Last year the NDP eliminated the farm cost reduction program, which was one of the few breaks which 
farmers were allowed with respect to the very high energy costs associated with agriculture. 
 
2. Land bank, created by the NDP, now owns well over $500 million worth of farmland, over 1.5 million 
acres that it doesn't want to sell back to farmers. It seems that only about 20,000 acres have been sold back to 
farmers since the program was created. Sold, I might add, for many times the purchase price — speculation 
by a government that professes not to believe in speculation. 
 
3. We have witnessed the demise of nearly all of the livestock processing and packaging facilities in this 
province. The NDP owns Intercontinental Packers, the only livestock packaging plant left in the province, 
and it is under criminal investigation for conspiracy to fix prices. 
 
4. In a province that boasts over 40 per cent of the agricultural land in Canada, we have lost a record number 
of farmers since the NDP came to power. 
 
5. There has been a net decline of 54 per cent in the population of Saskatchewan rural towns and villages. 



 
March 22, 1982 

 
735 

6. The NDP has reduced expenditures on irrigation after a history of drought problems including a 
devastating drought as recent as 1979. 
 
7. We had the creation of a drought assistance program in 1979 only after repeated and insistent calls by the 
Progressive Conservative opposition and by the agricultural community. The subsequent program then 
proved to be very poorly managed, inequitable and insufficient. 
 
8. We have a proposal by the Saskatchewan Minister of Agriculture to buy CP Rail shares for $2 billion to 
$8 billion of taxpayers' money while refusing to spend even a fraction of that to upgrade irrigation systems 
and supply natural gas to farmers to cut energy costs. 
 
9. There's been a steady decline in the marketing of livestock since 1970. Calves marketed declined by 50 
per cent. Sheep and lambs declined by 60 per cent. Hogs declined by 40 per cent. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the net income to farmers from farm production has declined by 50 per cent between 
1976 and 1981. It strikes me as somewhat strange in light of the facts I have just given that the NDP should 
suddenly have taken an interest in the agricultural community. Or perhaps it is not so strange when we 
consider that the Minister of Agriculture cannot decide whether or not he is advocating straight grain or a 
diversified agriculture economy. 
 
He has clearly stated his support for both, though they stand in contradiction, one with the other. I venture to 
say that in reality the intent of this NDP manoeuvre is nothing more than a mercenary political move to 
capitalize on farmers' misfortune as a political ploy. 
 
They will try to create an election issue out of this crowrate tragedy, and then if re-elected will simply toss 
the farmers and the concerns aside as they give CPR billions of dollars. I wanted to watch the Premier and 
his colleagues summon their rhetoric for the crow debate currently in progress in this House. They have 
painted themselves as saviors of the rural way of life, defenders of Saskatchewan's rural communities. Did 
you know, Mr. Speaker, that since this government came to power in 1971, over 300 grain delivery points in 
Saskatchewan have been closed? Did the NDP cry out? No. Once again their actions betray their words. 
 
The NDP is deliberately delaying a vote on the crowrate resolution, a resolution which would not be here 
had it not been for the public embarrassment my colleague, the member for Souris-Cannington, caused the 
government by insisting on a joint resolution in support of the crowrates. The NDP members do not want 
this vote to take place because it would undermine their political manoeuvres for the up-coming election. It's 
politics before people with the NDP, Mr. Speaker. They delay sending a clear message to Ottawa. They 
expose the farm community to unnecessary risk and, in short, they do not really care unless it suits their 
political purposes. 
 
The NDP says it has a solution. Its solution is to get together with four other governments, including Ottawa, 
to buy the CPR. They have been taking political shots at three of these governments; nevertheless, they 
expect us to believe that collectively they will somehow be able to agree on how to guarantee service. It's 
absolutely ridiculous. Let's look at health and education, where only two governments are involved, and we 
will know the guarantee is worth nothing. 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
736 

Mr. Speaker, there are other measures which need to be taken to reverse the decline in our agricultural 
sector. We need to help keep energy costs down both in general and in the agricultural industry. Energy costs 
are a major component of agriculture costs. A rural natural gas system would help to cut these costs — we 
must get more people back into farming. A Progressive Conservative government, Mr. Speaker, will 
establish a family farm purchase program which would grant once in a lifetime loans of up to $350,000 at 8 
per cent for the first five years, and 12 per cent or the then interest rate (whichever is lower) for the 
remainder of the term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will revitalize rural communities through a rural community development program by 
giving unconditional capital grants to local governments to establish necessary rural infrastructure, and by 
giving tax incentives to rural industrial and service sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to see the return of farmer-owner farmland, and a moving away from state ownership 
of our agricultural sector. This can be partially accomplished by encouraging the current lessees of land bank 
land to buy this leased land at a guaranteed 8 per cent interest rate for the first five years, and a 12 per cent 
rate for the remainder of the term. 
 
We want to see the agricultural sector diversified. This can be done through several avenues. Agricultural 
education and research funding will be greatly increased, and we will introduce a Saskatchewan agriculture 
and food processing program to provide both investment capital and tax incentives to stimulate such 
activities as the production of grain alcohol as an alternative fuel source known as gasohol, and the creation 
of secondary agricultural industries such as the processing of agricultural products in our province. 
 
We shall significantly enhance the development of irrigation in the province through increased attention to 
the development of a South Saskatchewan irrigation project with assistance to farmers who wish to irrigate. 
 
These, Mr. Speaker, are real proposals directed at helping to solve some of the problems facing our 
agricultural community. They recognize the importance of the agricultural community to our economy and 
give to it the attention that this contribution merits. 
 
Agriculture forms a large component of our provincial economy, but obviously not the only one. A 
well-designed economic development strategy must consider all components. Therefore, I will now turn to 
manufacturing. An integrated, well-planned industrial strategy for Saskatchewan naturally includes the 
manufacturing sector. For too long we have simply been exporters of raw materials, of primary products. It is 
a structural weakness both in the Saskatchewan and Canadian economies. While not attempting to down play 
the importance of such export commodities as wheat, I believe we can be augmenting their contributions by 
building up a secondary manufacturing sector. 
 
We have already discussed our plans to build a rural natural gas distribution network. There will be a large 
demand for both labor and materials, such as piping and compression equipment, while this project is being 
constructed. There is no reason why most or all of this equipment cannot be built in Saskatchewan. 



 
March 22, 1982 

 
737 

We believe that because of the fluctuating and ever-uncertain supply of foreign oil on the market and 
Canada's dependence upon imported oil, we should be looking for alternatives to this source of fuel. We 
recognize that the production of gasoline for transportation requires a large part of our oil imports, and we 
know that a perennial problem with grain producers in our province is having to store grain that exceeds 
their allowable quota. 
 
The Progressive Conservative Party has believed for a long time now that the time is right for a move toward 
the production of grain alcohol as an alternate energy source. Mix one-tenth ethanol with nine-tenths 
gasoline and you produce gasohol. We save energy by 10 per cent per year in transportation; we provide a 
new home-grown alternative fuel; we create jobs in Saskatchewan both during construction and production 
phases; we capitalize upon one of our traditionally strong sectors, that of grain production. 
 
Because of recurring problems of water supply in this province the Progressive Conservative Party proposes 
two projects. The first I have already spoken of. It concerns the need for extensive expansion of the irrigation 
system in our province. We believe that if farmers were able to irrigate their lands it would help to remove a 
large part of the boom or bust nature of agriculture in Saskatchewan. A significant spinoff of the expansion 
and upgrading of irrigation systems would be the need for literally millions of dollars worth of construction 
material and the creation of new manufacturing jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
A second project which I personally feel strongly is the quality of the water supply serving the Regina and 
Moose Jaw areas. The current Minister of Urban Affairs, Mr. Smishek, through his deputy minister, has 
already told the people of the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw that the NDP government takes no interest in 
the quality of the water consumed by the people in these areas . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, he did. 
Yes he said that. I guess, Mr. Speaker, that he would rather use the taxpayers' money to buy himself and his 
colleagues an airline or a Marathon Oil. Now is that, Mr. Speaker, a people first attitude? 
 
I, in contrast, believe that a high priority should be placed on improving the quality of water consumed by 
the people of this area. I believe that provincial development funding from the heritage fund could and 
should be used for such a project and I think that it should be done now. The people of this area have for too 
long been forced to live with water which has such a bad taste and foul smell that it has earned a reputation 
for being the worst water in Canada. 
 
The completion of a program to upgrade the quality of this water will generate the need for new materials 
and manpower. So let's get on with the job. Between 20 and 25 per cent of the population of our province 
lives in this area. Gentlemen, let's get on with that job. 
 
Moving to another related area, Mr. Speaker, the Progressive Conservative Party has promised to provide 
cable television to all residents of Saskatchewan. There is still less than one-half of our population which is 
able to receive it. We believe that a hybrid system utilizing Sask Tel's already in-place fibre optics network 
supplemented by satellite receiving dish equipment is the answer. There's little economy in running fibre 
optic lines to sparsely populated areas. But similarly, there is no reason why people who live in these areas 
should be deprived of the service which many of us take for  



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
738 

granted. The provision of cable TV will require much new equipment that we could be building and buying 
in Saskatchewan: receiving dishes, cable wire, and the local expertise to install the system. Again we would 
be creating jobs and diversifying our manufacturing base. These are but a few areas in which economic 
activity can and will be stimulated when the Progressive Conservative Party becomes the Government of 
Saskatchewan in the very near future. 
 
These plans demonstrate a strong change in spending priorities when contrasted to the efforts of the current 
government. It keeps boasting about the wealth of the province contained in our heritage fund — wealth that 
is supposed to be owned by the people and benefiting them. But the way we see our heritage fund money 
being invested just indicates how mixed up the current government's priorities really are. The main objective 
of the heritage fund according to its own annual report is, and I quote: 
 

To provide a financial mechanism through which a substantial portion of resource revenue will be 
set aside each year and invested in income-generating assets for the benefit of future generations. 

 
A laudable aim; a necessary priority. Taking the economic benefits of royalties from our non-renewable 
resource wealth and investing it in activities to create renewable economic benefits to ensure the financial 
and social security of future generations of Saskatchewan citizens is our priority but, sadly, this is where the 
system falls apart. 
 
We have only to glance at the heritage fund to see that of the royalties collected from such non-renewable 
resources as uranium, potash, oil and gas, nearly $1 billion has been dumped back into these very same 
resources. It is like buying stock in a company that has just declared bankruptcy. We are supposed to be 
creating renewable wealth but instead we are buying up increasing amounts of non-renewable resources. And 
to cap it all off, Mr. Speaker, the investments in these non-renewable resources are not even paying off as 
they should. Documents and booklets produced by the NDP government claim that markets have dropped off 
sharply for both uranium and potash. Uranium prices, to make matters worse, have fallen by 50 per cent in 
the last couple of years. Yet they continue to make equity investments or advances, as they call them, in 
these non-renewable resource-based Crown corporations — $1 billion, Mr. Speaker, — in uranium and 
potash and oil. And they plan to spend another $2.5 billion in further potash expansion. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
perverse logic. 
 
When the market drops, they want to spend more. Perhaps it is best illustrated by another one of our family 
of Crown corporations. In 1981, when all other oil companies made record profits, Saskoil actually say its 
profits decline sharply. I predict, Mr. Speaker, when we see the annual report of Saskoil it won't just be a 
sharp decline. It will be a huge loss. I predict we will see that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the economic benefits of our non-renewable resources can be made to benefit the people of 
Saskatchewan. They can be used to stimulate renewable resource development like agriculture and 
agri-energy projects, promote water development in both urban and rural areas, upgrade our health-care 
delivery system, and provide more and better nursing homes in our province. (It is somewhat ironical, as I 
stated earlier, there here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, in the seat of provincial government where we have four 
provincial cabinet ministers including the Premier, not one nursing home bed has been added since 1978.) 
These benefits can help Saskatchewan people to own or keep the houses that they live in, reduce the cost of 
living for individual citizens including the cost of housing, utilities and food, and cut provincial income tax 
and sales tax to allow  



 
March 22, 1982 

 
739 

people to enjoy a few of the dollars that they work so hard for. I remind you that for a have province our per 
capita income is still 10 per cent below the national average. That is almost $1,000 per person, and that isn't 
people first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the people's money. The people should really benefit from it. Our young people are 
currently leaving the province to find jobs. Our senior citizens are being forced to live below or at the 
poverty line with fixed incomes of below $600 a month while prices for food, heat and shelter are escalating 
dramatically and continually around them. Farmers are experiencing declining incomes and escalating costs, 
and the cost-price squeeze is forcing many, Mr. Speaker, to the point of bankruptcy. Small businesses are 
declaring bankruptcy in record numbers. Every citizen in Saskatchewan is being forced to pay for the poor 
management and irresponsible spending of the current government. There is a never-ending series of taxes, 
levies and fees imposed by the NDP to pay for their mismanagement. 
 
Saskatchewan is blessed with abundant natural resources — resources for which there is a high world 
demand, resources which can provide economic benefits to the people of our province. But I stand firmly . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How would you develop them, Paul? 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — The Minister of Finance says, "How would you develop them?" I have spent the last 
hour explaining, as an example, irrigation on our farmlands, but he didn't hear. I stand firmly at odds with 
the NDP government as to the best means of exploiting these resources for the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan. They advocate state ownership. They believe in the expenditure of a huge amount of 
taxpayers' dollars to buy up non-renewable resource industries. They believe in and they boast about how 
well our Crown corporations are doing. They spend great amounts of time and money advertising the 
supposed benefits of these companies to the people. Once again, Mr. Speaker, the record of the NDP 
government betrays its words. What are the benefits to the people? The government has spent large amounts 
of tax money acquiring these companies — more than $1 billion, just as much as agriculture. Although they 
don't like to admit it, these non-renewable resources are prone to a boom or bust cycle. We're seeing the 
market fall sharply for all of these commodities right now. The base line question, Mr. Speaker, is: who is 
left holding the bag when these resources dry up or the bottom falls out of the market? And the answer, 
unfortunately, is obvious: the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I fundamentally disagree with this idea of government ownership of our economy. Private enterprise should 
— and I might add, is willing to — take the risk with these business ventures. The people of Saskatchewan 
don't need to be left in this risk-taking position. Through a tax and royalty regimen that generates good 
returns for the people of this province from private sector development of our own resources, we could do 
better; we could be better off than we are right now and, Mr. Speaker, without the risk. If we were to follow 
this non-risk avenue, many benefits would accrue to the people. We would gain great revenue through 
royalties and corporate taxation, which could then be used to lessen the impact of inflation on all the people 
of Saskatchewan. We could invest part of the heritage fund assets in renewable resource industries to 
generate long-term opportunities for the people of the province. We could cease indirect taxation through 
utility rates. I want to repeat that, Mr. Speaker. We could cease indirect taxation through utility rates, 
gasoline tax levies, and so on to pay for these acquisitions. And, we would have much more money to spend 
on such programs as mortgage assistance, small-business assistance programs, programs for agriculture, 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
740 

health, social programs, education, and many, many others. For too long now the people of Saskatchewan 
have been highly taxed, both directly and indirectly, to pay for the ruthless and endless acquisition programs 
and poor management practices of the political appointees heading our Crown corporations. This practice 
can and must end. 
 
Since coming to power in 1971 the NDP has repeatedly and brutally taxed the people of our province to 
feather its nest. Natural gas rates have increased between 500 and 1,400 per cent, depending on whether you 
are a residential or a commercial customer — 500 to 1,400 per cent increase since the NDP came to power. 
Electricity rates have increased nearly 300 per cent. Insurance rates, through SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance), have increased over 250 per cent for some vehicles — not since 1971, but since 
1978. Again we see its concern for the farmer: for a two-year-old grain truck, needed by farmers in this 
province, there has been an increase of 252 per cent — not since 1971, but from 1978 to 1981, in a 
three-year period. That doesn't even include the new rate. Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. 
 
People in Saskatchewan are hurting. They are losing their businesses; they can't pay their bills; they are tired; 
and they are unsure of their futures with this government. What do they get from their government? Both the 
governments of Saskatchewan and of Canada abdicate responsibility for the terrible state of the economy by 
attempting to blame each other for its condition. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan and Canada 
have grown tired of such buck-passing measures. They are no longer content to sit and listen to the NDP in 
Regina say it is helpless to do anything about the economy because the problems are caused by the federal 
government. The Trudeau Liberals, in turn, say that they are powerless to do much to turn the economy 
around because our economy is so closely tied to that of the U.S. and can only be cured when the United 
States economy improves. The whole process is nothing more than feeble buck-passing by two political 
parties which have grown old and tired in their positions and have lost their ability to do the job that they 
were elected to do. It is, furthermore, just another example of the arrogance and the disdain that these two 
parties feel for the electorate. They believe that the public may be duped by their posturing. The economy is 
in terrible shape; however, it need not be so, particularly in Saskatchewan with the wealth of the resources 
that we have in this province. I say the economy is in terrible shape, perhaps the worst in 50 years. But it 
need not be so. 
 
Unemployment has reached record heights in this country; nearly one and one-quarter million people in 
Canada. Regina and Saskatoon have seen unemployment rise to new provincial highs in the last 12 months. 
There is no sign of a downward trend. Inflation is on the verge of destroying many families. Interest rates are 
still soaring and promise to return to the record highs we saw last summer. Mortgage rates follow in the 
wake of interest rate hikes so they too are destined to return to the record rates seen last summer. Canadians 
by the thousands either have lost or are in fear of losing their houses when their turn to renew their 
mortgages comes. Small businesses are going bankrupt in record numbers. Big businesses are laying off 
workers at unheard of rates. Farmers are recording record crops yet are seeing their earnings diminish. 
 
The individual citizen is confronted, daily it seems, with an unending series of price and rate increases. Food 
costs more. Gasoline costs more. Utilities cost more. Insurance costs more. Where does it all end? I would 
suggest that it should end when these two levels of government begin to face up to the plight of our 
individual citizens, when they stop passing the buck on the economy and start to look for solutions to our 
problems, when they start to live up to the responsibilities to which they were elected. Mr. Speaker, I am 
afraid that this is unlikely to happen while the Trudeau government sits in  



 
March 22, 1982 

 
741 

Ottawa and the NDP sits in Regina. 
 
The problems are not new. They are fundamentally problems that have confronted Canadians for the greater 
part of the time that these two parties have been in power. But they fail to come up with any answers. The 
problems have a profound impact on the very livelihoods of all Canadians. They attack the basic individual 
rights of all Canadians: the right to enjoy a decent standard of living, the right to own a home, the right to be 
able to provide adequate food and shelter for their families, the right to enjoy peace of mind not burdened by 
the anxiety created wondering whether one will be able to provide these basic needs in days to come. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the individual Canadian should enjoy these basic, fundamental rights — rights 
which until recently we as Canadians have taken for granted. I believe that individual Canadians should be 
able to keep the house that they currently occupy. I believe that young or first-time potential home-owners 
should be able to realize their dream of buying a home. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that every individual citizen 
should be able to provide adequate food, clothing and energy for himself and his family, and still have 
enough money left over to provide a few of the pleasures of life. I believe that every individual worker 
should be able to enjoy the profits of his labor rather than see them stripped away by ever-increasing 
government-imposed taxes, charges and interest rates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that every citizen has the right to enjoy health care and social 
services provided efficiently and fully for him by his government. 
 
These are just some individual rights and freedoms which I believe the individual citizen of Saskatchewan 
and of Canada deserves to enjoy. These same rights and freedoms are precisely those I see being eroded daily 
by the inactivity of both our Saskatchewan and our federal governments. Their stick their heads in the sand 
attitude cannot be allowed to prevail. How then can a responsible government help the individual citizen? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it can help by owning up to the fact that it is responsible to the people it represents to get them 
through economic hard times, and then, by acting on its responsibility, not with flowery, hollow, empty 
promises like we have seen in the current budget, not by election come-ons or carrots for the voters, but with 
real, substantial people-oriented policies which are aimed at curing the economic ills of the economy and 
increasing the economic and social well-being of all the people of our province — policies like those which 
have been part of the Progressive Conservative program for years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is merely an election ploy, a sugar-coated pill which has a bitter taste, a vain 
attempt by a tired, old, fading party that bamboozled the voting public into voting it into office one more 
time. I predict, Mr. Speaker, that this ploy will fail, first, because it deserves to, and second, because the 
people of this province will not be duped by the Premier and his party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake that the motion be 
amended by deleting all the words after "that" and substituting the  



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
742 

following therefor: 
 

This Assembly regrets that it has no confidence in your advisors by reason of the following: 
 

1. They have refused to accept unequivocally a one-year freeze on utility rates; 
 

2. They have refused to endorse a concept of and a need for a permanent public utilities review 
commission; 

 
3. They have ignored the effect of the high cost of energy on everyone, and have failed to take any 
action to freeze or roll back the provincial road taxes on gasoline; 

 
4. They have refused to recognize the high input costs to farmers and have not announced a 
comprehensive rural gas distribution program; 

 
5. They have increased individual income tax revenue by 36 per cent from $409 million to $596 
million; 

 
6. They are insensitive to the needs of the farmer and the small businessman, the home-owner, the 
youth and the seniors of this province; 

 
7. They have shown an amazing lack of respect for those who expect consistency; 

 
8. They have replaced care and concern with hypocrisy and cynicism. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I find the motion in order and debate continues concurrently on the motion and the 
amendment. 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Would the hon. member accept one short question before he takes his place? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Apparently not. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by congratulating the Minister of Finance on the 
budget delivered last Thursday. There are a number of items, far too many items, of benefit to the 
Saskatchewan public for me to discuss in the limited time available to me. I will only touch on a couple of 
areas of special interest. 
 
Before doing so I have to comment on the rather curious address delivered by the member for Regina South. 
I may say that is about the most eloquent praise I've ever heard for a budget — that utter inability to launch 
and mount any kind of an attack on a budget. I don't think you could find more eloquent praise of what the 
Minister of Finance delivered last Thursday. 
 
I note that the members opposite are again trying to suggest that we have somehow been not accountable in 
the area of utility rates. Somehow or other in the curious logic that seems to prevail over there a decision 
made by cabinet is one that we are not  



 
March 22, 1982 

 
743 

accountable for; a decision made by an independent review board is one that we are accountable for. The 
logic of that, I may say, escapes me a little. 
 
But the most curious, I'm sure, portion of that speech was the use of population figures. I first was a 
candidate in 1971. The population of Saskatchewan then was 907,000. In the year 1982 the population of 
Saskatchewan is 980,000. Now, somehow or other, to members opposite, when you subtract 980 from 907 
you get a population loss. 
 
We've heard of Reagan economics. We now have Tory mathematics. Only in Saskatchewan, I may say, 
could you have such selective use of mathematics. 
 
I noted as well the member for Regina South was critical of the property tax rebate. The property tax rebate 
is of course part of a larger cost of living package. I noted the member didn't have an awful lot to say about 
the Saskatchewan Home-owners' Mortgage Entitlement Program and I assume that's because that program 
out there is quite popular. That's part of the cost of living package. 
 
If you people want to come into Regina Centre and campaign against me on the basis of the cost of living 
package that was included in that budget, I may say I hope you get all the press you want, because I don't 
think you'll do yourselves a lot of good. First you'll have to find a candidate in Regina Centre, but when you 
do, I hope you get lots of coverage with that one. 
 
The member for Regina South felt that the Saskatchewan economy was in terrible shape. He would visit 
upon the people of Saskatchewan the kind of economic miracle that Sterling Lyon managed to effect in 
Manitoba. 
 
My guess is that the people of Saskatchewan aren't going to take any chances with that economic miracle and 
I doubt that that would be a serious problem. 
 
I was also interested in the member for Regina South and his opposition to the capital program. The member 
for Regina South might have been more honest had he told the people of Saskatchewan that there are 18,000 
jobs. If you want to campaign in the next election on the basis that you're opposed to a program which 
creates 18,000 jobs, I hope you get lots of publicity. 
 
That capital program includes, among other things, the Poplar River power project. I wonder if the members 
are against that. Is that what they're against? Would you visit upon the Saskatchewan people the sort of 
brown-outs that they experience in the United States? That's a capital program which is simply providing for 
our electrical needs. Are you against that? It also provides for the Nipawin hydro-electric project. Are you 
against that? 
 
We have heard of Reagan economics. And that seems to be what the member for Regina South is suggesting 
that the public of Saskatchewan buy. It seems that he would visit upon the people of Saskatchewan a sort of 
economic stagnation, record unemployment and other economic problems experienced by those south of the 
border, or the kind of de-industrialization that Britain has experienced under Margaret Thatcher. That's not 
the program of this government. That's not what we will be going forward with in the election. We are going 
forward in the election with a positive program which creates jobs and at the same time provides for the 
needs of the Saskatchewan public. 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
744 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The member for Regina South also decried the role of the government in 
participating in the Cornwall Centre. I may say that there are few things which the government has done 
which the people of Regina are as proud of as they are of the Cornwall Centre. The people of Regina are 
genuinely proud of the Cornwall Centre and they boast about it. If the member for Regina South wants to 
campaign on the basis of being opposed to the Cornwall Centre I hope he gets lots of publicity in the city of 
Regina. 
 
We also got a glimpse of the Tory election platform. I may say that no one is going to accuse you of being 
ahead of the times. I heard members opposite promise a gasohol project, something we implemented some 
months ago. I am sure the public of Saskatchewan will be interested to know that you people are promising 
programs we have already implemented. 
 
Another illustration of the same thing: the member for Regina South is in favor of better water in Regina. 
Isn't that a distinguishing feature? I am sure he is joined by 150,000 other people in the city of Regina. We 
didn't hear what he was going to do about it. Once again, I may say, the member for Regina South is 
promising a program which we are already implementing. The members opposite seem to be suffering from 
poor memories. Let me read from Hansard, March 19, a question put to the Minister of Urban Affairs by the 
member for Arm River. The question asked by the member for Arm River was, "What are you going to do 
about the water?" The Minister of Urban Affairs answered as follows: 
 

Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member had read the budget speech he would have noticed that $17 
million is provided in the budget for urban water and sewer systems in the province through the 
municipal water assistance board. We are providing a 50 per cent increase in the budget this year 
for water for communities. In the case of Regina and Moose Jaw the hon. member may be aware (I 
certainly told him last year and I invite him to review Hansard) that the Department of Urban 
Affairs, together with the Department of the Environment and the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina, 
is having a two-phase study one on the water needs in those two communities. Phase one of the 
study is on the verge of being completed. After that study is completed it is our intention to meet 
with officials from the cities of Moose Jaw and Regina to discuss the report and recommendations. 

 
Once again we have members opposite promising programs that we are already implementing. As I say, no 
one is going to accuse you people of being ahead of the times. 
 
The remarks which I heard the member for Regina South make read like an old movie. I recall hearing 
Davey Steuart make much the same speech, telling the people of Saskatchewan that a vote for the NDP was 
a short road to loss of freedom, taking over the farms, Crown corporation's taking over the economy. We 
have the same speech every year. We heard it from the Liberals; we heard it from the Conservatives; we 
heard it from the member for Thunder Creek. We heard it from the member for Regina South last time. And 
we hear the same tired speech again. 
 
I may say that the thrust of your complaints against this budget seems to be that these were some of your 
ideas. I may say that that's not the most biting criticism I've ever  



 
March 22, 1982 

 
745 

heard of a budget speech. Indeed, that sounds to me like something of a compliment, and I think we've just 
witnessed history, Mr. Speaker. It's the first time in the history of the legislature, I'm sure, that the opposition 
has stood up and said, "Good job, well done. You implemented our programs? That seems to be what the 
members opposite are saying. As I say, that strikes me as being eloquent congratulations to the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
I want to comment, as I haven't done so already, on the expressed intention of the federal government to 
change the crowrate. I didn't enter the debate. I don't have the familiarity with the issue that many of my 
colleagues have, and I left the debate in their very capable hands. But I wouldn't be doing justice to the 
interests of my constituents if I were to pass the issue by entirely. If Mr. Pepin's proposals see the light of 
day, it will most certainly affect the people of Regina Centre, my constituents, very profoundly. 
 
It might at first thought be felt that the constituents of Regina Centre are as isolated from the effects of the 
crowrate changes as anyone. That view, unfortunately somewhat common among people of Regina, that this 
isn't their fight is a most unfortunate misconception. My constituents don't haul grain, and won't be shelling 
out an extra $5,000, $10,000, $15,000 to get their product to market, but they are vitally affected none the 
less. Agriculture is still the largest industry in Saskatchewan, and as agriculture goes, so go the cities. When 
agriculture is in trouble the constituent of Regina Centre may find himself laid off. The downtown merchants 
find sales are down and profit margins are hard to come by. The trades find, with farmers spending less 
money, fewer offices and residences are being built and that means less work for the construction trades. 
 
Are the residents of Regina Centre affected by the crowrate? Profoundly. And I sense a growing awareness 
of that among my constituents. There is a growing appreciation that this is an issue which can rework the 
entire fabric of the province. It will affect those who live and make their living in the shadows of the 
downtown highrises almost as much as those who live on the farms. 
 
And what's the response of people of Regina Centre? Their response is to ask themselves who is best able to 
speak for the people of Saskatchewan on the issue. That person is most certainly not Mr. Goodale. The 
Liberal Party is only a vestigial shadow of its former self. Even Liberals admit that the party is going 
nowhere . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There's not much further to go I say to the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Just as critical to Mr. Goodale's credibility is his painful conflict of interest. The Liberal Party's only lease on 
life seems to be the financial and moral support from the national Liberty Party of Canada. The only way of 
raising money, the only way they seem to be able to mount a campaign, is to utilize the resources of the 
national federation. It is indicative of the desperation the provincial Liberals find themselves in that they 
would invite Pierre Elliott Trudeau to Regina as a guest speaker — the very man who was an anathema to 
western people, a lightning rod for western discontent. His appearance as guest speaker is eloquent testimony 
to the weakness of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. If anyone else could have drawn a crowd he would have 
been invited. 
 
For the constituents of Regina Centre, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Devine is not a great deal more credible than Mr. 
Goodale. True, he doesn't depend for support on Mr. Trudeau's purse strings. Mr. Devine's problem is that, 
like Saint Paul of old, he, too, claims to have experienced something in the nature of a blinding light on the 
road to Damascus. He, 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
746 

too, is a new person. He's no longer the American-educated, academically-orientated spokesman for big 
business. Not now. Now he's a true son of the soil with a pitchfork in one hand and a permit book in the 
other. Where he was a sinner before, he's a true believer now. Depending on whether or not they're religious, 
some of my constituents believe that the incident on the road to Damascus happened as described in the Acts 
of the Apostles and some do not. I can tell you there are very few of my constituents who believe that this 
miracle was repeated a second time in Saskatchewan in 1982. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — When those whom I represent turn to a spokesman for their interests, they turn to 
someone with a proven track record. They turn to the man who fought the long, lonely battle against the 
federal constitutional proposal — a battle which at many times looked hopeless, but a struggle which 
eventually largely succeeded. When they're asked who it is that best speaks for Saskatchewan, the answer 
comes back almost as an immediate reaction: Allan Blakeney. 
 
Back to the budget, Mr. Speaker. Regina Centre, is, of course, the oldest part of the city. Many of this city's 
historical buildings are situated there. One of the interesting phenomena which I've witnessed is the growth 
and vigor of historical societies. This hasn't happened by accident. Oh, there've always been a number of 
people, sometimes formerly organized and sometimes not, who possess a keen sense of history and who 
decry the destruction of our architectural heritage. In times past, what those people lacked was not popular 
support. There has always been in the public a deeply felt need to preserve some tangible reminders of our 
past. What those people lacked were tools to do the job, any effective means of opposing the developers. 
These people, like Sisyphus of Greek mythology, seemed forever destined to push a millstone up a hill only 
to see it roll back to the bottom when they stopped for breath. Their every effort seemed to take them back to 
square one. 
 
Thanks in part to this government, the problem became acute in Saskatchewan. I say with some tongue in 
cheek that this government is indirectly responsible for the pressure on Saskatchewan's architectural heritage 
because the most effective preservation program in the world is a prolonged recession, the type of recession 
we experienced under the old-line parties. The most devastating phenomenon of our architectural heritage is 
a sustained boom. Thanks in part to the efforts of this government, the province of Saskatchewan has 
enjoyed of late sustained and unprecedented prosperity. So, in part, this government is indirectly responsible 
for creating serious pressure on our architectural heritage. 
 
But these historical societies are showing development and a vitality that, like Saskatchewan's, is impressive. 
That's occurring because this government gave groups like the Regina historical society the tools they needed 
to do the job. By far the most important tool is The Heritage Property Act. The philosophy behind The 
Heritage Property Act deserves recalling. Unlike other provincial governments such as Alberta and B.C. that 
gave the responsibility for the preservation of heritage buildings to the provincial government, we sought to 
leave that responsibility with the community. We did that in part because we wanted to respond to the widely 
voiced opinion that governments are attempting to do too much and leaving too little to the individual and 
the local community. But in a more fundamental way, we realize that no building can be preserved unless it 
can be utilized and the best hope of making use of buildings of historic interest lies with the local 
community. It is they who know what the community 



 
March 22, 1982 

 
747 

needs, and it is they who are in the best position to know what's feasible and what is not. 
 
We backed up this legislation with money. We have instituted a grant program, and we will make grants 
available to communities to help with various restoration projects. This is supplemented — perhaps I should 
say, Mr. Speaker, it is multiplied many-fold — by the community in the form of municipal grants, donations 
of money, materials and most important, time. Our money in most of the preservation projects is just a 
catalyst which unleashes an expenditure of time and money that far overshadows our own grant. 
 
We were delighted to see how fertile was the soil upon which The Heritage Property Act and this grant 
program fell. This program has achieved a success far beyond our wildest dreams. Saskatchewan is 
preserving its heritage in a way that other provinces are not. The act has been in existence for little more than 
a year, yet local advisory boards have sprung up all over the province. About 60 sites have been designated, 
and another 60 or so are in the works. I obtained from the Department of Culture and Youth a list of what 
has been designated as protected property by municipalities, and it makes graphic reading, Mr. Speaker. It's 
an apt illustration of the broad spectrum of heritage treasure which this province may still preserve and is 
preserving. 
 
Arcola is preserving its town hall. Anybody who has been to Arcola and seen the town hall will applaud 
them in the preservation of this building. Avonlea is designating its railway station. There will be a whole lot 
more communities designating portions of the railway as heritage sites if Mr. Pepin has his way. Battleford is 
designating a bank. Battleford is also designating a town hall and an opera house. Big River is designating a 
school. I think I've been in most communities in Saskatchewan, but here's one, I don't know and I'm not sure 
I know how to pronounce it — Bonne Madone is designating a church. Is that correct? Chaplin is 
designating a bank. The R.M. of Corman Park is designating a bone trail. Now I haven't any idea what a 
bone trail is, but I'll bet there's an interesting story behind that bone trail, and the R.M. of Corman Park is 
preserving it for future generations. 
 
Dundurn has designated a church. Gravelbourg has designated a college and some of the finest paintings 
done by Saskatchewan artists are inside that college. The R.M. of Gravelbourg has designated a prehistoric 
site. The R.M. of Invergordon has designated a trestle bridge. The town of Kerrobert has designated a water 
tower. The town of Maple Creek — the member might be interested to know — has designated a hotel. I 
don't know whether that's the centre of the cultural life of Maple Creek, but they're designating it. The R.M. 
of Montmartre is preserving a shrine. Saskatoon is designating a cemetery. I wasn't aware that cemeteries in 
this province were in imminent danger of destruction, but perhaps one is. Watson is designating a newspaper 
office; Zenon Park is designating a convent. 
 
Perhaps one of the most ambitious projects is being considered by the city of Moose Jaw. They are 
struggling to preserve the architectural flavor of that city, which reflects the early years of this century. I 
understand from my colleague, the member for Moose Jaw North, that Moose Jaw has been designated for 
help by Heritage Canada, and so the project is under way. I think all of us who value our history wish them 
well. George Bernard Shaw once said that all we learn from history is that men never learn anything from 
history. That's far too cynical a view. Canada's pre-eminent historical writer, Donald Creighton, said it better. 
He said that for a person to live in a country and be ignorant of its history on almost every issue that comes 
up means that he is really walking around in the dark all of the time. 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
748 

I think that history can give you a sense of courage in a difficult and dark world. You can say to yourself, "At 
least I know something about this world; I know how it got this way; I know where it's possibly going (not 
certainly, but possibly). I can stand up against the world." 
 
History cannot be understood if it is presented as scientific, categorized, classified facts. If we are to 
understand history we must be able to experience and see some tangible reminders of our history — tangible 
reminders that breathe life and meaning into scientific information and turn that information, Mr. Speaker, 
into knowledge and understanding. 
 
I want to turn to another aspect of the budget before I close. Mr. Speaker, it would seem to take some sort of 
a demented genius to create a housing shortage in a land covered with trees and lots of space, and yet that is 
what the present government in Ottawa seems close to achieving. Among nations on earth, few would seem 
to have the lucky combination of space and resources that Canada has to adequately house its population. 
Yet we have fallen far short of our potential in this area of housing, and the federal government's high 
interest rate policy is likely to critically exacerbate the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan stand in danger of experiencing the run-away house prices which 
Vancouver saw last year. Anyone who has observed the housing scene in Regina and Saskatoon must feel a 
sense of unease as ever higher interest rates tighten their grip on the jugular of the housing industry. As 
housing starts to plummet to a fraction of the real demand, it's only a matter of time before the pent-up 
demand breaks out and when that happens we stand an excellent chance of experiencing what Vancouver 
say, and to a lesser extent, what Toronto saw, when housing prices simply shot through the stratosphere. The 
people I represent don't want to see that; they don't want housing driven beyond the reach of the young; they 
don't want to see speculators enrich themselves at the expense of the ordinary person. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it was with considerable pleasure that I saw the new provisions in the budget relating to 
housing. The capital budget for housing has increased by 130 per cent. I wonder if the hon. member for 
Regina South is going to campaign against that. In addition to our existing housing programs, we will be 
constructing an additional 1,000 houses. We will also be embarking on an additional 500-unit apartment 
construction program, and that's in addition to our existing program, which will see 1,000 new houses, 1,550 
apartment units constructed — over 4,000 housing units in 1982. 
 
I've done some checking and I believe that this housing program is without parallel in Canada — this, Mr. 
Speaker, in spite of the fact that other parts of Canada face housing problems as acute as ours. Only in 
Saskatchewan is there a recognition of the massive housing problems which the misguided federal interest 
rate policy has brought on their heads. Just one more reason I believe the people of Saskatchewan will vote 
in even greater numbers to retain a government which makes a genuine and usually successful effort to meet 
and solve the problems which affect them. It's another reason they'll reject a party whose record in other 
provinces has been one of insensitivity and resignation to problems which just simply should not be 
tolerated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not just a government with a mind to solve tough problems which are a result of the 
federal government's interest rate policies, the economic ones. It's  



 
March 22, 1982 

 
749 

also a government with heart and courage. Mr. Speaker, among the most serious problems our society faces 
is the plight of natives. We could do as other governments do and neglect the problem. It is not a simple 
problem to face and it's a great deal more complex to juggle politically. But this government, which 
genuinely cares about the people who elect it, has embarked on a number of initiatives. We've tried to meet 
the needs in education with a 46 per cent increase in funding in the educational programs for natives. We 
have provided similar increases in housing and jobs. As imperfect, as ineffective as these measures may 
sometimes be, they are infinitely preferable to the efforts of every other government in Canada, which 
ignores the problems in the vain hope that they will somehow or other go away. A moment's reflection will 
lead any impartial observer to the conclusion that neglect will only make the problems worse. 
 
Not only do the Tories have patently no intention of dealing with native problems if elected, but even more 
disturbing to native people is the willingness of the members opposite to appeal to racism in their desperate 
struggle to attract attention. If members opposite wish, I will recite for them from election campaigns in 
Pelly and Regina North-West. If the member for Maple Creek wants a full recycle of it, I will happily do it. I 
have a vivid memory of the advertisements which the members opposite used to try to attract votes. I am 
sure members opposite are as ashamed of that campaign as I am. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Don't call me a racist. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — If the member opposite wants proof, I'd be happy to relay the record of the 
campaigns of members opposite. Well, I hear a small clamor for more information on this. It's not by any 
means overwhelming so I'll forego the temptation to recite your past sins to you. I say to the member for 
Maple Creek who takes offence at what I've said, suffice it to say that what you did in Pelly and in Regina 
North-West appalled and frightened native people. The joke making the rounds among native people in 
Regina at the last election was that if the Tories were elected, the ovens were all ready for them. That's kind 
of grim humor, but it illustrates the depth of their concern should a Conservative Party ever come to power. I 
may say, fortunately for native people, other groups in society find the Conservative Party almost as 
unpalatable and it doesn't seem likely that they are going to be faced with a Conservative government. Ours 
is a government with the philosophical depth to create a program which unleashes the energies of the people 
of Saskatchewan and their desire to preserve and enhance their heritage, a government with the mind to 
tackle housing programs which other governments find intractable, a government with the heart and courage 
to face the plight of natives and call it what it is: an intolerable blight on society. 
 
Well, I vote in favor of the budget for such a government. To ask the question is to answer it. Mr. Speaker, I 
really have not yet had sufficient time to analyse the brilliance and the rationale lying beneath the arguments 
of the member for Regina South. I therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate. I will have more to say on the 
remarks from the member for Regina South on the debate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 



 
March 22, 1982 
 

 
750 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act 
 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, I move that a bill to amend The Education and Health Tax Act 
be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 — An Act respecting the Provision of Financial and Other Assistance to Rural 
Municipalities for Capital Works Projects. 

 
HON. MR. ROMANOW: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. minister, I move that a bill respecting the 
provision of financial and other assistance to rural municipalities for capital works projects be introduced 
and read a first time. While I do so, I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honor, the Lieutenant-Governor, 
having been informed of the subject matter of the bill, recommends the consideration of the Assembly. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


