






















































Hansard: June 21, 1982


73 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
June 21, 1982 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 

 
MR. HOPFNER: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed with honor and a sense of history that I rise in this 
respected Assembly to contribute to the first Progressive Conservative government Speech from the 
Throne as an elected member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster. In all sincerity, Mr. Speaker, this is the most 
eventful experience of my lifetime, for not only is it a privilege to represent over 12,000 constituents of 
Cut Knife-Lloydminster, but it is indeed a noble honor to represent such a fine constituency as their first 
ever elected Progressive Conservative MLA. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HOPFNER: — Indeed, the honor is twofold, and I pledge to serve the constituents of Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster to the best of my ability, representing them with all my capacity as their elected 
voice. In honor of the great traditions this Assembly represents, Mr. Speaker, I congratulate you on your 
selection as a Speaker of the House. The sincerity and honesty of this government is reflected by its 
choice of you to preside over this elected Assembly. Sincerity and honesty are traits which will become a 
hallmark of this government as it presides over its elected responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, I would like to extend congratulations to all re-elected or newly elected members 
at this time. In particular, I would like to congratulate the member for Estevan, our Premier, Grant 
Devine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Premier Devine not only represents the youth and vitality of this great province of ours, but 
also symbolizes the greatness of our future, and I want to go on record as saying that history will bear out 
that Premier Devine’s wise and prudent leadership will not only have guided Saskatchewan through the 
turmoil of the ‘80s but will have laid out the groundwork for the future that our children’s grandchildren 
will be thankful for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Premier Devine’s leadership has to be congratulated once more in his choice of cabinet 
ministers. Saskatchewan’s finest men and women have been selected with care and concern for the 
people of Saskatchewan and I pledge to work with this talented group. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HOPFNER: — I will be supporting them to bring about the kind of government Saskatchewan 
desires and deserves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the opportunity to address this Assembly for the first time, I find it difficult to hold 
myself from speaking out in disrespect for the undermining influence the people of this province have 
had to put up with by the previous administration. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
74 

MR. HOPFNER: —When I first considered the Progressive Conservative nomination for Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster, I felt real betrayal by the previous administration. That, Mr. Speaker, spurred me on 
in the weeks and months before April 26, 1982. as I came to know the many people of Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. I found that my feelings were shared – so dramatically shared, that results on April 
26 were not limited to Cut Knife-Lloydminster, but right across this great province of ours. 
 
The NDP led us down the garden path, building false hopes, painting an unreal picture of prosperity, 
solving problems by government ownership and, generally, not caring about you and me, the average 
man, in our trying to go about things. Mr. Speaker, the NDP was telling lies, and people of 
Saskatchewan were not fooled, by witness to our just victory at the polls on April 26, 1982. the NDP’s 
callous disregard for people, province, and country actually drove people from Saskatchewan, depleting 
our greatest resource of all, that of people. Even more, the NDP drive industry and commerce, large and 
small business, from Saskatchewan with its socialist policies, destroying our future. Mr. Speaker, we all 
know where our greatest resource went, and now I would like to use this Assembly to extend a warm 
welcome to all those who wish to return home. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HOPFNER: — Yes, and you are welcome, Mr. Speaker, Premier Grant Devine’s message during 
the historic spring campaign of April 1982 was “There is so much more we can be.” To that, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to turn my remarks to the constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
The elected members present all share a particular pride for the constituency they represent. In keeping 
with that pride, I stand to say my respect and sincerity for the constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster is 
equal to if not greater than any elected member has for his or her riding. 
 
The people of Cut Knife-Lloydminster are diverse in scope and nature. Culturally, nearly every ethnic 
group is represented, be it French, English, Ukrainian, Italian, Scottish, Irish or native Indian. 
Economically, the diversity extends from a sound agricultural base to future potential of heavy oil. 
 
The constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster has the potential to become one of the province’s leading 
lights, offering opportunity, growth and prosperity to the betterment of all. Geographically, Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster ranges from the fertile Battle River Valley to the south and the lush parkland of the 
North Saskatchewan to the north. People-wise, Cut Knife-Lloydminster is a prime example of strong 
rural communities throughout, sharing the benefits of city borders, bordered by Lloydminster to the west 
and North Battleford to the east. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than once the talent and respect in my constituency has gained provincial and 
national recognition. Wendy Swift, a talented golfer from Lloydminster, has won provincial and national 
honors. The Lashburn Bluebirds from my home town have been consistent provincial and national 
contenders. Joni Mitchell, an internationally acclaimed singer and song-writer, spent her formative years 
in Maidstone. The Maidstone Jets have competed nationally and internationally in the growing sport of 
old-timer hockey. 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
75 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, I represent a constituency deep in human potential. That potential must not go 
untapped, nor will it be by this government. 
 
There are pressing issues in the constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, issues that must 
be addressed for the sake of my constituents in the province of Saskatchewan. The oil field is hurting 
badly from misguided federal policies and the previous government’s heavy-handed dealings with the oil 
industry. We must encourage the development of the proposed heavy oil upgrader, or a great potential of 
this resource will be forever gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, business is suffering because of unreal interest rates, poor cash flow and, in general, lack of 
confidence. Mr. Speaker, nowhere in Saskatchewan do these economic ailments hurt more than in Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, knows and understands Saskatchewan, and I know and understand my 
constituency. Together, Mr. Speaker, we will weather the storm and build a stronger future through the 
strength and leadership of Premier Grant Devine in this historic Progressive Conservative government. 
 
I eagerly await the opportunity to represent the constituency of Cut Knife-Lloydminster in many more 
sittings of this Assembly, Yes, Mr. Speaker, “There is so much more we can be,” And to that I proudly 
say, I support the motion in support of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — Mr. Speaker, fellow members, an awesome responsibility has been accepted by each 
of us here. We have been elected to lead; we have been elected to assist; and we have been elected to 
care. 
 
My riding is Saskatoon Nutana. Nutana encompasses much of character-Saskatoon. That is to say, it is 
an established part of Saskatoon. Nutana has a broad diversification of people: labourers, professionals, 
students, and retired people. A major concern throughout the campaign was the high cost of utilities and 
their incessant increases. To the Leader of the Opposition, I ask: who was paying? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — The danger of losing one’s home was faced by many and, of course, the expressed 
resentment of government’s constant interference with the lives of the people was repetitive. How 
pleasing it is to note that the utility rates have been frozen and that these rates will be publicly reviewed. 
The 13.25 per cent mortgage plan is the only source of hope for many home-owners, and that, too, will 
soon be legislation. The removal of the gasoline tax has already helped anyone who uses a motor 
vehicle. As for the concern about big government, I believe the attitude of this government will be 
people-oriented and not just power-oriented. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — The recent industrial openings in Saskatoon are proof of the change in 
Saskatchewan’s economic outlook, proof that indeed others see a firm future for their business ventures 
within our borders with this government. The riding of Nutana holds within its boundaries many citizens 
over the age of 65, as well as many young 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
76 

families and students. It is primarily the senior citizens who are lacking the resources to survive the 
soaring inflation with their fixed incomes, and I personally am committed to initiate action that will 
allow these pioneers of Saskatchewan, the founders of our proud heritage, the chance to live with peace 
of mind and the security of future they so rightly deserve. A job well done should be rewarded with 
satisfaction, not worry and fear. Worry and fear festers in the minds of many of our seniors – their 
thoughts infected by this government’s predecessors, the NDP administration. 
 
I would like to thank the citizens of Nutana for placing with me faith and trust that I will serve them 
well, I should also like to commend the Nutana voters as we enjoyed a large voter turnout. The 
revitalized interest and concern expressed about Saskatchewan’s direction was the most healthy and 
welcome indication that our population has awakened from their socialistic sleep. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — I am grateful and would like to take this opportunity to thank my tireless campaign 
workers. Many were devoted above and beyond the call of duty. Our slogan was “We are number one,” 
and they approached each day with the optimism and conviction necessary to be successful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the people I met during the recent election campaign reiterated their distaste 
regarding the direction and the relentless interference of the previous administration. Common was the 
concern that government priorities were questionable, reasons were unrealistic if given at all, and 
repeated was the concern and the uneasiness of knowing that the entire workings of Saskatchewan were 
manipulated by politically associated strings. Indeed, the people realized they had become the 
government’s puppets to be bled and to be taxed. I feel confident that the people of this great province 
may now rest assured that this new government will put people first and that this approach will slowly 
but certainly filter through the marionette webbing of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — I am proud to be an elected member of this 20th sitting of the Saskatchewan 
legislature, but this pride is coupled with humility. The honor of sitting as an elected member in 
Saskatchewan is one which befalls a small percentage of our population. The humility is newly aroused 
with each realization of the noble task ahead. I do, however, feel secure, for I know I am surrounded by 
able minds and caring people. I feel confident in the style and leadership abilities of Premier Devine. 
Premier Devine’s aura of confidence with compassion, government with God, and reality with rationale 
are special qualities – qualities very much needed today by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
It is my belief that our province has a bright and promising future. It is my belief that this government 
shares with the world some of the most able and conscientious people elected to government. With the 
sharing of knowledge and the catalyst of optimism, I believe we can formulate a Saskatchewan which 
will grow to the utmost of her potential, an attainable goal, and our catalyst is the lack of arrogant and 
power-driven people. 
 
Premier Devine and fellow members, I now pledge to you my time, my energy, my ability 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
77 

and my heart to the service of the people of Saskatoon Nutana and to the people of Saskatchewan. I 
pledge to you my honest, for I strongly believe that it is time that the people of this province have some 
honesty in government, I pledge to you my continuing respect for the ability of others to make decisions 
for themselves even though they are non-government people. 
 
It is mandatory that this option of decision making be returned to the people, for decision making is the 
foundation of self–respect within each of us. The result of the election indicates that the people of 
Saskatchewan are beginning to think for themselves; they are beginning to perpetuate their thoughts and 
desires, and they decisively but not painlessly rejected rabid government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I pledge to you now my desire to remain a grass-roots person, receptive to each 
problems, and open-minded to the people of this province. I intend to remain approachable, and in touch 
with reality and the people – another concept long overdue in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I extend to you my warmest congratulations on your appointment as Speaker of the House 
– a position worthy of a man of your stature. 
 
Let us each remember why we sit in this Chamber; let us remember the reasons for the voters’ choices, 
and let us each remember to use our energies for the reasons intended by the full mandate given. 
 
I give to you now a short poem which clearly defines the directions and convictions of Premier Devine 
and the new government of Saskatchewan. 
 

We all are blind until we see 
That in the human plan 
Nothing is worth the making 
If it does not make a man. 
Why build these cities glorious 
If man unbuilded goes? 
In vain we build the world unless 
The builder also grows. 

 
May I emphatically reply to the question raised regarding the tardiness of the action of this government. 
This government has the future of the people of Saskatchewan on its mind, not just the future of the 
government, and that responsibility deserves adequate forethought. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker and honored members, I take this opportunity to introduce myself as the 
MLA for Moose Jaw South, Bud Smith. It is both a privilege and a pleasure to stand before you tonight 
in this historic and venerated Chamber. I would like to say that I am proud to be a Progressive 
Conservative, and proud to have this opportunity to serve my province and my constituency on the side 
of the government. I hope this will be an exciting and responsible legislature. Mr. Speaker, I share that 
responsibility with each of you, and I accept the challenge which it entails. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Speaker of the House for accepting his responsibilities. I would also like 
to congratulate the Premier, Mr. Devine, for the challenge he has 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
78 

accepted, and I wish him success in the future. 
 
As for my background, I was born on a farm in the Cardross district where I received my education and 
then took up farming, having owned and operated my own farm in that district until 1965. I then moved 
to Moose Jaw, at which time I married my wife Goldie. We have one daughter. At that time I became 
interested and involved in carpentry work which was my occupation until the present time. I was 
involved with community work while on the farm, and continued with it after moving to Moose Jaw. 
Mr. Speaker, this has enabled me to meet a large number of people and to learn of their problems and 
concerns. My interest in becoming an MLA was to address some of the problems and concerns in an 
effective manner. Mr. Speaker, we cannot solve all these problems and concerns immediately, but 
hopefully, as time permits, we will look after them all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are several areas of concern which have been expressed by the citizens of Moose Jaw 
in the past month. One of these problems and concerns is the unlit entrance at the east end of the city. It 
is a potential hazard spot which could greatly benefit by some new lighting to the approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area of concern is the junction of Highway 1 and 9th Avenue Northwest. This 
trouble spot has been the scene of many accidents in the past, and no doubt it will be in the future if 
something is not done to rectify the problem. A set of traffic lights would go far, I am sure, to help 
motorists. We should give this intersection more thought and consideration for the safety of the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fourth floor of Union Hospital in Moose Jaw is presently not in use. As MLA for 
Moose Jaw South, I feel this is a waste in accommodations needed to relieve the families of chronic care 
patients who are treated at home. For example, where do these people go when those responsible for 
them take sick or are suddenly called away? In this day and age, when chronically ill patients are more 
often attempting to lead normal existences in their own homes, special facilities have to be made 
available for emergency situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Wakamow Valley project in Moose Jaw seems to be faced with conflicting reports 
from studies prepared by various individuals and groups. The information contained in these reports is 
essential for the overall development, so I, as the MLA for Moose Jaw South, would suggest a review be 
made of this project. 
 
The people of Moose Jaw, some 36,000 strong, are made up of a wide variety of ethnic groups and 
backgrounds, and at this time I would like to give many thanks to those in the constituency who 
supported me, and I am quite sure they are very pleased with the returns. The harmony of existence is 
demonstrated by the fact that Moose Jaw is know far and wide as a friendly city. Perhaps the cement in 
the relationships is the large percentage of senior citizens who pioneered and opened up this great 
province, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw is largely dependent on the rich, mixed and grain-growing areas 
surrounding it. We have a large technical institute in Moose Jaw which trains growing numbers of trades 
people each year. That factor, along with our recently opened industrial park, affordable housing, and a 
position as a transportation centre, will undoubtedly do much to encourage new growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us here today must do everything necessary to foster and nurture that growth so that 
our young people have the opportunity to stay and raise their families here in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, lifestyles are changing at a time when men and women are beginning to share more and more a 
working world in society. It is with 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
79 

real pleasure that I welcome and look forward to working with all these lovely ladies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us here are new to our present positions and, some of us, to the political arena. We 
shall make mistakes, but let us address these mistakes and go on in an open and honest way. The respect 
of the people must be earned, and those who have put their trust in us deserve no less than that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of us here today are, no doubt, full of hope and confidence that we can make the 
necessary changes for a buoyant economy. We have the natural resources and the people resources to do 
our part. However, because we are very dependent on outside factors, such as the Canadian economy as 
a whole, the U.S. economy, and the world economy in general, we must be prepared to shift our 
emphasis on our priorities from time to time. While this may mean a slower realization of some of our 
goals, it need not mean that we lose sight of our goals. 
 
In regard to the throne speech, I am prepared to support it in the vote. In closing let me say thank you 
once again to the citizens of Moose Jaw South for having placed their trust in me to represent them here. 
They will not see that trust go unheeded. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the member for Wilkie as well for that very 
kind welcome. 
 
I want to begin by congratulating all of the new members of the Assembly. I recall seven years ago, 
when I was first elected and first say in the Assembly, what a thrill it was. I only hope that the new 
members who have been elected experience some of the same thrill as I did. I hope it lasts. I hope when 
you are coming back for your second term of your third term – I think in this Assembly, that’s about the 
maximum . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — . . . you will still sense that same thrill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you on your election. I think it is apparent to everyone that members 
opposite have made some good decisions and some good judgements lately, not the least of which was 
your election as Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think it is fair to say that all of us in this corner on this side of the Assembly 
. . . I was going to say this side of the Assembly, but I don’t pretend to speak for the members to my 
right. I wouldn’t want to. I think it is fair to say that all members of our caucus applaud your election. 
We look forward to working with you. 
 
As well, on the same theme, I want to congratulate Premier Devine on his election. Premier Devine, the 
member for Thunder Creek, and I all grew up in what could be roughly described as the same district, I 
think there might be six miles separating the three farms, and I suppose it is probably unique in this 
legislature and perhaps in the history of the province. Members of my caucus will understand that if I 
have some shortcomings (and I have many) it may have something to do with the company I kept as a 
youth. I do genuinely want to congratulate the Premier. I do think it is fair to say, 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
80 

whatever the political stripe, all of the people in the district in which he and I grew up are genuinely 
proud to have a native son elected as Premier. 
 
To say that the election was not what I expected is a gross understatement. But I must say I have been 
almost surprised by what has followed since. What I expected was a government that would begin 
decisively with vigour, would act like so many other new governments have – John Kennedy’s New 
Frontier, Johnson’s Ninety Days of Decision. What we have before us, Mr. Speaker, is a government that 
looks very much like an old, worn-out, tired government unable to make any decisions, proceeding 
insensitively, callously and cynically. Much was said by members opposite about the need to throw open 
government, to clear air and allow the public to see what was going on. I was very surprised, therefore, 
to see that one of the first acts of the new government was the decision not to broadcast these debates in 
the legislature. Surely members opposite would have wanted the public not to see but to hear their new 
members give their maiden speeches. Some of them have been well worth hearing, I may say. I am just 
unable to fathom the reason why we decided not to broadcast this session. This is the first time since we 
began broadcasting the legislative debates that a major session (and I gather that’s what this is) . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — In 1971 the NDP took government; you did not broadcast a major session. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — That was a session intended to last a few days, and did last a few days. That’s 
not what you said this is. You said this is going to be the session for 1982 and it is the first time since we 
began broadcasting the session that the public will not have a chance to hear it. I really wonder what it is 
that members opposite are ashamed of. I hope the members on the opposite bench are not ashamed of 
their new members. We’ll take the credit or the blame for what we say if you people are prepared to 
allow yourselves to be heard. 
 
I simply can’t believe that the reason given – that it was the cost – has anything to do with the actual 
decision. I really can’t believe that the cost has anything to do with it. As I was saying earlier, the 
government opposite has been spending money like a drunken sailor, and the cost of broadcasting these 
debates is immeasurably small compared to the total budget. So I am really curious as to why you people 
decided not to broadcast the debates and I would be interested in hearing from any member opposite who 
might be able to enlighten me. 
 
Perhaps it has something to do with the flavour of so many of the speeches from members opposite. 
They have been, by and large, Mr. Speaker, gloating, arrogant and self-congratulatory. I say to members 
opposite, that may bring applause from your colleagues, but that is not what the public really elected you 
for, and that’s not really what they want to hear from you. They really do not want to hear you tell 
yourselves why you are such fine folk and why you won. I think instead what they are looking for from 
members opposite are some solutions to some of today’s problems and particularly the recessionary 
problems – something members opposite have been wilfully short of. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Do you have a mortgage? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, as a matter of interest I don’t have a mortgage. I’ll be dealing with your 
mortgage plan later on. I will be pointing out later on that the mortgage plan which you implement will 
be of very little assistance to the people of my riding, who are generally low income people. 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
81 

During the election I think it’s fair to say that members opposite campaigned o the campaign of free 
money. The level of promises by the members opposite must surely be unprecedented. It’s paradoxical 
that a supposedly socialist government managed the affairs of this province in a very responsible fashion 
with 11 balanced budgets in as many years. Conservative members come in and behave in a fashion 
which can only be described as totally irresponsible. 
 
I want to remind members opposite of some of the little trifles you have yet to do, I’m quoting from a 
book that some of you may have some familiarity with. It’s called Pocket Politics. It is said to be a quick 
reference for a PC policy for candidates . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes it is and I’m going to keep it 
and I’m going to be reminding members opposite of all the things that you promised. 
 
You promised to phase out provincial sales tax. I’d be delighted to hear from members opposite a 
timetable on that. When do you plan to get around to that? Putting an immediate freeze on utility rates – 
that’s done. But I want to see the member opposite who will deny that SPC (Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation) is going to run a massive deficit. I want to see the member opposite who can tell this House 
that you can put a freeze on utility rates and not run a deficit in the utilities. Of course, you’re going to 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, you never promised to be responsible. I must say that’s true. You just 
promised free money. You promised a 10 per cent reduction in personal income tax. I would be 
interested in hearing from members opposite when you intend to get around to doing that. You promised 
to remove the gas tax; you’ve done that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — It’s very true. I do recall reading the odd advertisement – some of them 
taking up a full page in the city’s daily – promising 40 cents off. We’ve heard remarkably little abut that 
last 11 cents you people promised. The public of Saskatchewan have only two conclusions to draw. One 
is that you were dishonest with them and the second conclusion is you can’t add to 40. Neither one of 
those conclusions are very flattering and those seem to be the only conclusions the public of 
Saskatchewan can justly draw. Either you can’t add or you’re not being honest. This list on page 29 of 
this booklet doesn’t include a few other trifles that were promised during the election campaign. You 
promised free drugs. You promised the gas distribution system to every home in Saskatchewan. I’ve got 
the ad. 
 
Much was said by members opposite about making Saskatchewan first. Saskatchewan would be first. 
There were some areas where Saskatchewan was already first. Saskatchewan, for instance, already had 
the highest minimum wage in Canada. That was something I was proud of. I was proud that the people 
of this province, through their government, showed sufficient concern for the poor and the people on low 
incomes to try to grant them a decent wage. I was aghast when the Premier announced, unequivocally (at 
least he was recorded as being unequivocal), that the minimum wage wouldn’t be increased. 
 
He stated reasons for doing so. Well, he wanted to increase employment. What a statement coming from 
someone who has a doctorate in economics. Surely, all members must know that the minimum wage, by 
and large, is paid by a small businessman. It is, by and large, small businessmen who pay the minimum 
wage. They hire the unorganised workers. Small businessmen don’t make the decisions as to how many 
people they are going to hire, whether they are paying them $4.25 or $4.50 an 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
82 

hour. As someone who, in a sense, is a small business and hires people. I make the decision that 
everyone else does. I decide how many people I need and I hire them. 
 
To say that one is going to increase employment by suppressing the minimum wage surely is just simply 
not credible, Mr. Speaker. It is bad economics. There is general agreement by economists that it will be 
the consumer who leads us out of the current recession, as the consumer has led our economy out of the 
past several recessions. Increased consumer spending will lead to increased business confidence, and 
we’ll begin to move out of the recession. Surely that general consensus among economists should 
suggest to members opposite that rather than oppressing those on minimum wage, you should be 
increasing the minimum wage. Those people, by and large, spend all of what they get. 
 
It is also, I may say, unfair and in very sharp contrast to the way members opposite have treated their 
friends – a very, very sharp contrast to the salaries which have been paid to the political appointments of 
members opposite. I’m not going to slander anyone by using the word “political appointments,” for I 
may refer to someone who may well not be, but let me refer to one Derek Bedson. He was appointed, as 
I understand it, at a salary of $85,000. As I further understand it, his predecessor’s salary was $67,000. 
That is a pretty healthy increase. Surely, if you can grant such exorbitant salaries to your own friends, 
you can do something for those who have to get along on $4.25 an hour, who have no hope of ever 
seeing any fraction of $85,000 a year. 
 
I could go on and list other salaries of personal aides who have been appointed by this government. The 
level of salaries paid to executive assistants, special assistants and political appointments is 
unprecedented and without parallel in any provincial government in Canada. You may or may not be 
able to make an argument that that makes good sense. I don’t know how you would justify that. I don’t 
suppose you will ever get around to trying to justify it. Surely, when you compare that with the way you 
have oppressed those on minimum wage, you must experience some qualms of conscience at that kind of 
discrepancy. 
 
This province did not have the highest level of unemployment in Canada. Indeed, we vied for several 
years with Alberta for the lowest level of unemployment in Canada. 
 
Unemployment in this province is one the rise. I don’t think anyone is blaming members opposite for the 
unemployment and for the recession. I think many members of the public are asking what is being done 
about it. The day is gone when you people can simply blame somebody else for the problem, and say, 
“Why doesn’t somebody do something?” there is a good deal you can do. Some of the actions you have 
taken have been downright counterproductive. You have, I am told (although you have not announced it) 
put a freeze on government-funded construction. I recognize that some of that might not have gone 
ahead, what with the construction strike, but some of it would have. And to the extent that it would have, 
it would have alleviated some of the unemployment which exists in our society today. 
 
But more important than that is your approach to your budget. Just for openers, it appears we will not 
have budget until 1983. it appears we will get something called a mini-budget in the fall. It appears we 
will get something. Someone was merciful to your Minister of Finance and did not ask him to define 
what a mini-budget is. It appears we won’t get a budget until 1983. I suggest to the members opposite 
that is downright irresponsible. At a time when this province is beginning to face serious economic 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
83 

problems, you people dither, study, review and procrastinate for what is apparently going to be a full 
year. This province will not have a budget in the normal sense in 1982. Your approach to the budget 
leaves a great deal to be desired. 
 
In the budget that the former government introduced in March there was capital spending totalling 
almost $2 billion. It would have created many thousands of new jobs that at this point in time are very, 
very badly needed – much more needed than we thought when we introduced that budget. That is what 
this government should be doing. You are doing nothing. You are studying. You are reviewing, 
procrastinating, and you remain undecided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer for a moment to something I have made some public comments on, and that 
is the public service firings. I really wonder how some members opposite square what they have done 
with their consciences. I don’t know very many of the new members; I know some. I know some of you 
are people with integrity, people who are sensitive, people with a conscience. I really wonder how you 
square the callous, cruel treatment which you have meted out to some of Saskatchewan’s public 
servants. I really wonder how you square that with your conscience. I want to name a couple of names. I 
want to use them because I have used them before, and because I happen to know them. 
 
One was Dennis Foley. He was my deputy for about three years. He was not a card-carrying New 
Democrat. To the extent that I ever knew what his politics were, I assumed him to be something other 
than NDP. But I never knew and I never asked. That was the kind of relationship which we had. I know 
members opposite think that this is a great joke. I tell you if you ever had to go home to tell your wife 
and family that there is no more pay cheque, that’s not a joke. 
 
Dennis Foley was no New Democrat. He may have made some contributions to someone to whom he 
had some personal loyalty but he wasn’t a card-carrying New Democrat. He was a very, very able public 
servant and a fine human being. And you people, because you misunderstood, apparently, donations he 
made, fired him. 
 
I’m going to mention someone else, Liz Dowdeswell. I worked with Liz Dowdeswell for three years as 
well – not the same three years. She was deputy minister of culture and youth. I have no idea what Liz 
Dowdeswell’s sins were. I have no idea what you people think it was, what heinous sin you people think 
she committed. It may have had something to do with the fact that her brother was an executive assistant, 
was one of the 69, as I understand it, who were released. Perhaps it was guilt by association. 
 
I’ve used the word before – McCarthyism. That’s not too strong a term. Senator Joe’s great sin was not 
that he was anti-Communist (plenty of people were rabidly anti-Communist in that era); his sin was that 
he made assumptions about people and then acted on them in the public forum. That’s just what you’ve 
done. You have made assumptions about people, some of which are erroneous, and you’ve acted on 
them in the public forum. You have not just fired them; you have embarrassed them publicly in front of 
the whole province. 
 
Apart from the callous manner in which you have approached it, I wonder if you’ve asked yourself if 
that’s really in the best interests of the public of Saskatchewan. The public of Saskatchewan has a pretty 
important interest in how good the public service is. When word gets out, as it is, that you don’t cross 
the boundaries of this province unless you get a Tory membership, you’re going to have difficulty hiring 
the best public 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
84 

servants. 
 
Far more fundamental is just the simple question of human rights. Surely in 1982 it is not beyond 
question that people have as one of their fundamental freedoms freedom of association. Surely that 
doesn’t have to be restated in this day and age. The right has been stated in the UN declaration, has been 
restated. Reading from the Saskatchewan Human Rights Code (this is a straight lift out of the 
Saskatchewan Bill of Rights, enacted, I believe, in 1945 in the first session of the CCF government): 
 

Every person and every class of person shall enjoy the right to peaceable assembly with others and to 
form with others associations of any character under the law. 

 
It’s been around for 37-some years. Members opposite may recognize the author of the following 
paragraph: 
 

It is hereby declared and recognized that in Canada there have existed and shall continue to exist 
without discrimination by reason of race, national origin, colour, religion or sex the following human 
rights and fundamental freedoms, namely, (e) freedom of assembly and association. 

 
It’s a sad day when the party which bears the same name as the one led by the former prime minister 
must be reminded of such a fundamental freedom. It’s a sad day when it has been trampled in the 
manner in which it has. 
 
The member for Regina Rosemont referred to 11 years of mismanagement and how fortunate the public 
was to be rid of this mismanagement. Well, let me say to the member for Regina Rosemont that he has a 
different definition of mismanagement than many others. Eleven balanced budgets in 11 years – that 
hasn’t struck the banking fraternity as being mismanagement. And this province’s credit rating shows 
the very high respect which the banking fraternity has for the management which the former government 
gave this province its finances. It didn’t strike the Conference Board of Canada as being 
mismanagement. Indeed, they described this former government – they described the province – as being 
the best managed in Canada. So your definition of mismanagement is different from some others. 
 
I suppose your definition of management – of good management – is to bring in two admittedly very 
expensive promises without bringing in a budget. If you people had brought in a budget when you 
brought in the gas tax and the mortgage interest reduction and if you could have shown us where the 
money was coming from, then I would feel very differently about it. I might even be prepared to admit 
that all that we said about that during the campaign was wrong, but you haven’t done that. You haven’t 
trifled the public with the question, “Where is the money to come from?” I hear rumours of massive 
deficit. I hear rumours of a $300 million deficit. I ask the members opposite: what’s the logic of that? 
What is the logic of giving people free money today so that tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow, their 
children or their grandchildren can pay for it? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — At today’s interest rates. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What is the logic of that? Somebody here says, “at today’s interest rates.” If 
you were borrowing it to create jobs or for job-creating projects, that might be different, but you’re not. 
It’s your campaign of free money. When I ask members opposite how on earth you justify this, I get two 
answers. Some say to me, 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
85 

“Well, we won the election, didn’t we?” And I say to members opposite that if you think you can 
proceed in a democratic society by promising the public whatever they want and giving it to them, you 
are going to be sadly mistaken. You simply cannot give the public everything it wants when it wants it. I 
refer to the great British Conservative, Burke, who said that you owe the public not your acquiescence 
but your judgment. So to say that you’ve promised the public free money and they’ve found it attractive 
is pretty then justification if you can’t pay for it. 
 
The second answer I often get is, “Well, it will create jobs. Put all this money back into the economy, 
and it will create jobs.” I say to members opposite that is illogical. It’s contrary to Keynesian economics 
which have, by and large, governed our public financing. Let me say a bastardised form has governed 
our public financing. Keynesian economics said, of course, that during though times you run a deficit. 
You make it up with a surplus in good times. The problem has been that most governments have only 
understood half the equation. You run a deficit in bad times; you run a deficit in good times. The 
exception is this province. The exception, I say, was this province. I don’t believe for one moment that 
you people, no matter how long you are in office, and I don’t expect that to be very long, will ever again 
balance the budget, because the kind of over expenditures you are making are not in any sense one-time 
expenditures. This is not a one-time expenditure on a capital project. What you’re doing is destroying a 
very important part of the tax base of this province, and that isn’t something that will last one year or 
two or any definite term – it’s forever. 
 
What we’re seeing in this province is Reaganomics, and I’d be disturbed enough about that if you people 
thought of the idea. Not only have you not thought of it, but you’re introducing it in the province after it 
has been discredited in so many other jurisdictions. Reaganomics has brought unprecedented inflation 
and unprecedented unemployment to the U.S. by all agreement, the situation is the worst since the ‘30s 
and we’re not out of it yet. Indeed, it is so bad that this ultraconservative President, who should have had 
nothing but friends on Wall Street, has nothing but critics on Wall Street. As someone said, “To be a 
conservative Republican President and to be in office for 18 months and to have a sea of critics on Wall 
Street is quite a feat indeed.” But Reagan economics has managed that. 
 
We are currently seeing high deficits, just what you are visiting on this province, which then go on and 
lead to other problems. It may not lead to a deficit in the Saskatchewan context – it won’t lead to a 
devaluation of the currency – but it will create other problems. It has been tried in the United Kingdom. I 
had a copy of the Economist about a month ago. The word used to describe the British economy was 
“de-industrialization.” It wasn’t just recession. The whole industrial system of Britain is collapsing. 
 
But you don’t have to look abroad. You can look to Manitoba. Look to that popular government, the 
one-term government of Sterling Lyon. During a period of time when other provinces in other parts of 
this country were enjoying prosperity, the Manitoba economy degenerated, and Sterling Lyon is a 
memorable but one-term premier. 
 
Reagan economics would be bad enough if it were a new idea (something you people had thought of), 
but to have deficit financing, Reagan economics, discredited so often, it is just unfathomable that you 
people would visit that on this province. 
 
Something was said by one of the members, I think it was the member for Rosemont, that the election 
had swept socialism from this province. I say that it didn’t. I say that it 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
86 

swept socialism for the poor from this province and substituted socialism for the rich. I think your 
mortgage plan is a prime example of helping people at the wrong end of the scale. There was a mortgage 
plan introduced in the budget in March, and that mortgage interest reduction plan had some upper limits, 
so that, firstly, those who benefited from it would be the neediest, and secondly, the cost of that plan was 
manageable. The cut off there was about $35,000. You people have gone at it the opposite way. You’ve 
got the same cut off; you’re helping those with incomes above that. I am going to get around, in a 
moment, to an article in the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. I’ll leave that just for a moment. 
 
What you have done, in fact, is to assist the more affluent in society with your plan, and I think you are 
going to face some criticism beyond the Star-Phoenix when that face becomes more widely known. 
 
The gas tax: whom did the gas tax help? It didn’t help the farmers very much. A vast majority of their 
expenditures are not on car gas. They spend far more on other petroleum products, which aren’t part of 
your plan. No one could figure that out during the election. 
 
I read all the Tory ads and I even equipped myself with a copy of the handbook. Now, I frankly couldn’t 
tell whether or not you were going to assist . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I may say that I didn’t find in 
any piece of Tory literature a very precise explanation of what you were going to do with that tax. You 
obviously hoped, with some success, that everyone would believe that they would all benefit from it. 
You were successful, but I think you are going to face some discontent out there, when the folk out there 
realize they were duped. 
 
The farmers don’t get much help out of this. People in the city, it’s true, do, but it’s a fairly modest sum. 
I was just doing some calculations driving down here. I would estimate, and it’s nothing more than that, 
that the average city dweller puts 15,000 miles on his car every year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I 
have to apologize; I’m dealing in miles. Members will forgive me if I don’t calculate quite as quickly in 
kilometres; 15,000 miles should burn about 600 gallons. 
 
Perhaps that’s a little high, perhaps that’s a little low, but let’s take the figure of 600 gallons at a cost of 
$1,048. Of that, you have probably reduced that cost by under $200. So you are giving the average city 
dweller a benefit of less that $15 a month. 
 
So whom has this benefited? I’ll tell you who the primary benefactors have been. They have been the 
trucking industry and businesses who employ travellers. The vast majority of businesses who employ 
travellers are the larger businesses. Not an awful lot of small businesses employ travellers. So you have 
benefited big business and you’ve benefited the trucking industry. I say, Mr. Speaker, that what is being 
introduced in this session is not socialism for the poor (I couldn’t agree more) but what is being 
introduced is socialism for the rich. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: - What about school buses? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do you want to hear about school buses? I’ll let the member opposite talk 
about school buses. There aren’t a lot of them, I may say, in my riding. 
 
I want to deal for a moment with rent controls, if I may . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would like to get 
the Assembly off the question of school buses and get on to something 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
87 

that is important in Regina Centre, and that’s rent controls . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I never said 
education wasn’t important. I want to talk about rent controls. 
 
I may say that I can sympathize with the minister when he deals with the subject of rent controls, I say 
this guardedly, but I know that in one sense it’s unfair that all that is left of the wage and price controls is 
the rent controls, and to that extent they are unfair. By the same token, I say to members opposite that in 
the current context they are absolutely essential. Until we can get a decent vacancy rate among apartment 
dwellers (and it is very tight right now), we simply must retain rent controls, and we also have to 
strengthen them. 
 
I have some sympathy for the minister for another reason, and that is that he has been getting a large 
number of letters from me, by my constituents who are complaining about rent controls not being tough 
enough – rent controls which don’t control rents, and which allow rent increases of 20 per cent and 30 
per cent. 
 
I say to the Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs that we not only need to retain rent controls, 
we need to strengthen them, and I look forward to the minister considering and doing that. More than 
considering – I look forward to the minister doing it. 
 
I want to speak about one other item which is important to Regina Centre, and that is something called 
the multimodal station. For those people outside Regina who may not be familiar with it, it was a project 
to convert the Union Station into a centre not just for rail transportation (which was what it had been), 
but into a centre for bus transportation with an integration with air transportation. 
 
There were thought to be three benefits from this. I think the primary benefit was that it would be an 
attempt to rationalize travel, because bus travel, train travel and air travel each have their own 
efficiencies. Bus travel is just as fast and a lot easier on fuel over the short run. Train travel probably 
makes some sense over the intermediate run (the 150 to 600 mile run). Anything over that it is more 
convenient to go by air. The philosophy was that these would be integrated and rationalized, and that in 
some way we would be encouraging people to use the most efficient form of transportation for what they 
were doing. 
 
The project, in another way, would preserve an historical building. The Union Station (I am told by those 
who are experts in such things) is one of the finest remaining examples of railway stations as they were 
built around the turn of the century. Also important to the Regina members was the fact that it would 
make a very significant contribution to downtown Regina. 
 
An agreement was signed with the federal government whereby we would proceed with the multimodal 
station and develop it, and allow it to attain its full potential and allow the downtown of Regina to attain 
its full potential. I only say to the members from the city of Regina, for which there are now many more 
on your side than ours, that I hope you pursue this proposal and I hope the proposal doesn’t die. It’s a 
good proposal for transportation and it’s a good project for the city of Regina. 
 
I want to end with an article from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix. The Saskatoon Star-Phoenix has not 
always been known as an NDP house organ, but you might not know it by the virulence of the criticism 
recently. Members must forgive me when I have to read 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
88 

part of this to set the background for it. Not everybody may subscribe to this magazine which I’m 
finding more and more merit in as I see its approach to the government. 
 

Out on the campaign trail PC Leader Grant Devine promised . . . 
 
I should say it’s Thursday, June 17. 
 

Out on the campaign trail PC Leader Grant Devine promised the now famous 13.25 per cent 
mortgages up to $50,000. The fundamental difference, and most appealing to some, was the lack of 
conditions attached. NDP packages were less generous and, more importantly, had qualifying strings 
attached. Devine, aiming for the middle class vote, plugged throughout the rest of the campaign that 
his mortgage aid did not discriminate. The housing industry would flourish because that pent-up 
demand for housing would be unleashed by those who could not afford them at existing high rates, 
who would suddenly be able to afford to buy a home with cheap money. 
 
There’s no doubt it was appealing. This promise and others sent voters’ expectations soaring and 
landed the NDP on the mat on April 26. when the new cabinet was sworn in, voters had very right to 
believe that those raised expectations would be met. The day his helmsmanship was official, Premier 
Devine cancelled the provincial tax on gasoline, putting the price on par with Tory Alberta. 

 
I’m not quite sure that portion is accurate, but I’ll forgive him. 
 

Since then, though, the Conservatives have had a chance to look inside the government books. And 
what they found seems to confirm what they were told in opposition. And that is, when they called 
for more expensive programs, the amount of money was limited. Health Minister Graham Taylor 
was the first to indicate that the PCs may not have been telling the whole truth during the campaign. 
“Just because they criticized the NDP for not spending enough on health care does not mean the new 
government plans to spend more,” He told the press conference and the bewildered reporters. 

 
I may say that I predict that the Minister of Health is going to have to preside unhappily over a 
deterioration in this province’s health system. That will come about not because you people intend that, 
or you want that. Buy by destroying the tax base of this province, you’re taking away the finances which 
you need to run a health care system, and health is a very, very expensive item. And I’ll make the 
prediction that the Minister of Health will preside over a serious deterioration in health care. 
 
Others followed, using a variety of approaches. Paul Rousseau, minister in charge of Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance, was one of the many in opposition to decry the rise in vehicle insurance over the 
past couple of years. Now he says the rates may have to rise again, although only to compensate for NDP 
errors. He used a peculiar strain of bafflegab to explain the Tory increase to the bewildered reporters. It 
could actually be a reduction, if rates only increased by 6 per cent, and inflation is running at 12 per cent. 
 
I will make another prediction, and that is that by the time we see the rate increase in SGI, the public will 
happily settle for 6 per cent. What the minister in charge of SGI is trying to do is talk his way out of 
something. He knew when they promised to take away the gas tax that a portion of that gas tax went into 
SGI, and that was no secret to 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
89 

members opposite because they did nothing but criticize us for subsidizing SGI rates in that fashion. 
However, they conveniently forgot that during the election, and now they are trying to talk their way out 
of it. 
 
Well, onward. At a press conference April 1 . . . Oh yes, I forgot one choice part of this. 
 

The environment minister, Mr. Neil Hardy, was more upfront about the new tune whistled from the 
government benches. In opposition, Conservatives called for the best scrubbers available to be 
installed at the Coronach power station to cull the pollutants that cause acid rain. Now the 
Conservatives say they cost too much. “That’s politicians for you,” was the minister’s flip-flop 
answer. 

 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . April Fool’s Day is reserved for a very special promise of the 
Conservatives that I will get to in a moment. 
 
On the matter of expectations, the mortgage package caused a quantum leap compared to other promises. 
While the average driver will save $10 to $15 a month (I see the same figure here) because the gas tax 
was eliminated, the press release accompanying the mortgage announcement stated that a home-owner 
with a $3,000 mortgage at current rates would save $143 a month. At the maximum, a mortgage 
covering $50,000, the saving would be $210 a month. However, at the press conference April 1, Premier 
Devine promised there would be no means test. I do recall the Premier after he was elected saying that 
he could not think of anyone who would not qualify, no mortgage holder who wouldn’t qualify for the 
subsidy. “Many people in our cities, especially young families, are staying in apartments because they 
can’t afford to buy.” This is all part of a quotation from the current Premier. “This mortgage reduction 
plan will now enable those families to move into a house.” The Premier said. Now, he’s saying that only 
those who can afford to own a house will be eligible for the assistance, which means those referred to in 
the press release probably will have to stay in the apartments. 
 
At a recent press conference he confirmed that only those people who qualify for mortgages at the going 
rate will get the subsidy. In other words, the plan will not discriminate against the rich, or the relatively 
rich, but it will contain a means tests. This is the concluding paragraph: 
 

The hopes of some of those who thought they could buy a home (I can well imagine how members 
opposite have not been enjoying this) under the Tory plan have been quashed by this latest qualifier. 
The remainder are simply hoping it is pure coincidence that he announced the program April 1. 

 
Mr. Speaker, from what I said, it will be obvious that I will be voting against the motion. 
 
MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure and a privilege to rise in this House today to speak on 
behalf of The Battlefords. I would like to begin by congratulating you on your appointment to your high 
office. 
 
I would also like to congratulate the member for Estevan, the Premier of the province. In particular I 
would like to congratulate the Premier for the fact that in a few short weeks he could have done so many 
things viewed as wrong by the previous speaker, who stood in this House for 45 minutes to condemn 
them. I think it is unusual that the members down the row have spent so much time telling us that we 
haven’t done 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
90 

anything, and that they could go on for an hour about our shortcomings. I think we will have to do a 
shuffle in speaking after we have been in power for four years, because certainly it will take a week to 
talk about all the things we have done. 
 
I had planned tonight, Mr. Speaker, simply to comment on my riding. The Battlefords, a riding which I 
am very proud to represent, but things which I have heard in the House today preclude me from doing 
that. As a result, I would like to make a few comments on some of the other things which have been said 
here today. 
 
The member for Regina Elphinstone is widely and highly regarded across this province, yet I heard him 
stand today and talk about the public service and dismissals in the public service. I would like to advise 
them that for a short time I was a public servant when that party was in government. I was a public 
servant long enough to receive a very high rating and directives from my then director that I had a very 
bright career in the public service. Not long after that I applied for two jobs in higher positions. I won’t 
say that the best man didn’t win, but both successful candidates in those competitions were defeated 
NDP candidates in the previous general election. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — He also talked briefly about withdrawing grants. Coincidentally, when I left the 
government, I went to work for a corporation funded by a provincial government grant and, 
coincidentally again, during the previous election campaign, the NDP government offered to withdraw 
the grant which funded the corporation I worked for. Now you may be confused because of where I am 
standing in the House, but I did not run as an NDP. I think we want to be fair in these matters, in that an 
honest airing of the record should be taken. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, we live in an era of symbolism, and we are all very familiar with the 
symbol for justice: the two scales in balance. I would like to suggest that the symbol for the previous 
government’s economic – what would you call it? – platform might be a political hack standing with an 
NDP card in one hand and the provincial purse in the other. 
 
I’d like to comment briefly on the speech of the member for Regina Centre. He commented about the 
minimum wage. I agree and have a lot of sympathy for people who have to work at the minimum wage. I 
think it’s a darn shame that in a province like Saskatchewan we have so many people who have to live 
on it. If the previous government had had a little more care and concern for the economic development 
of this province, possibly the issue of the minimum wage wouldn’t be such a concern right now. 
 
He said further that, as with every recession, the consumer will lead us out of it, and I agree with him. He 
will now, because we’ve put money back in his pocket and he has something to spend. 
 
Comments about unemployment were made. I’ve said for some time and I think, in fairness, that we 
have to thank for the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan, or the lowness of it, the government in 
Alberta and the heat that their economy has seen in the recent number of years. 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
91 

With regard to the budget here, if the former government had hired a good bookkeeper maybe we would 
have had a budget by now. But we frankly haven’t figure out how they did their arithmetic, so we’re 
waiting. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: It’ll take a while. 
 
MR. MORIN: — I’m sure it will. The members down the line here also spend a lot of time on public 
service firings. The public service in my riding is the largest employer around. And when I go home – 
and by the way I used to be quite involved with their union, so they feel quite comfortable approaching 
me – the only thing they tell me is, “Don’t quite. Get rid of the hacks. Let it be professional. Let us have 
an opportunity for advancement.” And we’re doing that. 
 
Commenting on Burke, the English conservative who said, “We owe the public not acquiescence but 
judgment,” would it have been good judgment to allow people to continue to lose their homes? Our 
mortgage plan will solve that. 
 
Finally, the member for Regina Centre talked about socialism. In this province, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve 
seen about socialism was that it was sharing of the misery, not the wealth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of The Battlefords is composed of the city of North Battleford and the 
historic town of Battleford. It’s located in west central Saskatchewan on the CNR rail line at the 
confluence of the Battle and Saskatchewan rivers. The first recorded history of the Battlefords stretches 
back to the early 1800s, when the North West Company set up a trading post in that area. Later the 
Hudson’s Bay Company took it over and it proved to be a valuable and profitable trading post for that 
company. 
 
The area in which the Battlefords lie was particularly rich in beaver pelts. So, to this day, we can travel 
to the Battlefords and be greeted by businesses carrying a tribute to the beaver. 
 
In 1875 the Canadian Pacific Railway established a headquarters in the Battlefords. The telegraph lines 
were coming up alongside the railroad and it was decided that the flood plain of the Battle River would 
make a good campsite. At roughly the same time, Sir John a. Macdonald decided to send a garrison of 
Royal North West Mounted Police to the area to try to control the whisky trade – an unusual move for 
him, if historical accounts are accurate. Coincidental to this, government House was moved from near 
Swan River, Manitoba, and built on the high hills overlooking the Battle River. Consequently, in 1876, 
Battleford was the seat of government for the North West Territories. 
 
There were three sittings of the North West Council in the town of Battleford between 1876 and 1881. 
by 1883, for territorial reasons, the federal government decided to move the capital of the territories to 
Regina. The last item removed from the original Government House, Mr. Speaker, was one of the 
confederation tables, which had been moved there by ox cart. That table now graces the Legislative 
Library in the building in which we stand. 
 
The Battlefords has a deep and rich history in the politics of this country. It has also been a strong 
economic centre and continues to be so. The Battlefords are proud to have enjoyed a number of firsts in 
this region. In addition to being the first seat of 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
92 

government in the province, we had the first newspaper printed between Winnipeg and the Rocky 
Mountains. In 1878, P.J. Laurie printed the first copy of the Saskatchewan Herald. The newspaper and 
publishing industry still thrives in The Battlefords and is, in fact, among the largest cumulative 
employers in my riding. 
 
I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, that the settlement was built on Telegraph flats, on the flood plain of the 
Battle River. After a series of higher than normal spring foods, a gentleman named MacDonald’s 
commissioned a survey of the higher ground above the flats with the hope of relocating his warehouse to 
avoid the annual devastation of spring floods. This same Mr. MacDonald was the founder of 
MacDonald’s Consolidated Corporation, a large grocery wholesaler in this province and indeed in this 
country. 
 
In The Battlefords we saw agriculture become king. Farmland around The Battlefords in the beautiful 
rolling hills was renowned as being the best in the country. Settlers flocked to the area. The Battlefords 
became the service centre for the entire region and, in fact, Mr. Speaker, has never recorded a crop 
failure. 
 
The Battlefords are no stranger to adversity. They were keenly involved in the Riel Rebellion of 1885. 
after the signing of Treaty No. 6, they found that many of the Indians in the area didn’t want to go to the 
reservations. At that time they faced a depressed economy and had difficulty in finding an adequate food 
supply. There was a great deal of unrest and the Royal North West Mounted Police felt that there would 
be some trouble. Consequently when the Metis from Batoche in the Duck Lake area tried to enlist the 
support of the Indians in their fight, they found a willing audience. 
 
The major Indian leader in the area was Chief Poundmaker. He was a man of peace, and he tried to avoid 
having any involvement with the Sioux War Chief Big Bear. He found however, that he could not 
control all of his warriors, and when he and Chief Fineday, who was a war chief, tried to negotiate for 
more food at the settlement of Battleford and were subsequently unsuccessful, they found that a number 
of braves sacked the town, and 650 people took refuge in Fort Battleford. 
 
By the turn of the century there were rumblings that the railroad would be built on the north side of the 
river, not on the south where the CPR had originally surveyed. This caused a number of merchants to 
move over and begin the settlement of North Battleford. In addition, there were a number of farms and 
ranches developed on the north side of the river by the Royal North West Mounted Policemen whose 
commissions had expired. As a result, we had the growth of two communities – Battleford and North 
Battleford. Both towns have grown and prospered. They are steeped in tradition, and many of the 
residents there are descendants of the first pioneers. 
 
The Battlefords, in my mind, Mr. Speaker, is the most beautiful area of the province, and I have travelled 
it end to end, side to side. The mist on the hills in the morning and the deep hues that grace the 
landscapes are not to be found anywhere. 
 
It is not uncommon for people to move to The Battlefords, to be transferred there with their jobs, and 
when the time comes to leave, to quit that job and find another means of employment so that they can 
stay in The Battlefords. It is a very special community – a community that takes you and opens its arms 
to you and makes you feel a part of it. 
 
We have traditionally enjoyed prosperous agriculture. We are beginning to see the development in some 
manufacturing, and our real future lies beneath the ground in the 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
93 

heavy oil. We have been all through our history – we’re very much a laboratory there right now – as we 
try to find new ways of taking the oil out of the ground, of upgrading it and making it of more value than 
we currently see it. That creates a severe challenge, but we’ll overcome that challenge as we’ve 
overcome the other challenges which faced us. When people are provided with freedom and flexibility, 
and are in charge of their own lives, the ingenuity which they show is remarkable. 
 
The Battlefords now have an opportunity, and so does the whole province. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to 
represent The Battlefords. And in The Battlefords, we too are proud. We are proud of our past, but even 
more than that pride, we have faith. We have faith in our future – faith in the future that we can carve 
with our own hands, faith in the future that will province opportunities for our young people and for their 
creative ability. That faith has seen us through this fair, and will see us through further. I support the 
motion in support of the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SUTOR: — Mr. Speaker, today as I rise in the legislature for the first time as a member for Regina 
North East, I wish to express to each and every member of this House the sense of pride I have at this 
special time in Saskatchewan’s history. At the outset, I wish to express to you, Mr. Speaker, my 
congratulations on the election to your position of the office of Mr. Speaker, and there is no doubt that 
you will uphold the finest traditions of the parliamentary system. And, Mr. Speaker, I am sure that every 
member in the House holds you in the highest regard. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SUTOR: — Mr. Speaker, these are exciting times for Saskatchewan. For me, that excitement 
started several months back when I decided to offer myself as a candidate for the House in the 
constituency of Regina North East. My decision was based on my abiding faith in free enterprise, 
philosophically coupled with the fact that I saw in the leader and now Premier, Grant Devine, a man who 
could lead Saskatchewan to greatness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no experience can be as grand and as exciting as the campaign trail – getting to know the 
good people, the great people, in their constituencies. I am indebted to the many wonderful people in 
Regina North East who made it possible for me to be here today. 
 
Many months ago, I began the door-to-door trek to meet the families, men, women, senior citizens and 
youth of Regina North East. No matter where I went in the constituency, people told me it was time for a 
change. As time progressed, this mood turned into an upsurge. People told me they were tired of a tired, 
complacent government that had grown indifferent and arrogant after 11 years in office. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the landslide victory on April 26 did not come just because of discontent with the 
NDP government. It came about because people realized that Grant Devine and the Progressive 
Conservative Party offered brand-new, refreshing policies for the 1980s. we offered the people a 
government they could trust, or as our Premier said in every corner of the province, “a government as 
good as the people of Saskatchewan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, words cannot adequately describe the excellent quality of leadership our 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
94 

province has in Premier Grant Devine. He will indeed bring a real sense of destiny and greatness to our 
province, and I can say that I am honored to be part of his team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Progressive Conservative government will make Saskatchewan number one. Our 
province will be the number one place to live and to build a family. During the weeks I visited homes in 
Regina North East. I listened to the people tell me the kind of Saskatchewan in which they wanted to 
live. The people of Regina North East wanted protection from a government that eroded freedom at 
every chance. They told me that there is a chance for high achievement in Saskatchewan, and that they 
no longer wanted any part of a government that no longer listened to them. 
 
The previous MLA for Regina North East did not listen when the people wanted action to improve the 
quality of drinking water in Regina. He did not listen when people wanted to help combat inflation and 
high interest rates. He didn’t listen until it was too late and he thought he could cash a few election 
promises for votes. Well, Mr. Speaker, I stand here as proof that that didn’t work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people of Regina North East opted to endorse the Progressive Conservatives, who offered 
aid to home-owners and to working men and women. The moral of the story is we listened and we care. 
 
For the record, Mr. Speaker, one of the most serious problems in 1982 is the cost of living. Time and 
time again, the NDP said there was nothing the provincial government could do about it. Let me remind 
this House that the member for Elphinstone, the one-time premier of the province, said that it was an 
international problem. At the same time, he and the NDP government squeezed every cent from the 
taxpayers they could, through such things as the 20 per cent sliding tax on gasoline. Mr. Speaker, the 
Progressive Conservative government had the boldness and vision to remove this tax, and that’s what I 
call fighting inflation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SUTOR: — Mr. Speaker, then there were the high utility rates of the NDP. We called for a freeze. 
They laughed. We called for a public review commission. They said no. Suddenly, it’s an election year, 
Mr. Speaker, and the opportunists in the NDP did an about-face. It is little wonder they form a little 
rump group in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as this session begins, I believe we are entering a new era in this province’s history. The 
government of Premier Devine will bring government closer to the people, always realizing that power 
comes from the people, and not from governments. We will restore the human factor in government. We 
will never sacrifice our principles for partisan political gain. We will build a Saskatchewan that will be 
the envy of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, political expediency was the rule of the day, and their expediency brought 
them the worst political humiliation ever – a devastating rejection by the voters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Premier Devine and the Conservative government offer a sound, receptive approach by a 
government to encourage the growth of our economy. Our young people will no longer have to leave the 
province. Business and industry will thrive. We will trust the people, trust them to do what they believe 
in, and it will be best for 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
95 

Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government can encourage participation and can identify opportunity, but it is essentially 
the talent and foresight of the people who, by drawing on government, will ensure the future of this 
province. During the recent election our theme was: “There is much more we can be.” That is true, and 
the overwhelming majority of voters agreed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am honored to be able to serve Regina North East, and look forward to doing it for many 
years. I want to say that I will never forget that the people of my constituency made it all possible. I stand 
here and support the Speech from the Throne, the beginning of a new era for Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMPTON: — I, too, would like to extend my congratulations to you, sir. I would like to 
compliment the Assembly for its wisdom in electing you. Today, tomorrow and in the future, I know I 
will be envied by many, because I have the privilege of being part of a government which will be 
recorded in Saskatchewan’s history as the best this province has ever had. 
 
My name is Lloyd Hampton. I am 41 years of age and married to a wonderful wife whose name is Jean. 
We have two children, and another one expected any day. I was born at Tisdale, Saskatchewan, and 
raised on a mixed farm in the Prairie River area. My parents moved to the province of B.C. while I was 
still in high school and I finished my education in that province. After spending some years in the 
workforce in that province, I moved my family back to Saskatchewan and almost immediately, Mr. 
Speaker, I saw a need for some redirection of our political policies as they were being administered by 
the previous government. Thus, I became involved in politics. The Progressive Conservative Part of the 
Canora constituency last year saw fit to nominate me as its candidate to represent it in this past general 
election. Because of the very in-depth program offered by our party during this campaign, I will elected 
to represent my constituency. I thank my workers for their outstanding effort during the campaign and I 
also thank the thousands who supported me at the polls. 
 
The constituency of Canora is not unlike many others within our province, and yet in many ways it is 
unique. Our area is made up mainly of small farmers of two kinds: those who have homesteaded the 
farms, and those who are now trying to farm as tenants of the ground through its land bank commission. 
Mr. Speaker, it is the farmers in this second group who are patiently waiting, full of optimism, for our 
new program of land ownership so they too can be proud owners of their farms rather than mere 
crop-sharing workers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HAMPTON: — The northern part of my constituency has much marketable timber and so, Mr. 
Speaker, the people are excited about our government’s decision to make things happen in the housing 
and construction industries. There is also a feeling among all the people in general that finally they have 
elected a government that they can be part of and an MLA who will be fair to all, regardless of political 
affiliation – a practice that was not necessarily followed prior to my election. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, brings me to my next point. Our province has already begun to feel and to see the 
effects of our new government under the excellent leadership of Premier 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
96 

Devine and his cabinet. Our leader showed the people of the province his capabilities from the very 
beginning by eliminating the tax on gasoline and, at the same time, by announcing his cabinet, the men 
and women chosen to represent the various departments of government are excellent. Each of them has 
the necessary qualities to make them leaders in their respective offices. 
 
The fairness that was shown by the leader to those in the public service is to be commended, Mr. 
Speaker. I wonder if under different circumstances other leaders would have shown such compassion. I 
hope, Mr. Speaker, that the people out there understand and respect our leader’s decisions in this time of 
transition. 
 
The province of Saskatchewan is beyond doubt one of the most prosperous areas within this country. 
However, we must all work hard to restore confidence and investments from private sectors, and to 
again reach our position of being truly number one in all respects. The government has already made 
several major announcements affecting the welfare and the economy of the populace as a whole. This is 
only the beginning. Every day there will be releases of other significant policies and programs which will 
excite all of us, as we see the full grey lifting and countless hours of sunshine replacing it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier, I am most privileged to be part of this administration and to have the 
opportunity to work with so fine a group of elected members. It’s my prayer that we will all work 
together, remembering why we are here and remembering those we serve, making our province the best 
place in Canada to work, to live and to raise our families under a democratic free enterprise 
administration, a province where our senior citizens may enjoy their families close at hand, a province of 
dignity and respect for all and where all have respect for our province. This, Mr. Speaker, is my goal, 
and I’m sure the goal of my colleagues. I support the motion, and I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. MULLER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Premier Devine and his cabinet for the 
speed with which they dealt with the highway tax on fuel. I’m sure they will deal with the issue of house 
mortgage and agricultural interest rates as soon as possible. 
 
I also wish to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your appointment. You now hold the most important 
position in this House. 
 
I must thank the voters of Shellbrook-Torch River constituency who have placed their trust in me by 
electing me. Mr. Speaker, I feel the people who elected me did so because they felt I could represent 
them well in the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
The unique part about the constituency that I represent is that it has a fair share of farmland spanning its 
boundaries; the Saskatchewan River is to the south, lakes and forests are to the north and there are many 
tourist attractions. We also have forests near Prince Albert, which are used for industrial and recreational 
purposes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first matter I would like to speak on is the farming industry in my constituency, 
particularly grain farming, which is the largest form of farming in my area. Right now the crow rate issue 
is of great concern to the grain producers in Saskatchewan. I don’t think Mr. Pepin realizes how 
important the crow is to the grain farmers. The crow rate was guaranteed to us. Now the federal 
government wants to take it away. As our leader said, it is interesting how they want to protect the East 
on oil 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
97 

prices but are not wiling to protect the West on grain handling. 
 
The companies we compete against in rural trade get their grain to the ocean for less than we do, except 
for those in the northern United States. In order to stay competitive and keep our farmers on the land, the 
country as a whole has to get this grain in export position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also many cattle producers in my area. They too have concerns over beef 
stabilization plans and cow-calf operations. 
 
In the area south of Shellbrook and to the east side of my constituency, near Smeaton and Choiceland, 
people are going into the production of alfalfa seed with the use of leaf cutter bees. The bees themselves 
create some income for the farmers. These are the kinds of industries we have to encourage and support. 
There is also honey production in the Smeaton-Choiceland area because there is an alfalfa pelleting plant 
and it’s owned by local shareholders – another thing that we have to encourage. 
 
I would like to see more industry in the province; perhaps the building of a nitrogen fertilizer plan in 
Saskatchewan should be encourages. Fertilizer is heavily used in Saskatchewan and it all comes from 
Albert. Mr. Speaker, I think we also need, in the agricultural area, increased competition in rapeseed 
crushing, I would encourage that a crushing plant be put into Melfort, which is in the heart of the 
rapeseed growing area. To sum up on agriculture, not only do we have to help those farmers who are just 
starting out but we also have to be concerned with those farmers who have experienced some distress. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to turn to another important industry in my constituency, that being 
tourism. We have some of the most scenic lakes and forests in Saskatchewan. We have to promote 
tourism as much as possible. People come up to our area from all over North America. Tourism creates 
many summer employment positions for students and also adds to the economy of Saskatchewan. We 
also have to promote Saskatchewan fisheries. This creates employment for northern people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on the area of wildlife. There is a large amount of wildlife in the northern 
part of my area consisting of white-tailed deer, elk and moose. We have prairie chicken, ruffled grouse 
and waterfowl. The waterfowl create problems for farmers at harvest time. Farmers are allowed to use 
scare devices to keep them out of their crops, but at times this is not adequate to allow farmers to protect 
their crops. I am very disappointed in the past management of game in the northern area of 
Saskatchewan. For example. The early hunting season allows for too much game lost in the forest areas 
due to lack of tracking snow. Furthermore, the way the moose season is set up, there is a lot of game 
wasted by people’s shooting cow moose and leaving their carcasses in the bush. In the late season it is 
illegal to take cow moose, so the people continue to hunt until they take a bull moose. It is important that 
we protect this wildlife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I feel it is very important that we keep in touch with the people. We saw what happened to 
the NDP when they lost touch. Mr. Speaker, these are some of my ideas. I thank you for letting me 
express them. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
98 

MR. WEIMAN: — Mr. Speaker, if I may be permitted, I would like to preface my maiden speech with 
an apology. I believe I owe an apology to the hon. Member for Regina Centre for my outburst earlier this 
evening. I suppose the outburst was due to a puzzlement. I had been informed that the hon. Member 
opposite was a very honorable man and I suppose that puzzlement is over how an honorable man could 
conscientiously choose to sit in the opposition. So for that I apologize, I found great difficulty in 
listening to the chastisement of the member opposite when I remember back to a couple of months ago, 
and I ask myself” is this the same gentleman who was campaigning for a party that was proposing a $2 
billion-plus budget as well as a promise a week? I find great difficulty with that member’s chastising us 
over the types of priorities that we have in our spending. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hon. Members and staff of the Legislative Assembly, the phrase “it is an honor and a 
privilege” is oftentimes overused. However, in this instance, I believe the phrase to be an understatement 
for it is. Indeed, as a neophyte member of this Assembly, a privilege and an honor to serve this house, 
our province and my constituency of Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
I wish, Mr. Speaker, to offer my congratulations on your election to the position of Speaker. As well, I 
wish to commend the wisdom shown in your selection, which I am sure will be borne out by future 
events in this House. 
 
To the hon. Members, including the hon. Members opposite, also go my sincere congratulations. I 
keenly look forward to working with all members in this legislature for the betterment of our great 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I now wish to bring to the attention of this 20th legislature those exceptional people who 
worked so diligently on my campaign. Their moral support, undaunting participation, and unwillingness 
to consider second place more than anything made possible my victory in Saskatchewan Fairview. Now, 
that is not to suggest that they are the only exceptional people in my constituency. As a matter of fact, 
there are 22,000 of them. 
 
As you are all well aware, my constituency is one of those three newly created constituencies that came 
about through redistribution. It is located on the western extremity of Saskatoon and it is comprised of 
four unique communities: Massey Place, Confederation Park, Pacific Heights and Fairhaven. We are 
bounded by Massey Place on the north, which is well on to 20 years of age, and by the subdivision of 
Fairhaven on the south, which is a relatively young subdivision. In between are located the 
neighbourhoods of Confederation Park, the community that I am proud to have taught in these past five 
years, as well as Pacific Heights, the neighbourly neighbourhood in which I reside. 
 
Our four communities are composed of and blessed with a rich blend of trades people, professionals, 
farmers, and labourers, just to name a few. They range from the retired to the newly initiated in the 
workforce. However, though diversified in backgrounds, my constituents share in two common and 
important pursuits. First, they take great pride in their respective neighbourhoods, but participate fully in 
making their communities a dynamic place in which to live. Second, they share a common concern – the 
present economic conditions burden them with high interest rates, expanding municipal tax levies, 
worrying transportation costs, and escalating utility charges. Another present concern which I will 
expand upon shortly is the requirement of adequate educational facilities in Saskatoon Fairview. 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
99 

Mr. Speaker, the confidence showed at the polls recently requires that our government must make a 
concentrated effort to implement those creative and challenging programs, the mortgage assistance and 
the utility review commission, in just as responsible a manner and in as immediate a manner as we dealt 
with the gasoline reduction at the pumps. 
 
I am proud to represent the trust conferred on me by my constituents, and equally proud to be a part of a 
team that is actively and compassionately pursuing its concerns as well as the concerns of the entire 
province. 
 
Earlier, Mr. Speaker, I had mentioned that it was the drive and determination of a very dedicated group 
of workers that allows me to stand here this evening. I fully appreciate that the people-oriented programs 
of our present government and the dissatisfaction with the past government were of great assistance. 
What I had failed to enunciate was my prime motivation for seeking office in the first place. Quite 
simply, my entry into the political arena was due to the neglect of the past member before redistribution. 
The past neglect has been suffered by my constituency for these past many years. 
 
Specifically, I was prompted by the lack of, and need for, adequate educational facilities in Saskatoon 
Fairview. Mr. Speaker, too long have we had to accept and witness the decline of expenditures in 
education in comparison to other sectors of our society. If I may be permitted, Mr. Speaker, I would like 
to thank the hon. Member for Saskatoon Mayfair for so ably delineating the magnitude of this problem 
this afternoon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIMAN: — Clearly, this deterioration indicates that, as a priority, educational expenditures have 
been allowed to degenerate in this province. One need only look at the construction of schools in the 
high population areas in our communities to be aware of the past mentality that dictated bigger is better 
and bigger is cheaper. The validity of that rationale may be sound in the world of trade and commerce, 
but in the field of education that type of logic holds no legitimacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than ever, we look to our schools to foster wholesome social attitudes. As well, they 
have the responsibility for reinforcing and encouraging the concepts of self-worth and confidence in our 
children. 
 
It is to our schools that we entrust our children for the major part of their pre-adult life, a time when they 
are at their most impressionable stages of human development. With the realities of 
double-wage-earning families, single parent families and changing life styles, our schools are becoming, 
if they are not already, surrogate homes. as a parent, more resemble factories in size than wholesome 
learning centres. Surely, in our society the nurturing of our children, which we recognize as our greatest 
resource in all its potential, demands far more serious and far more generous consideration than a profit 
and loss column in a financial ledger. 
 
I ask that those who might rebut the cost of education as being too expensive in these sensitive economic 
times consider the alternative cost of ignorance. Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that the Japanese, 
who regard education as a top priority, are presently reaping a twofold benefit. A country that lay 
devastated in 1945, the 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
100 

Japanese economic growth and well-being today is envied by the nations of the world. Further, as 
indicated by a recent international study, Japan not only had the greatest intelligence quotient increase 
since World War II of any nation, it is presently the world leader in IQ. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that we 
would be well-advised to consider the correlation between education and economic reward as 
demonstrated by the country of Japan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, too, would be guilty of neglect, and doing a disservice to my constituents, if I did not 
bring to light an immediate and desperate need of my constituency. I speak of the absence of a high 
school in Saskatoon Fairview and area. It is worth noting that if the 22,000 people of Saskatoon Fairview 
were geographically juxtaposed, we would be the sixth largest city in Saskatchewan. We are still 
growing, but as yet there is no high school. 
 
We have eight of the largest elementary schools in all of the city of Saskatoon, with a student population 
of 4,400 to draw from, yet we have no high school. Since we are at the end of the school term, within 
one year almost 800 grade 7 and grade 8 students must leave our four communities to attend 
overcrowded high schools in other areas of Saskatoon. Again, we have no high school in Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
I would be less than honest if I did not report the distaste for the past administration and the frustration 
my constituents feel about the Bergstrom report of this past spring. This report initiated the past 
government’s approval of the construction of two high schools in the northern end of Saskatoon, after 
our having waited these many years in our constituency for the approval of a single unit. However, I am 
totally confident that our government, the present government, with its commitment and determination 
in the field of education, will act upon an equitable solution for Saskatoon Fairview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and hon. Members, we in Saskatoon are celebrating our 100th anniversary. I offer you the 
challenge of rekindling the pioneer spirit. I invite all members and those opposite to be independent, yet 
recognize our interdependence. Be aggressive, yet sensitive to the needs of others. Proceed with trust in 
your potential and in the potential of this great province. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion. 
Thank you. 
 
MR. MARTENS: — Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege for me to rise in this first session of the 20th 
legislature to say thank you to all the people who have worked so hard for me during the election 
campaign. I would like to congratulate all those here who were elected. It’s an honor for me to sit 
together with you. 
 
I’d like to also congratulate you on your election as member for Rosetown-Elrose and as Speaker of this 
legislature, and also the member for Shellbrook-Torch River on his election as Deputy Speaker of this 
House. 
 
I would like to thank and congratulate the Premier, the member for Estevan, on his fine choice of 
cabinet. The Premier was a forceful inspiration for me before the campaign began and also during the 
campaign. The miles, hours and family sacrifice all indicate to me a strong, purposeful motivation, a 
desire to see this province become a leader in developing a stronger, more well-rounded economy. 
 
I would also like to acknowledge the Premier’s choice of two women for the cabinet: the member for 
Maple Creek and the member for Swift Current. These members have 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
101 

shown to us quality leadership from a feminine point of view, and I will be pleased to continue to work 
together with them as representatives of the Southwest. 
 
The Morse constituency, which I represent, is made up of people who are involved in agriculture. I 
believe the diversity of agriculture in this constituency is representative of the imagination of the people 
and their desire to grow and become a vital part of the productivity of the province. They are people who 
have worked hard to make their farms become viable operations, many of them have been willing to 
sacrifice time and energy fighting the elements of wind, heat, hail and storm. 
 
There are two areas in agriculture I would like to deal with that are prominent in the Morse constituency. 
I’m only going to single these two out and deal with them in some detail. The others I will deal with later 
when I have an opportunity. 
 
The first one is the dairy industry. In the milkshed that covers the entire southwest corner of the 
province, there are 63 milk producers. Forty of these are located in the Morse constituency. Most of 
them are located in the Wymark-Waldeck-Rush Lake-Herbert area, with some at Hodgeville. Before the 
members opposite think that these are all through FarmStart, I would like to remind them that they are 
two-, three-, and sometimes four-generation dairies. That was prior to the implementation of FarmStart. I 
wonder too, Mr. Speaker, whether they have had, in their constituencies, the rural parts of the province, 
bankruptcies in the dairy industries. Well, we have had that there. 
 
Over the last eight years production has increased, and the limitation factor on its increase is the control 
of the market share quota that is available to this province under the national supply program. The size 
of the dairy herds varies from 50 to 150 milking cows, with an average of more than 50 per dairy. 
Allowing for the dry stock, heifers and calves, the total dairy cow population is estimated at about 100 
per dairy or about 4,000 head. In addition to the milk producers in the Swift Current milk shed there are 
about 400 cream producers. Milk from this shed is processed in two plants in Swift Current. The one is a 
fluid processing, butter manufacturing plant, and in addition there is a cheese processing plant. 
 
The cheese plant is the only one in the province, and it is there that they manufacture both cheddar and 
specialty cheeses. Because of the competition from the plants manufacturing cheese in the eastern part of 
Canada, the plant doesn’t operate to its maximum capacity. For this reason, 270,000 pounds of milk per 
year must be shipped to Saskatoon where the milk is manufactured into skim milk. It is also there that 
the excess is manufactured into butter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you may wonder why I go into such details about the milk production in my constituency. 
Well, to support such an industry it is very obvious that a lot of feed needs to be produced. The milking 
industry slowly developed around the area of Rush Lake, where water was made available through the 
development of irrigation in the lake by the Government of Canada through The Prairie Farm 
Rehabilitation Act. I am honored in that instance to have had an uncle be part of that development 
through the Department of Agriculture in Swift Current and the research station there. 
 
The concept of a spring flood was introduced with dikes and ditches to direct the flow of water in this 
development. As the need for more feed for not only the milk producers grew, the beef producers also 
became aware of their needs to develop a winter feed supply. During the blizzard which we had just 
recently, it was brought to my attention that we have over 300,000 cows in the southwest portion of the 
province of 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
102 

Saskatchewan. Many people, through their imagination and initiative, have developed irrigation to 
provide feed as a source of winter supply for their cows. 
 
In doing some research for my talk this evening, I asked the PFRA in Swift current to give me the 
volume of acres under irrigation in the Morse constituency. There are 30,000 acres. The majority of this 
water is water which is used through the Swift Current Creek-Duncairn water shed area. These dams and 
ditches were built and operated by the PFRA. The majority of land and irrigation in this area is used to 
produce hay. If we would assume that all of it is, the total of production from those 30,000 acres would 
be equivalent to 120,000 tons of hay. 
 
There was also another area I looked at. That was the total volume of feed transported into the province 
of Saskatchewan during the past two years. It was brought to my attention, Mr. Speaker, that through the 
weigh scales in Medicine Hat the highest run they had in one single day was 104 truck loads. Now, 104 
truck loads of hay at 600 bales a load is 60,000 bales. I thought this was a serious problem. The people 
who had the transportation assistance paid to them were grateful for that. But it deals with a problem that 
is prevalent today and has been for the last 10 years. If the $9 million paid out by this province in the last 
two years to bring hay into this province as a subsidy payment had been made in irrigation, Mr. Speaker, 
then today we would have that hay to sell for next year. We would have that hay to move into our 
ranches and farms in the Southwest that desperately need it. That assistance helped a lot of livestock 
owners for this period of time, but again I say if that $9 million that was spent during those two years 
had been spent in the development of irrigation, the demand for that would have been there. The need 
would have been met, and we would have developed again a resource for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would also like to indicate some research that I’ve done regarding the development of the South 
Saskatchewan River Dam project. I was reading in the reports we just received within the last few days 
that the total development in district one of the Outlook irrigation project is 35,000 acres. I would 
suggest that is very minimal in proportion to the total volume that could be – the total volume being very 
nearly 480,000 acres left to develop. I think we need in this province greater development in that area 
and as the Premier has suggested, on many times during his campaigns during the past few years, 
irrigation probably needs the greatest emphasis in this province. I agree with him. There is a definite 
need in Saskatchewan to develop a diversified agriculture to give a balance to the economy and also to 
provide a definite reason for people to earn a good living in the rural part of Saskatchewan. 
 
The development of oil in the Southwest has given to the area a lot of the stability needed for a strong 
economy. It seems to me, from the departure of the small, independent oil field service in the last 10 
years (and we heard a little bit about it this afternoon from the minister), that the industry will need a 
demonstrative invitation to even consider coming back. Those that have stayed had to demonstrate some 
intestinal fortitude going into other areas of service just to stay in business. Some went into supplying 
water to put up irrigation systems so the dust wouldn’t fly. Some went into insulation programs. In these 
ways, these oil field service units tried to stay in business. Some positive indications from the premier, 
such as “The province is open for business,” have impressed a lot of them and they are encouraged by it. 
They are encouraged by it to stay and to help build from where we are now. The appearance of 
confrontation with government seems to have been eroded. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to compliment the Premier for his moving on the energy issue 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
103 

as we promised during the campaign. It was precise; it was to the point; it was the first major campaign 
commitment and the Premier delivered it. It was a commitment that had a major impact during the 
campaign, and it will continue to have a major economic impact in the province. 
 
In addressing the impact that it will have in rural Saskatchewan, I took the liberty of looking at some of 
the budgets that the school units have proposed during the past few months, and I discovered that the 
rural divisions in the Morse constituency will get a major benefit of almost two mills. It’s a 
transportation grant they don’t have to apply for; it’s a grant directly from the people to their own school 
system, or a savings on the taxes collected. 
 
The rural municipalities will also have a cost saving in their budgets because of a reduction in the costs 
of energy of also nearly two mills. This is a far-reaching service to the province of Saskatchewan, 
reaching right down into the cost of living for every vehicle operator in this province. People were 
required, by the former administration, to pay a sizable road tax imposed on a percentage basis on a 
commodity that is essential for the economic growth of the people of this province. Whether the tax 
saving is on energy, whether it happens to fall to industrial development, tourism, agriculture or labour, 
we all are beneficiaries of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are and will continue to be actively promoting policies for the betterment of all the 
people of Saskatchewan. This government has obviously gained support from all areas of the province, 
from most political philosophies, and I am pleased that the people of the Morse constituency are no 
exception. 
 
I am also pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the throne speech had in it provisions for reducing the cost of 
interest for the home-owners. This will bring to the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to be able to 
purchase, pay for, and eventually own their own homes. it makes the costs reasonable. I am also pleased 
that it includes so many of the people who were forced to sacrifice other essentials to pay their 
mortgages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan decided they wanted it, and here we are delivering what we 
promised. It’s a commitment that will cost the government a great deal, but we’re not forgetting that we 
get it from the people in the first place. The people of Saskatchewan work hard to earn it, and we’re 
allowing it to flow back to them so that they again feel the security of owning their own homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe there are two basic reasons people immigrated to this country. Others may be 
included, but I think these are basic. The first one is the freedom of religion, which is the right of people 
to place God and the worship of God in whatever perspective they want. For my family in the Soviet 
Union this freedom had been removed. When the decision was made to come to live in Canada, the only 
choice they had was to come or to change to a humanistic socialist philosophy. For many in my 
constituency this was the only choice they had. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second reason people came to this country was the freedom they now enjoy, the right to 
private ownership. 
 
Private ownership does many things for people, but most important, I feel, is that the people gain the 
right to control their own destinies. Mr. Speaker, these rights are fundamental to me and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. When we consider the statistics that involve private ownership in this province, and 
relate them to the Dominion of 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
104 

Canada, I am pleased to say that I believe that these people believe in private enterprise. These rights are 
the backbone of our society. They are principles for which this government stands; they are principles 
which I believe must be guarded; they are principles which need to be protected by all the people of the 
Assembly. I also believe these principles need to be guarded and protected nationally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because I know this government will work fairly with the people of Saskatchewan with a 
view to sensible, positive government, I will support the motion and oppose the amendment. Thank you. 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, fellow members of the 20th legislature of Saskatchewan. I’m 
honored by the citizens of Melville to come here and speak on their behalf. In the 77-year history of our 
constituency, now called Melville and formerly called Qu’Appelle North and Pheasant Hills, we’ve had 
a great tradition of capable leaders, and I am pleased to say that I am the first Progressive Conservative 
member elected. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Some of you may not live long enough to see me be the last. But I don’t wish 
anyone ill; I’m just prophesying. I want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker. I see you sitting there in your 
high chair that looks like a throne. I’m new around here and I don’t know the official title. It reminds me 
of a judge. I’ve had the pleasure of speaking and taking part in arguments in all of the courts in this 
province, even the courts of appeal. I would say that I will treat you with high esteem, as I have treated 
all the other judges. I consider you to be the judge of this, the final part of this province, where we make 
laws rather than interpret them. You will have my co-operation and I will try to control myself. At times 
it may be difficult. I will do my best. 
 
April 26, 1982, was an historic day for our constituency and I might say, for the entire province. The 
people of this province decided to return to strong, sensible leadership which had existed earlier in our 
history – I must say, much earlier in our history. I’m going to refer to some of the history of the great 
leadership of my constituency. I’ve been elected to represent a constituency which has had a proven 
tradition of capable leaders. The Hon. James G. Gardiner, our fourth premier, resided in Lemberg, 
Saskatchewan, and his relatives still farm his homestead. I might say that I believe (although it’s a secret 
ballot) that they supported me, although I must confess some people in my constituency didn’t. I will try 
my best to change their minds over the next four years. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — But we’ve had a tradition. We’ve had three federal ministers of agriculture 
represent us in Ottawa. The first was the Hon. William Richard Motherwell from Abernethy, 
Saskatchewan. Those people who travel in my constituency can visit his restored homestead – I should 
say partially restored homestead. The project has gone on for 15 years. I understand. Hopefully, this 
government will be able to complete it. But you can visit his homestead three miles south of Abernethy, 
Saskatchewan. I invite you to turn off Highway No. 22 and do so, if you have the opportunity. 
 
The second of our great leaders was the Hon. James G. Gardiner from Lemberg, Saskatchewan. I would 
say that he was truly a great man, such as can no longer be 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
105 

found in the Liberal Party and, I might say, the NDP as well. 
 
In the southern half of our constituency we are blessed to still have a great man represent us, the Hon. 
Alvin Hamilton, MP for Qu’Appelle-Moose Mountain, who still capably represents us. So we have had 
three ministers of agriculture. I can tell you that agriculture is important in our constituency. 
 
I’m honored to follow in the footsteps of these great men. I was pleased to note that lawyers are allowed 
in this House; I took a count and I note that our new, fresh government has a 7 per cent representation of 
lawyers. I found it strange that the members opposite say they speak on behalf of the poor. I’ve always 
found them to have a great dislike for lawyers like me – we being such purportedly rich mean. But they 
have 33 per cent representation of lawyers in their caucus. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Good lawyers are found in court. I know you’re going to tell me that I’m here 
because I’ve no business elsewhere, but I assure you that’s not the case. It’s not money that drove me 
here. 
 
Before I became a lawyer, I had an honest profession as a farmer. We have, I understand, 20 honest 
farmers in our caucus. I’m in wonderful company here. It makes me feel at home. The farmers of 
Melville constituency know that I will represent their interests in this Assembly as our former federal 
members . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . In playing the cornerback position here, I have difficulty 
understanding the interjections. But I would be pleased to hear them. I don’t want to miss anything here. 
I say cornerback because I understand Saskatchewan has a successful football team and I hope not to be 
cut. 
 
I was saying that I will represent the farmers of my constituency in the tradition in which they have been 
represented in the past. I promise them strong representation. I think sometimes we forget that 
agriculture is still the mainstay of our province, and I can tell you that I won’t let anyone forget that in 
my 4, 8 or 12 years here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Now my constituency of Melville is typical of our province. One-third of the 
voters live on farms, one-third of the voters live in towns and villages, and one-third (I wouldn’t say the 
last third, but the last third mentioned), live in the city of Melville. So we are typical and are a 
cross-section of this province. 
 
In addition, we have four Indian reserves in our area, and I can tell you I am familiar with them, having 
grown up 12 miles from the nearest reservation. Therefore, I consider myself to represent a broad 
cross-section of our society. 
 
I am fortunate to be able to speak German, which is quite common in my constituency, and my wife is 
fortunate to be able to speak Ukrainian, which is a culture that is lasting in my constituency. Of course, 
English and French are our official languages. I am not blessed with the French language, so I hired a 
French secretary. Therefore, my constituents can communicate with me in four languages. They don’t 
always get the answers they want to hear, but I have promised them I will try my best, in whatever 
language they speak. 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
106 

The city of Melville has some records which we are proud of. We have the highest percentage of senior 
citizens of any city in this province. Approximately one-third of all the voters in the city of Melville are 
senior citizens. We have the highest per capita income, and this is largely because of the large number of 
people who work, or did work I should say, at Canadian National Railway. I’m told and advised that we 
also have the highest bank savings rate, which means my people are thrifty. 
 
The constituency lies north of the Qu’Appelle River between No. 9 and No. 35 highways. The northern 
boundary runs on a line from Ituna, Saskatchewan, to Otthon, just south of Yorkton. I told you that our 
mainstay was agriculture, but I can tell you that railroading and potash are also large factors. Melville 
has a potash cleaning track, which cleans the potash cars which ship our potash out of the province. So 
when potash is hunting, Melville also suffers. 
 
We have, and we are fortunate that we have, a gigantic supply of potash under Melville constituency, but 
we are unfortunate that we have no mine within the constituency. Now I understood that, before the 
change of government in the province of Manitoba, they were going to dig a new mine, just a few miles 
on the other side of our border. I couldn’t understand since the change of government there’s no longer 
the required trust in the province of Manitoba and the mine is not proceeding. I realize that economic 
times are bad, but it would certainly invite the people who are going to build the mine in Manitoba to 
come into my constituency, because it is now safe to do business in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — IMCC (International Minerals and Chemical Corporation) has been there longer 
than any other mine and will be there longer than any other mine unless it gets chased out by someone. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You’re touching a nerve. 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — I’m touching a nerve. Potash mines have led me to great disgust over the years and 
I’ll deal with them later. 
 
I want to tell you about my city, Melville, where I live with my neighbours. It has suffered a loss of 
population over the last 11 years. If we lose any more people, we may be put back to the status of a 
town. I will do whatever is possible to reverse that. It is unfortunate that our biggest export is people. I 
must tell you that we have exported very fine people, and I will deal with that later. 
 
On the whole, Melville is a service centre and a CNR divisional point. Prior to the current layoffs on 
Canadian National Railways, CN employed 600 people in Melville. Now many of the younger people 
are working in Jasper, Alberta. It seems there is more traffic. I don’t know what it is – maybe it’s coal 
traffic because potash traffic is down. 
 
The citizens of Melville have told me over and over again (and I heard it for the 10 years since I came 
back) that they felt neglected, and I can tell you that this government will not neglect the city of Melville 
and my constituency. 
 
We have towns in our constituency. We have the towns of Balcarres, Ituna and Lemberg. We have the 
villages of Abernethy, Duff (where I happened to grow up), 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
107 

Hubbard, Fenwood, Goodeve, Grayson, Lebret, Killaly, Otthon and Neudorf, all of which are dependent 
on agriculture for their existence. I recall during the last election campaign that the crows came home 
early. There was much crowing, and it was said that we would not defend our agricultural sector – that 
we would not defend the crow rate. Well, I think the people of Saskatchewan have shown confidence in 
my government and you will see us defend it, and the crow will not go south in the fall. 
 
I’m proud to say that every rural square mile of my constituency is used for grain or livestock 
production. Most of the land is cultivated for grain production and wheat is still king in Melville’s 
economy. 
 
We also have good recreation facilities, most of them given to us by nature. Within the constituency are 
located Katepwa Provincial park, which I believe is the smallest provincial park in Saskatchewan, Valley 
Centre recreational area at Fort Qu’Appelle, which is complete with a nine-hole golf course, Greenspot 
recreational area at Crooked Lake, and two regional parks, one at Ituna and one at Melville, both of 
which have swimming pools. In addition, we have the Thomas Battersby Wildlife Protected Area at 
Goodeve, Saskatchewan, for which the credit must go to our former MLA John Kowalchuk. I must say 
for Mr. Kowalchuk, I’ve always had a great deal of respect for him. I supported him in past years and he 
tried very hard to ably represent us for 15 years. It was unfortunate for Mr. Kowalchuk that the former 
government wouldn’t listen to him. I always felt sorry for him in that regard. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Was he NDP? 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — I don’t know if he still is NDP; he was NDP. 
 
I must say that politics is an awakening for me, because you learn a lot of things. I learned on the count 
that I had received 4,100 and some-odd votes, but I have learned since then that I received 6,000 or 
7,000 votes. I think that we should go out and sell more memberships because people are changing all 
the time. It could be because in only four or five weeks they have seen that this government can produce, 
has started to produce and continues to produce. My learned friends opposite (that’s a term that we learn 
in law; we call our friends learned and I believe that they are misguided but learned) say we are slow to 
move, but I watched the NDP snail on for 11 years and now they want us to be a rabbit. Do they want us 
to run in front of a truck? We want to look where we are going before we jump. 
 
We’ve had some distinguished people from our constituency in the area of sports; the famous Eddie 
Shore in hockey, famous for many reasons but no doubt a great hockey player; Mr. Sid Abel, the brother 
of our mayor and a distinguished hockey player; Mr. John Ferguson, a tough hockey player; and Mr. 
Brian Propp from Neudorf, whose parents now live in Regina – he’s getting better all the time and is a 
credit to our constituency. And we’re not limited to sliding around on ice. We know a curve when we 
see one. We saw it in April; we hit it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — I want to refer you to Terry Poole, who plays for the Houston Astros and whose 
father lives in Melville and who learned to play baseball hitting curves in Melville, Saskatchewan. We’re 
duly proud of him. 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
108 

We have a great asset in our constituency, the Qu’Appelle Valley which forms the southern border. I 
have to share this with the Minister of Health. He’s the Minister of Health but I’ve forgotten where he 
resides . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, my learned friends. I must share this valley with him. 
We’ve had difficulties over the years with the valley – bureaucratic difficulty. 
 
Some senior citizens tell me stories of how bureaucrats demolished their cabins in 1956 by keeping the 
water level high so that the ice turned the cabins into toothpicks. We have bureaucratic problems. We 
had flooding in 1976. now the bureaucrats ever since then have told people who have cottages in that 
valley for 30 years that their cottages shouldn’t be there. The people got tired of this and on April 26 
they rebelled and voted for some freedom. They said to me and to many other people, “Isn’t it my 
business if I want to build a cottage that’s going to get ruined? Is it any of the government’s business if I 
want to build on low ground?” Individuals should have some choice, and if they want a soggy basement 
it should be their choice not the government’s choice. 
 
Now in dealing with the throne speech . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I realize that my learned friends 
appreciate my honesty. You see there was a problem in my young career when I wanted to become a 
lawyer. My mother said I didn’t know hoe to lie and I said that for money I could learn. But I said it as a 
joke, and I’ve tried to be honest, as was my basic nature. Well, my learned friends and members opposite 
find it humorous, but I don’t think what I have to say later will be so humorous. 
 
The citizens of Melville have read the throne speech and they’re truly pleased to hear a fresh and 
enlightened speech. I stand proud to be a part of the new government which has reduced the price of 
gasoline and home interest rates. And don’t let anyone think that I am helping myself, because just 
before the election I paid for my house. We were looking at all of Saskatchewan and not any segment. 
It’s unfortunate that the people of Saskatchewan had to suffer so dearly before they expelled the former 
government. I think it’s truly fitting that they are punished by sitting in the corner of this Assembly. 
 
There are times when people must come forward and offer leadership. When I sat and looked at this 
country and at this province and saw that we were in the seven lean years, I felt it was time to come 
forward and offer leadership. I knew that my income and family would suffer, but I still sought election 
to this Assembly. I was of the opinion that the former government and the federal government in Ottawa 
were misguided. I use the word “misguided” only to be polite because it’s my first speech here. On April 
26, 1982, the people of Saskatchewan confirmed my opinion as to who was misguided. My mathematics 
are not good, but I recall that 9 to 55 is definitely a mandate. Unfortunately, not all the sins of being 
misguided were in Saskatchewan. They are also in Ottawa, and I know that before 1985 comes, the 
people of Saskatchewan and the people of Canada will have returned to the wise leadership of my 
colleagues in Ottawa. 
 
I am pleased to sit on this side of the government. The opposition has no solution for the problems it has 
caused. I can cast the first stone because we are still without sin. Should we ever sin, from where I stand, 
I’m not too concerned about stones. 
 
I don’t deny that the opposition is learned. Now, the learned opposition says it speaks for the poor. I can 
tell you our government speaks for the poor. When we were last in power, there were many poor people, 
but for 44 years the NDP, and for a brief interlude the Liberals, have ridden this province, and it is 
strange that there are still poor people. so I can say that for a change we will speak for the poor. You had 
44 years. In the 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
109 

campaign I met a man, and he said right off (he was an honest man), “I’m NDP; they stand for the poor 
people.” I said, “They have been in power for 44 years and you’re still poor.” He didn’t know what to 
say. Then he said he wasn’t poor any more. 
 
The throne speech shows our government has the answers to the problems; I don’t care if you call it 
Reaganomics or any other kind of economics, we have the answers. I don’t know much about what the 
Minister of finance is doing, but if he has to spend money in these lean years, which I think will end 
(we’re in about the seventh learn year now), we will save it in the fat years; we can’t have people 
starving in the learn years. All my learned friends opposite told us we had a full granary, that the heritage 
fund was doing fine, and where does it turn out to be? Lent to crown corporations – a noble investment 
with no return. 
 
You can’t spend I.O.U.s and you can’t eat I.O.U.s and you can’t take them to the bank and pay your 
mortgage. So, therefore, we are going to put money in the pockets of the people and then they can pay 
their mortgages and the extra money will filter down into our economy. But I must caution the people 
not to expect miracles. For 44 years they have been promised miracles, and I can’t see whey they should 
start expecting them now. 
 
It has taken the socialist in Saskatchewan the last 11 years to put us in our present positions; it has taken 
the socialist in Ottawa 20 years to ruin the entire country. I predict that we will need at least 8 years to 
put Saskatchewan back together again. But it must sadly predict that regardless of any change in 
government in Ottawa it will take at least 12 years to correct the wrongs that Pierre Trudeau has inflicted 
on us. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Now members of the opposition and the former premier, Leader of the Opposition, 
lectured us on freedom. I say first of all, on April 26 he had an example of freedom, and I’m glad that we 
still had it so that we could oust them from office. I am not without sin; I once had the socialist disease. I 
have found that socialism and freedom cannot go together, because there is no flexibility in socialism. I 
can tell you this: the new Government of Saskatchewan will be flexible in meeting the needs of the 
people. 
 
If anyone thinks that we are dogmatic and pure, ruthless capitalists, they can forget it. We follow one 
policy and it is a policy of common sense. How can you govern a province when you have one dogma, 
socialism, and you have to fit into the mould? I said I am not without sin. I once was a part of the 
socialist movement, as they call it. But I saw that the movement was too inflexible to form a common 
sense government, and I quit the socialists and I said I would start my own party, the party of common 
sense. But when Grant Devine became the leader of this party, I found it was not necessary to start my 
own party. I could join other people with common sense, and I did so. 
 
We talk about freedom and we’re lectured. I tell you that my forefathers moved from Germany to find 
land that they could own in what is now Russia on the border of Romania. They went there because they 
could own their own land and when it turned out they couldn’t keep their own land, they came to 
Saskatchewan to own their own land. And what does our former government do? It tries to make them 
into peasants again. And then we were lectured on freedom. They came for freedom and now they are 
going to keep their freedom. 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
110 

I can tell you stories of lack of freedom in the former administration, In 1978, my father was a crop 
insurance adjuster. He received a telephone call from the executive members of the Melville 
constituency reminding him that he had a government job and it would be very nice if he went out and 
campaigned. And what he told them to do with their job I won’t repeat in this House. And he kept his 
job because he had the strength to stand up to that kind of oppression. And who is casting the first stone 
at us? You there. 
 
Words can mean a lot of things. Clearly, we just rid ourselves of the New Democratic government. I 
have secret desires and wishes. I wish that my German relatives could rid themselves of the German 
Democratic Republic and that the people of Cambodia could rid themselves of the title Democratic 
Kampuchea, then they wouldn’t have to send us their boat people. so words can be confusing. I caution 
people not to think that because something is called democratic, it acts democratic. 
 
I want to tell you, since I came here to bare my breast and tell you about my soul, that I once was part of 
the socialist movement but I didn’t fit into the cogs in the wheel. I can tell you why I stand here now. It’s 
because of one great man – a great man who put his hands of my head and straightened it out. That man 
was John Diefenbaker. When I graduated from law school I leaned heavily to the left from the weight of 
my student loan on that side of my body. I received my degree in law. John Diefenbaker gave it to me 
and as I knelt in front of him, he put his hand on my head and said “Do well, young man.” And I can say 
that I tried to do well in the NDP but I just couldn’t see myself doing well. The reason I stand here and 
criticize the members opposite is because they wouldn’t listen when I told them what had to be done. 
And I think the results on April 26 vindicate my opinion that they didn’t listen to their own people and 
they didn’t listen to all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I came from a family that is a reformist family. When the CCF was created, my grandfather supported it 
because it was a reform movement. And he kept supporting it until it became a reactionary movement. 
There’s hardly anyone in this province who would speak against Medicare, and I commend Mr. Douglas 
on its implementation. And I commend the former government for trying to keep it going. But, 
unfortunately, there was more rhetoric than action. Premier Grant Devine and the Minister of Health 
have told the people of this province that we will improve Medicare. I’ve told the people of my 
constituency to watch, not to believe that scare, that Medicare will still be there. And look, today it is 
still there. It will be there next year and the year after. So I wonder what the members opposite will 
campaign about in 1986. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — And I state . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I didn’t know that the members opposite 
were so nervous. There’s nothing to fear from me. I’m a mere backbencher. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — I can tell you that I received an education in socialism as I got older and wiser. I 
found out that it was a program, a movement to share the same pie, but it had no intention of building a 
bigger pie so that everybody could get a bigger piece. Instead, they cut the same old pie into smaller 
pieces and they have equal poverty. Now, in 1975 and 1976 I might say that the last straw appeared in 
my conversion. That’s when the former government decided to buy holes in the ground and shipped 
millions of dollars out of the province so that mining companies could use our money to build 



 
June 21, 1982 

 
111 

competitive mines in other parts of the world. And is it a small wonder now that there’s an oversupply of 
potash when they’ve spent money digging in New Brunswick and in the United States? They were going 
to in Manitoba but they were scared away. 
 
I can tell you this. Our government is a thinking government. Dr. Morris Shumiatcher, whom I’ve had 
occasion to meet in court from time to time, and I might say pleasantly, told me a story (I don’t know if 
it’s his original or not) to the effect that if you’re under 30 and you’re not a socialist you have no heart, 
and that if you’re over 30 and you’re still a socialist you have no brain. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — And it’s fine to have a heart, but you must have a brain so you can build something 
up, so you can use your heart. That’s what we intend to do. In the election I made only two promises. I 
promised sensible government and I promised strong representation for Melville constituency. Now, 
most of my constituents have known me for a long time and they put their faith in me. They need no 
assurances. But I do assure the Leader of the Opposition that I will keep my promises. I understand that 
he had some concerns that we wouldn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a pleasure to hear the throne speech and to speak in favour of it. I can tell you that I 
will rise on any occasion, in any place, to speak to any person, when necessary, to keep my election 
promises. My citizens have supported the motion and I also support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:01 p.m. 


	LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN
	June 21, 1982
	EVENING SESSION
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	We all are blind until we see
	Why build these cities glorious

