






















































Hansard: July 13, 1982


719 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Twentieth Legislature 

 
Tuesday, July 13, 1982. 

 
 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Industrial Strategy of Government of Saskatchewan 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. 
I have a recent press release wherein the Minister of Industry and Commerce has indicated that the 
government will be participating in an international conference on Saskatchewan's new climate for business 
and investment. The news release goes on to indicate that the conference is designed for business executives 
and the financial community across Canada, the United States and Europe. It goes on, in the release, to say, 
"Saskatchewan Open for Business will unveil in detail the new government's industrial strategy." 
 
Since he is prepared to unveil industrial strategy to the executives of Europe and North America and Canada, 
I wonder if the minister would be good enough to unveil to the House, and to the people of Saskatchewan, 
the details of the new government's economic strategy? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, that is exactly the intent of this government — to release it to the 
people of Saskatchewan, when we have it read, in due course. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, it is probably under study, as are many of the others. In view of the fact, 
Mr. Minister, that we have seen evidence . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a supplementary question? You did not ask for a 
supplementary. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — What I want to address to the Minister of Industry and Commerce is: will he outline to 
the people of Saskatchewan whether he is going to take an active role as the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce to assist the many businesses in Saskatchewan which are having to close their doors, and lay 
people off their jobs? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know how many businesses were opened by the previous 
minister during his administration — probably not too many. In the first 30 days of my ministry in this 
government, I attended the official opening of a minimum of eight. If this government, Mr. Speaker, had not 
driven the private sector out of this province in its 11 years, we wouldn't be out looking as hard as we are 
today to bring them back to this province after their having left. 
 
To answer the hon. member's question, we are indeed concerned about the companies that are having 
hardships today and, Mr. Speaker, it was that administration, that government opposite, that caused and 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
720 

created the conditions under which we are living today. But we will do something about it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A supplementary. I would like to ask the minister whether, in fact, the government's 
policy not to increase the minimum wage is a part of his new industrial strategy. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I don't understand why the hon. member is asking the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce a question about minimum wages, which is the Minister of Labor's area. I am not 
going to speak for the Minister of Labor. I want to come back again to the question of what we are doing for 
the people of this province. If it hasn't got through to those people across this Chamber yet — the things that 
we have already done in two months of our administration, the gas tax . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's 
right, and the 13.25 per cent mortgage reduction. If they don't know what it means, Mr. Speaker, the gas tax 
alone is $128 million in one year. The 13.25 per cent mortgage assistance program will mean $300 million 
within three years time. That's action, that's positive action. 
 

P.A. Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, first a question to the Minister of Continuing Education. In the 
Prince Albert Herald, of Monday, July 12, there is an announcement from a Paul Meagher, PC MLA-elect 
for the constituency of Prince Albert, that the PC caucus will be meeting in Prince Albert on August 16, 17, 
and 18. My question to the Minister of Continuing Education is: is it the intention of the government to 
announce the government's decision regarding the Prince Albert Institute of Applied Arts and Sciences at 
that time? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that that was the same question the hon. member 
asked yesterday, or something relevant to it. I think my answer at the time was that we were . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . studying it. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Right. We were studying the situation. We are determining to what extent the 
previous government was right in its deliberations to do what it was going to do in Prince Albert, and to 
what extent it was wrong. I think I culminated the answer with the fact that we would be prepared to release 
it when we had finished our review. It would have no relevance, in my way of thinking, to the fact that the 
hon. member mentioned that there is going to be a caucus meeting or convention or something or other in 
Prince Albert on August 16 and 17, if that is what he mentioned. 
 
Natural Gas Extension 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — A question to the minister responsible for Sask Power, Mr. Speaker. In light of 
the announcement (and not my announcement, as suggested by the Minister of Continuing Education, but the 
announcement by the MLA-elect for Prince Albert), will the government be making any announcements 
during that period of August 16, 17, and 18 with regard to the extension of natural gas to the communities of 
Davis and Macdowall, and to the farms and other communities in the Prince Albert area? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we will be making our announcements, as far as the Saskatchewan 
rural gas program is concerned, in this legislature and not at our  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
721 

caucus meetings. 
 

Saskatchewan Rivers Heritage Complex 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources. 
That will be a refreshing departure from the practice of the Minister of Energy and Mines and the practice 
announced by the Minister of Industry and Commerce. My question to the Minister of Tourism and 
Renewable Resources is: during the time of the announced caucus meeting of August 16, 17, and 18 in 
Prince Albert at which it has been announced that the caucus will be meeting with several representative 
groups and bodies from the area, will the government be making an announcement with regard to the 
government's decision on the Saskatchewan Rivers heritage complex? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, as far as the line of questioning of the hon. member with regard to 
our caucus meeting that has been announced for Prince Albert is concerned that is one issue. We will be 
having a caucus meeting in Prince Albert which is related to the fact that this is a government which is 
becoming open to people. We will be holding caucus meetings at various locations around this province 
throughout our term of office. That is number one. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — As far as the particular question regarding the Saskatchewan Rivers heritage park 
program and so on is concerned, we certainly will be looking at that. We are looking at it. I did talk to the 
hon. member about it, as he will recall, privately the other day. We certainly are not opposed to the concept. 
We are looking at the details of it. Whether or not we will be committed to exactly what the former 
government's discussions were involved with is another question. But certainly we will be looking at it. 
There is no relationship between any announcement from my department and from any of my colleagues' 
departments and the fact that we are holding a caucus meeting and opening government to the people of this 
province, which they asked for and which they got on April 26. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Announcement on Prince Albert Pulp Mill 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce, Mr. Speaker. While it is 
commendable that there would be declarations of open government, it would be even more commendable if 
such declarations would be accompanied by some announcements as to what it is the government is planning 
to do for the people that it's opening itself to. My question to the minister responsible for CIC (crown 
investments corporation) is: will the government be making any announcements with regard to the sale or 
expansion of the Prince Albert pulp mill during the period August 16 to August 18? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I find it very difficult to understand that question. I announced it 
some time ago. Where have you been? 
 

Purpose of PC Caucus Meeting in Prince Albert 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, question to the Acting House Leader. Are we to  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
722 

assume then that the statements made by the PC MLA-elect for Prince Albert as to the purpose for the 
meeting are accurate? His statement is that the purpose of the meeting is to demonstrate PC Party support for 
the PC MLA-elect for Prince Albert. Is that the purpose of the meeting since you won't be making any 
announcements? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the question, the new government of the province of 
Saskatchewan, as indicated by the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources, intends to hold caucus 
meetings not only in Prince Albert but also throughout the entire province. The reason for that, of course, is 
that we want to hear the views, not only of the lobbyists who have the power and the mechanism to come to 
Regina, but also the views of the people who live in the smaller centres and smaller cities of this province. 
We want them to have an opportunity, as well, to get to the ear of government, whether it be through caucus 
or whether it be through a cabinet meeting. 
 
The purpose of the meeting in Prince Albert is the first step in the direction of a new and open government, 
that is, to hear the views of the people and try to react to the views of the people, rather than superimposing 
the views of government on the people. That was the view of the previous government. That was the result 
of April 26. The people rejected that concept of government. They brought in a new concept of government. 
That is the purpose of the caucus meeting and the cabinet meeting in the city of Prince Albert. 
 
The only comment I would make about the statements made by the honorable gentleman referred to by the 
member opposite is that we on this side of the House certainly look forward to the day when he might also 
be sitting on this side of the House to take his rightful place as a member of the legislature of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Borden Bridge 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Highways. In a June 10 memo from 
the Yellowhead Route Association of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What year? 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — June 10, 1982, for the Attorney General's information. The association indicates that it 
has had a commitment that a new Borden bridge would be constructed. And because there is some concern 
about that bridge — and I can understand the Yellowhead association's concern about the many accidents 
that have occurred there — could the minister indicate to this House whether he intends to continue with 
construction of that bridge, and when that construction might begin? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, in reply to the hon. member's question, I did state to the 
Yellowhead association that the Borden bridge is a priority under the new government, and it will be brought 
into the project array over the next few yeas. But nothing can be done until the river bed study is completed, 
and the access road is built for a new location of the bridge replacing the existing bridge that is in place right 
now. It is under review, and as soon as the studies are completed there will be an announcement made. 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
723 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could the minister indicate to this House, since he 
mentioned that he is having a study conducted of the river bed, if he has begun this study? Has he taken the 
consultants out there and indicated to them that they should proceed with the study, so that he can get on 
with the construction of that bridge as soon as possible? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, this is a prime example of how the new administration is going to 
be working versus the old administration. You don't just stand up in the Assembly before an election in order 
to try to bait the voters of Saskatchewan by announcing a bridge. Studies and surveys have to be done before 
you announce these bridges and you have to find the money, except, Mr. Speaker, there is a problem from 
the previous administration. For 70 per cent of the capital project array announced by the previous 
administration, funding was not available. This administration is not going to go in that direction. We are not 
promising roads that we can't build. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister continues to avoid the question. Has the 
minister initiated that study yet so he could consider getting some funding in place and getting that bridge 
constructed? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here we go again. The study has been started. For your further 
information, two previous ministers of highways in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Eiling Kramer and 
Mr. Bob Long, drove over that same road and over that same bridge and promised it for the past 20 years, 
and we still don't have the bridge. It will be constructed under the Devine government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Bus Route from Meadow Lake to La Loche 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company (STC). In view of the fact that a new STC route was to start in April, 
from Meadow Lake to La Loche, and to date it hasn't started, could the minister indicate to this House if that 
route has been canceled? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, another example — announce the service before a study is 
even done; don't find out how much it is going to cost or whether it is going to make money, just use it as an 
election gimmick for the people of Saskatchewan. For your further information, a prime example of how the 
administration previously ran STC in the province of Saskatchewan is the Prairie Shuttle service. To date we 
have lost approximately $100,000 of the taxpayers' money on a venture just like the one the member 
opposite is asking for. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know if a supplementary is in order here because he never 
answered the original question. I'll try once more. Has the route from Meadow Lake to La Loche been 
canceled? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — It has not been canceled. It has not been announced by us  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
724 

either. Mr. Speaker, how many times do I have to tell the members opposite that we're not going to jump 
from the fat into the fire as the previous government did. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Speaker, this bus route was announced prior to the election. A study was carried 
on for four years concerning that bus route. The only reason that bus route wasn't in place years ago was that 
they were waiting for that road to be dust free. My supplementary question to the minister is: can he give us 
a date when this service will be starting? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, I can promise the hon. member opposite that I will check into it personally 
and find out if it is a viable route. By his own explanation, Mr. Speaker, the roads were not fit. I can agree 
with him on that, because the previous government was playing politics with the roads of Saskatchewan, 
instead of putting them in places where people needed them. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I don't want to get into a debate about highway 
construction, but the attitude of the group across there is that they want to run a route that makes money not 
one that provides service to people. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I didn't say that. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — No, the minister didn't say that but it came from across the floor. 
 
My supplementary, Mr. Speaker, is to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. Have you or your department 
made a decision on the subsidy that is required for the feeder routes for this STC service? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I have been in conversation with my colleague, the minister 
responsible for STC. As the member has indicated, those feeder routes are an important part of the service, 
because it wouldn't be reasonable to have that service without the feeder routes from Ile-a-la-Crosse or from 
Cole Bay at Canoe Lake. We are looking into the whole thing, as my colleague has indicated, and you will 
get your answer as soon as possible. I don't disagree with you about the need, but the viability certainly has 
to be looked into. If it is going to be a subsidized route, let's realize just how much subsidy we can stand with 
the type of budget we have been presented with by you folks. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

Layoff of Workers in Hudson Bay Forest Products Mill 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the minister in charge of 
Saskatchewan Forest Products. In view of the fact that (and I am going by a news release in the Prince Albert 
Herald, dated July 10, 1982) it is indicated that starting July 16 there will be a six-week layoff of 
approximately 230 workers at the Hudson Bay forest products mill, could you indicate, Mr. Minister, to this 
House if after the six-week layoff there will be any other layoff time in the Mill? Will they resume work in 
that industry in Hudson Bay? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, with regard to the Sask Forest layoffs in Hudson Bay, effective this 
Friday, there will be a three-week maintenance layoff and a three-week holiday layoff. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
we have sold all of the present board, so the three-week maintenance layoff may be in conjunction with the 
three-week holiday and there may only be a three-week layoff. 
 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
725 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Also, Mr. Speaker, I would like to draw to the attention of the hon. member that 
we will be selling within the province many more of the products produced by Sask Forest Products in 
relation to Sask Housing using them. Within our own lumberyards, we sold a great deal to Beaver Lumber 
just recently. Also, in Hudson Bay, MacMillan Bloedel has just reopened its plant for a two-week period. In 
regard to that, you realize that Sask Forest Products was only down for a very short period of time early in 
the winter. This time it will be three weeks to six weeks only, and definitely end at six weeks, and the people 
are very receptive to it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the answer that I have just received from 
the minister — that things are looking pretty good in the forest industry — could the minister indicate to this 
House and guarantee to the workers of the Sask Forest Product mills at Carrot River and the Big River mill 
at Bodmin that there will be no layoffs in those two mills this summer? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, in regard to the two other mills, that would be based upon what the 
lumber sales are in the province and in the country. As you know, we don't anticipate any layoffs there, and 
in the foreseeable future, no, there are going to be no layoffs. The lumber sales have picked up; the price has 
picked up; and we hopefully can continue to keep these people working. 
 
As I have indicted previously, Sask Forest Products will keep its people working as much as possible, to 
keep the jobs, keep the employment here in Saskatchewan, and will do everything possible to attain that. 
 

Proposed Nuclear Rod Plan for Uranium City 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. I would like to direct this question to the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce, and it's regarding some conflicting reports regarding the industry that is proposed, 
or has been proposed, for Uranium City, the nuclear rod plant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the Leader-Post. I quote, Mr. Minister: 
 

Mr. Rousseau said he told the firm the province wasn't interested in the proposed $660 
million nuclear rod plant. 

 
Other reports that are coming out indicate that you are in favor, and I quote from the Saskatoon 
Star-Phoenix, where you said: 
 

However, if the consulting firm wants to travel to Saskatchewan at its own expense to 
discuss it further, department officials would be willing to meet. 

 
Could you indicate to this House and to the citizens of Saskatchewan if you are still prepared to discuss with 
the group from Europe — Austria, West Germany and France — their proposal, see just what it is, and take a 
serious look at this $660 million project that has been proposed? 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
726 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I've been wondering for three weeks when I was going to be asked that 
question, Mr. Speaker. First of all, let me tell this Assembly that the previous government had the report that 
he's referring to in its files since February of this year, and sat on it, absolutely covered it, wouldn't do 
anything with it, and would not commit itself either way as to what it was going to do with that proposal . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, about the time the announcement that Uranium City was closing down 
happened. 
 
Before I get into further negotiations, the letter that I sent, not to the European firm, but to a firm from 
Winnipeg (and I think the hon. member knows that), a promoting firm, was to indicate to them that with a 
gun at my head I was not interested on a 30-day basis, and I still am not today. I left the opportunity for 
them, within the contents of that letter, to come back to negotiate at any time — at any time. 
 
As for the project, Mr. Speaker, he refers to a $660 million project. It may be a $660 million project; it could 
even be a multibillion dollar project, and I think the hon. member knows that as well. The project referred to, 
Mr. Speaker, is for the reprocessing and storage of nuclear fuel waste. Before that kind of project comes into 
this province, it will take years of decision making to allow those wastes to be stored in this province, what 
with the dangers to the environment and to the health of the people of this province. I have no intention, as 
the Minister of Industry and Commerce, of negotiating that kind of project with anyone, particularly when 
they are the promoters of the program, and particularly, Mr. Speaker, when every country in the world that 
has been approached for this program has turned the project down, including the province of Manitoba. 
 
When the project came to my attention in May, I was approached at that time by the Winnipeg firm to make 
a decision in locating this project in Uranium City, and the decision had to be made by June 30. I had no 
intention, and we said no at the time. I would say no today and I'll say no tomorrow. Yes, I will, and our 
government will discuss this project with anyone, but I can assure the hon. member it would take years of 
study before we would allow that kind of project to come into this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to give a reply to the Assembly on a ruling that I have made on the request 
of the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
A point of privilege was raised on Friday, July 9, 1982, by the hon. member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, 
claiming that the Minister of Mineral Resources deliberately misled the House in answers he made to certain 
oral questions on July 8, 1982. I am satisfied that the member raised the matter at the earliest opportunity, 
which he is required to do according to Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice, 19th Edition, page 347. 
 
I also want to point out that it has not been a practice of this House for notice to be given to the member 
whose conduct is in question when a matter of privilege is to be raised. 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
727 

On Friday I deferred my ruling. Yesterday we heard from the Minister of Mineral Resources, and other 
members also spoke to the question. I listened carefully to the comments made and, in view of the 
seriousness of this matter, I believe it is incumbent upon me to deal with it without further delay. 
 
It is important for all members to understand the concepts being dealt with here. Parliamentary privilege can 
be defined as: 
 

the sum of the particular rights enjoyed by each House collectively . . . And by members of 
each House individually, without which they could not discharge their functions, and which 
exceed those possessed by other bodies or individuals. 

 
The above quote is from Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice, 19th Edition, page 67. 
 
Specific privileges of parliament, which have been established over the centuries, include freedom of speech, 
freedom from arrest and molestation, the right of access to the crown and the right to punish breaches of 
privileges. Parliament has also claimed the right to punish actions which, while not breaches, are offences 
against the authority and dignity of parliament and are more properly called "contempts." 
 
I would also like to outline to the Assembly what the role of the Chair is in a question of privilege. I refer all 
hon. members to Beauchesne's Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, paragraph 84, as follows: 
 

(1) Once the claim of a breach of privilege has been made, it is the duty of the Speaker to 
decide if a prima facie case can be established. The Speaker requires to be satisfied, both that 
privilege appears to be sufficiently involved to justify him in giving such precedence (or as it 
is sometimes put, that there is a prima facie case that a breach of privilege has been 
committed); and also that the matter is being raised at the earliest opportunity. 

 
(2) It has often been laid down that the speaker's function in ruling on a claim of breach of 
privilege is limited to deciding the formal question, whether the case confirms with the 
conditions which alone entitle it to take precedence over the notices of motions and Orders of 
the Day standing on the Order Paper; and does not extend to deciding the question of 
substance, whether a breach of privilege has, in fact, been committed — a question which 
can only be decided by the House itself. 

 
I also refer all hon. members to Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice, 19th Edition, pages 346-7 on this 
matter. 
 
I have reviewed the remarks of all members on this point of privilege. There seems to be two main issues 
involved in the case: (1) was it misleading for the Minister of Mineral Resources to say that he did not 
personally fire any employee, and (2) was there a deliberate intent to mislead the House? 
 
The minister in his remarks explained the circumstances regarding the dismissal and claimed that he did not 
personally fire the employee, thus implying that there was no misleading of the House. Although there were 
other circumstances involved, the fact remains that it was the letter signed by the minister which effectively 
accomplished the 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
728 

dismissal, I did not find anything in the comments of any member to dispute this conclusion. 
 
In this light I find that the original answers of the minister in question period on July 8 were misleading. 
 
The second question is the more important one in determining whether a breach of privilege has been 
committed, and that is: was there a deliberate intent to mislead the House? The Minister of Mineral 
Resources did not deal with this question in his explanation yesterday. I want the House to understand very 
clearly that it is not the role of the Chair to decide whether or not there was a deliberate intent to mislead; 
that is for the House to decide. It is my role to decide whether privilege is sufficiently involved to warrant 
the House examining this question now, before any other business is taken up. 
 
Based on the information I have in front of me, I rule that a prima facie case of privilege has been 
established, which justifies giving this matter precedence over the orders of the day. I now leave the matter 
in the hands of the House to deal with it as it sees fit. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the great care with which you have studied the 
matter and through which you have come to the conclusion resulting in your ruling today. 
 
I think I can say without being repetitive that it is a very serious matter and it is a matter which when raised 
(and it should never be raised lightly), places the Speaker in a particularly unenviable position, to say the 
least, and one upon which the House depends for fairness and thoroughness, and that you have demonstrated 
today in what, like all such rulings, will be an historic ruling of this House. It is my intention, Mr. Speaker, 
following a few opening remarks, to put a motion before the House to be dealt with. The motion will read 
somewhat as follows: that in light of the letter of dismissal dated May 17, 1982, to Mr. Shakir Alwarid, and 
signed by the Hon. Colin Thatcher, in stating to the House Thursday, July 8, 1982, pages 616 and 617 of 
Hansard, in reply to questions from the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, that he had no personal 
involvement in the termination of any employee of the Department of Mineral Resources, personally, in 
writing, verbally, from the radio of his tractor, or by any means whatsoever, the Minister of Mineral 
Resources was deliberately misleading the House. And this House therefore resolves that the matter of 
statements made to the House by the Minister of Mineral Resources on Thursday, July 8, be referred to the 
standing committee on privileges and elections, and that the committee on privileges and elections report to 
the House as to whether the statements of the Minister of Mineral Resources constitute a contempt of the 
House and whether the conduct of the minister is consistent with that expected of a minister of the crown. 
 
In beginning my remarks prior to putting that motion, I wish to quote from a book — Dawson, The 
Government of Canada, revised by Norman Ward, University of Toronto Press, reprinted in 1973. I wish to 
turn to page 176 of the book where reference is made to ministerial responsibility. I want to quote from 
Canadian House of Commons Debates, March 18, 1903, page 132 and page 133. And I quote: 
 

The members of cabinet are above everything else responsible to the House of Commons, not 
as individuals alone but collectively as well. This responsibility has been the key to the 
control of the executive power in Canada and in Britain. The powers of the crown have 
remained for the most part intact, or have been increased, but the exercise of those powers 
has 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
729 

come under the cabinet and this body, in turn, under the general scrutiny of parliament. This 
is the central fact of parliamentary democracy, for it is this practice which keeps the system 
both efficient and constantly amenable to popular control. The minister at the head of every 
department is responsible for everything that is done within that department, and inasmuch as 
he will expect praise or assume blame for all the acts of his subordinates, he must have the 
final word on any important decision that is taken. 

 
The book goes on to quote R. L. Borden who, when leader of the opposition, aptly described the ideal 
situation as follows: 
 

A minister of the crown is responsible, under the system in Great Britain, for the minutest 
details of the administration of his department. He is politically responsible, but he does not 
know anything at all about them. When anything goes wrong in his department, he is 
responsible therefore to parliament. If he comes to parliament and points out that he entrusted 
the duty to an official in the ordinary course and in good faith, and that the official had been 
selected for his capacity, ability and integrity, and that the moment the man went wrong the 
minister investigated the matter to the full and punished the man, either by degradation or 
dismissal, the minister has done his duty to the public. 

 
That is the way matters are dealt with in Great Britain and that is the way, it seems to me, that our affairs 
ought to be carried on in this country. 
 
In light, particularly, of the remarks the member for Thunder Creek made yesterday, I wish to have the 
House take note of those views on ministerial responsibility prior to putting the motion before the House. 
 
As Mr. Speaker has rightly pointed out, it is not the Speaker's task to decide whether or not there has been, in 
fact, a breach of privilege, or whether or not such breach is sufficient to constitute a contempt of the House. 
It is his duty to decide whether or not a prima facie case has been established. It is the duty and responsibility 
of the House to then judge. Because we are in a unique situation as members of a House, as members of a 
parliament that follows the British parliamentary tradition, this matter of privilege is central to the nature of 
the responsibilities placed upon us. 
 
I wish to quote from Erskine May, 19th Edition, page 67, the paragraph entitled "Ancillary Nature of 
Privilege — A necessary means to fulfillment of functions": 
 

The distinctive mark of a privilege is its ancillary character. The privileges of Parliament are 
rights which are "absolutely necessary for the due execution of its powers." They are enjoyed 
by individual Members, because the House cannot perform its functions without unimpeded 
use of the services of its Members; and by each House for the protection of its Members and 
the vindication of its own authority and dignity. 

 
I wish to turn now to a definition of contempt given in Erskine May, 19th Edition, on page 136, under the 
heading, "Acts or Conduct Constituting Breach of Privilege or Contempt," subheading "Contempt in 
General": 
 

It would be vain to attempt an enumeration of every act which might be  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
730 

constructed into a contempt, the power to punish for contempt being in its nature 
discretionary. Certain principles may, however, be collected from the Journals which will 
serve as general declarations of the law of Parliament. It may be stated generally that any act 
or omission which obstructs or impedes either House of Parliament in the performance of its 
functions, or which obstructs or impedes any member or officer of such House in the 
discharge of his duty, or which has a tendency, directly or indirectly, to produce such results 
may be treated as a contempt even though there is no precedent of the offence. 

 
Erskine May, 19th Edition, goes on to discuss this matter of deliberately misleading the House. Under the 
heading, "Misconduct of Members or Officers of Either House As Such," subheading, "Deliberately 
Misleading the House": 
 

The House may treat the making of a deliberately misleading statement as a contempt. 
 

In 1963 the House resolved that in making a personal statement which contained words 
which he later admitted not to be true, a former member had been guilty of a grave contempt. 

 
I want to now, Mr. Speaker, refer particularly to the response of the Minister of Energy yesterday, in replying 
to the matter that had been raised Friday last (if you will just give me a moment, Mr. Speaker, until I find it). 
I wish to quote the statement of the minister on page 671 of Hansard. 
 

. . . I indicated that I had not personally fired anyone in my capacity as minister. Mr. Speaker, 
I made that statement Thursday in the House. I repeat that statement today. I have not 
personally fired any employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as far as the individual is concerned who was discussed on Friday, this 
individual was informed by the deputy minister, upon my instructions, on May 11 that he was 
terminated. It was suggested to him that if he so wished the standard severance or favorable 
severance that was being accorded to order in council employees would be available to him. 
He indicated at that time that he wished to discuss the matter with his attorney. Mr. Speaker, 
on May 12 the individual involved informed senior officials of the department that he would 
not leave the job, and that he was staying in his office under advice of his attorney. Mr. 
Speaker, this situation, this unacceptable situation, persisted for several days before 
ultimately, on May 17, I signed the letter which was tabled in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, 
that letter was confirmation of the action taken by the deputy minister. 

 
I ask the House to pay particular attention to that statement, "Mr. Speaker, that letter was confirmation of the 
action taken by the deputy minister." 
 

There is no question, Mr. Speaker, that the deputy minister was acting under my instructions. 
There is no question, Mr. Speaker, I state categorically again, I have not personally fired any 
employees. 

 
I wish to now, Mr. Speaker, read into the record and table further documents in the course of putting the 
motion that may indicate (may indicate, I say) that yesterday, in reply to the charge made on Friday last, that 
statements by the minister on Thursday, 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
731 

July 8 constituted a breach of privilege of this House and may have constituted a contempt of this House. 
The minister, in making his explanation, may have further breached the privileges of this House and may 
have further demonstrated contempt for this House. I refer now to a letter under the letterhead of the law 
firm, Rath, Oledzki, and Johnson, dated May 18, 1982, addressed to the law firm of MacPherson, Leslie and 
Tyerman, Attention Mr. R.L. Barclay, Q.C. re Termination of Shakir Alwarid from employment with the 
Government of Saskatchewan. I will not read the entire letter, Mr. Speaker, but just the opening paragraph: 
 

Further to our telephone conversation of May 17, 1982, this will confirm that we represent 
Mr.Alwarid in this matter. Mr.Alwarid received notification from the Minister of Mineral 
Resources, Mr. W. Colin Thatcher, by letter dated May 17, 1982. He was so advised that his 
employment as assistant deputy minister, finance and administration, Saskatchewan Mineral 
Resources, was thereby terminated immediately. 

 
The understanding, clearly, of Mr. Alwarid and of his attorney was that he had been terminated by the 
Minister of Mineral Resources, the said Mr. Thatcher. I lay a copy of this letter on the Table. 
 
On May 21, 1982, under the letterhead of the law firm MacPherson, Leslie and Tyerman, a letter addressed 
to the law firm of Rath, Oledzki and Johnson, Attention Mr. R.T. Hart. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Is that without prejudice, Jerry? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Without prejudice. Government of Saskatchewan . . . Mr. Speaker, do I have 
the floor to continue, or is it the Attorney General's wish to speak now or later? 
 
If I may continue, Mr. Speaker. The letter is regarding the Government of Saskatchewan, Shakir Alwarid 
dismissal. 
 

I acknowledge receipt of your letter of May 18. Your client was advised at the time of 
termination that the government is prepared to make certain payments and contributions as 
compensation for services, which will assist him in securing further employment. (Signed) 
R.L. Barclay, Q.C. 
 

The letter makes no reference to any suggestion that the opening paragraph in the letter of May 17 from Hart 
to Barclay was inaccurate in describing the termination having been effected by the Minister of Mineral 
Resources, the said Mr. Thatcher. I lay that letter on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I wish also to refer to another document. It is dated May 11, the day the minister says that he instructed the 
deputy minister of the Department of Mineral Resources to dismiss the said employee, Mr. Alwarid. And 
this is a recollection from Mr. Alwarid of a meeting he had with the deputy minister on May 11. It's a 
memorandum on Government of Saskatchewan letterhead from Shakir Alwarid, assistant deputy minister, to 
file regarding "request for my resignation." The text reads: 
 

I was called into Mr. Don Moroz's office today at 2 p.m. to inform me of his discussion with 
the minister, Mr. Colin Thatcher, this morning. In summary, Mr. Moroz summarized the 
minister's directive, as it relates to me, as follows: 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
732 

 
 

the minister wants me to resign my position with the department and left it to Moroz to 
arrange for my resignation and settlement. The minister did not indicate what kind of 
settlement the government is willing to make with me. The minister informed Moroz that he 
wants the people with political affiliation to the NDP out of the department and that the 
request for my resignation relates to my political association with the NDP and my previous 
employment with DNS. The minister indicated that he was aware of my employment status 
as a certified permanent employee and not an order in council appointment. Given that, he 
would like to see a settlement reached with myself and my resignation submitted as soon as 
possible. 

 
For the record, I was called to a meeting with Mr. Thatcher yesterday, along with Mr. Moroz, 
and at no time was any mention of my employment status or anybody else's made, with the 
exception of his instruction that Mr. Brian Hill's OC will not be approved. This meeting with 
Mr. Thatcher was to meet him and review our briefing notes for him. 

 
I informed Mr. Moroz that I will be contacting my lawyer and will inform Mr. Moroz of my 
decision following that. cc. Don Moroz (Signed) Shakir Alwarid. 

 
There is no indication and no record produced yesterday by the minister, no communication received by Mr. 
Alwarid, of anything other than a request for his resignation. I lay that memo on the Table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, in conclusion, before I put the motion to the House, I just want to sum up to the House how important 
this matter is, because we in this House, while we are in this House, are not governed by or subject to the 
laws of general application in society. That is a privilege. We have the privilege of making the laws that 
govern ourselves, and with that privilege we have the responsibility of enforcing those laws. 
 
We can hardly expect that the citizens of Saskatchewan will show respect for the laws that this House 
passes, if this House demonstrates that it cannot govern itself — that it cannot itself show respect for the 
laws that it passes, or that it follows, to govern the conduct of the House and the conduct of each individual 
member. When a member violates those laws of the House, it reflects on every member of the House. We 
know that there are likely more than enough people today who don't believe anything that politicians say, and 
who take the view: "A plague on all your houses; you're all deceitful and not to be trusted." 
 
All the more important, then, that we should, in examining our own conduct, assure that our conduct, 
particularly in this self-governing institution, is beyond reproach, beyond reasonable doubt. And we all have 
an obligation to do that. It has nothing to do with partisanship. It has to do with our role and our status and 
our responsibilities as individual members of this House — not some other role we might have as members 
of a political party. It has to do with this House. 
 
I think we also need to consider, in that light, whether we would find it acceptable, whether we would be 
able to defend to the general public, a situation where someone was involved in a serious violation of a law 
passed by this legislature. That may be a law having to do with traffic. Someone is involved in a violation of 
the traffic laws, has been  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
733 

reckless and careless, and has endangered not only the rights of other people, but the lives of other people. If 
then, we would permit that citizen to argue that he didn't think he was going to get caught, if we would 
accept the view that the crime was not in the act, that it was in getting caught, then we would have to further 
accept the view that, having been caught, it is sufficient to say, "I forgot." "I didn't do it." "Somebody else 
did it." "He did it at my direction," or "I'm sorry." I don't think we would accept that from the citizens. I don't 
think they should accept it from each other; I don't think we should accept that from each other in this House. 
If we are going to accord this House and this process the respect it deserves in society, we need to set an 
example. 
 
The minister says clearly that under his instructions the deputy minister fired the employee. The minister 
asks us to accept his word that he did that. He has not produced any evidence to support that argument. I 
think he should have the opportunity to present the evidence to support that argument, and the place to take 
advantage of that opportunity to present that evidence is before the committee on privileges and elections, a 
committee of this legislature, made up of hon. members of this legislature. Witnesses can be called to this 
committee and evidence taken under oath. I think that is the appropriate place to deal with it. 
 
The committee would be, and is, empowered only to report back to this House and to make 
recommendations to this House as to whether or not there is sufficient evidence to support the charge made 
by me as a member against another member. If there isn't, the matter is done with and the process and the 
responsibility of this House have been satisfied. If, on the other hand, the committee finds that there is 
sufficient evidence, it reports that fact, and recommends action to be taken by this House. I think that is an 
appropriate course of action. 
 
Let me sum up, Mr. Speaker, by emphasizing two clear points. First of all, the question asked to the minister, 
the second question, did refer clearly to whether he was involved personally in writing, verbally from the 
radio of his tractor, or by any means whatsoever. That phrase " by any means whatsoever," in my view, 
would include the use of the deputy minister as an instrument, if that was the instrument, or any other 
instrument. Further to that point, we have already tabled and examined in this House the letter that was 
signed by the member charged, and that any reasonable person would view as clear evidence that the 
minister had personally, in writing, terminated the employment of the individual referred to. I think having 
done that, and that the House recognizes that, that is clearly sufficient to establish deliberate intent in the 
question period on Thursday, July 8, because the minister was certain and clear and unequivocal. 
 
Now, I remind hon. members that ministers do not have an obligation to answer questions. A minister might 
simply decline to answer and not give any reason for answering or a minister has the option, which many 
ministers have used, of taking notice of the question because he is uncertain of his facts and may wish to 
check the facts. I think those who were in the House Thursday would have to agree that the minister couldn't 
have been more certain. He was asked twice. He had opportunity to take notice, and to check his facts, as I 
will point out the Premier did yesterday in the question period. He wasn't sure of the facts so he said, "I'll 
take notice; I'll answer at a later date." I think that's perfectly appropriate. 
 
So, having made those points, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Quill Lakes: 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
734 

 
 

That in light of the letter of dismissal dated May 17, 1982, to Mr. Shakir Alwarid, and signed 
by the Hon. Colin Thatcher, in stating to the House Thursday, July 8, 1982, at pages 616 and 
617 of Hansard, in reply to questions from the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, that he 
had no personal involvement in the termination of any employee of the Department of 
Mineral Resources, personally, in writing, verbally, from the radio of his tractor, or by any 
means whatsoever, the Minister of Mineral Resources was deliberately misleading the 
House; and 

 
That this House, therefore, resolves that the matter of the statements made to the House by 
the Minister of Mineral Resources on Thursday, July 8, be referred to the standing committee 
on privileges and elections; and 

 
That the committee on privileges and elections report to the House as to whether the 
statements of the Minister of Mineral Resources constitute a contempt of the House, and 
whether the conduct of the minister is consistent with that expected of a minister of the 
crown. 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, with regard to the ruling, it would appear that the Assembly, 
through you and the Chair, is certainly moving in what I think is a new direction with regard to the 
Assembly. Perhaps we, on this side of the House, as perhaps counsel, put reliance on previous decisions of 
this Chair, put perhaps more weight on that than on decisions, let's say, of other legislatures, other . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Is the hon. member disputing my decision? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. The concern, perhaps, is that the Chair, as I understand the 
ruling of the Chair, has ruled that the prima facie case has been made that in fact the date of the letter was the 
material date. I take it that is pretty fundamental to the decision that we're dealing with, and certainly the 
decision that would have to be resolved by the members of this Assembly is the material date of the 
termination. Your ruling seems to have said that that point has been proven prima facie, as I understand the 
ruling to be, but you left then simply the Assembly to have the decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! Why is the member on his feet? 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — A point of order, Mr. Speaker. I am having a great deal of difficulty, as 
members in the opposition are, trying to follow how this debate relates to the motion on the floor. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would ask the hon. member to try to relate his comments to the motion that is before 
the Assembly. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the motion has indicated that the members of this 
Assembly are to rule that the member, the Minister of Mineral Resources . . . It lays out the facts of the case. 
Certainly that is the motion before the Assembly. I would assume Mr. Speaker, that would entitle members 
of the Assembly to address the specific allegations in that motion. Certainly the member opposite has gone 
into great detail, Mr. Speaker, with regard to what in fact has happened. This included, I might add, Mr. 
Speaker, reading in the expelled or terminated employee's memo to himself, if you like, as is. I think in a 
court of law, Mr. Speaker, certainly self-serving evidence. I think, as well, the member opposite indicated 
that probably, or 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
735 

 perhaps, a further breach was made by the hon. member in his response the following day. So I think that 
the members on this side of the House in general should have an opportunity to address what they see in that 
particular motion. 
 
Now, as I said before, Mr. Speaker, it seems material that, number one, the decision of the Chair has been 
that the effective date of the termination of the employment was the date of the letter. I think the members on 
this side of the House agree, or I suggest to members on all sides of the House, that that, quite frankly, is the 
root of the decision in court, that this could maybe be found ultimately in this court or some committee of 
this court. 
 
Surely the members of this Assembly, dealing as parliamentarians, have the right to make the decision as to 
when was the effective date of termination. Surely we have the decision, Mr. Speaker, of saying that the 
effective date of termination was, if we are to believe the Minister of Energy, at the material date when the 
deputy minister called the employee to his office, advised the employee of his termination and told him that 
he was no longer to be with the government. That, Mr. Speaker, was the evidence of one of the combatants 
or contestants in this particular issue, the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
You, Mr. Speaker, it seems to me, have ruled prima facie that, in fact, the material point of termination was 
the letter as referred to by the hon. member. I simply say, Mr. Speaker: do not we, as the members of this 
Assembly, the ultimate court if you like, not have the right to make that decision? Or, are we to accept that 
as fact, and then only have the right to determine if, given those facts, that was a deliberate attempt, a 
deliberate motion, or a deliberate action on behalf of the member to mislead this House. And that seems to 
me to be where we are coming down on this. 
 
Obviously, Mr. Speaker, there are legal ramifications as well to this particular motion. The hon. member, in 
his presentation today, referred to "without prejudice" letters between lawyers. Clearly, this type of case, Mr. 
Speaker, can find itself not in simply this court (the legislature), but in the judicial courts of this particular 
province. 
 
With the evidence before us, I simply caution the members of the House, let us not judge a man, or make a 
decision as to the material and perhaps central part of a potential lawsuit that could come before the courts of 
this land — that in fact the termination was as set out in the letter — before we have had an opportunity to 
hear all of the evidence of the case. I think we are finding ourselves going down what I suggest to be a very 
tricky road when this House becomes so quick to make that type of decision, which is very fundamental and 
material to any court of law. 
 
I also think that given the fact that the minister is not present in the legislature today, I find that unfortunate, 
because, Mr. Speaker, we are once again sitting in judgment on him in his absence. That, Mr. Speaker, I 
suggest is pretty fundamentally dangerous to the whole system, not only of justice, but to the whole system 
ultimately of justice, which is the legislature of this province, or the parliament of this country. 
 
I suggest that the decision that you have taken, first of all, as Mr. Speaker, and that the motion is asking all 
of us to take, has certain legal ramifications. Surely, the member  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
736 

opposite made reference to the importance of the function of this institution. I would hate to think, Mr. 
Speaker, that this exercise is nothing more than a vehicle by which to assist someone in his legal cause that 
he is going to be advancing in the courts of law. If that is the case, Mr. Speaker, that is a far more serious 
privilege. That is a far more serious privilege than anything that has been advanced before in this legislature 
as it comes today. Given the potential legal implications of the decision of the Chair as to what could happen 
with regard to the motion, and given the fact that the hon. minister is not, in fact, here today, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I would like to advise the hon. member that yesterday I advised this House that I 
would bring in a ruling today. So the fact that the hon. member is not here I don't think enters into the debate. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I apologize for that, Mr. Speaker. I thought your ruling was yesterday. I 
apologize. I thought you would bring it in in all due haste. Okay, from that point of view, I take that and 
apologize, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, because of the ramifications this has for the courts of law, and to seek the 
advice of counsel on this particular situation, with the indulgence of the House, I would ask for leave to 
adjourn this debate. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member has asked leave to adjourn the debate. Is leave granted? I believe the ayes 
have it. Call in the members. 
 
The following recorded division was taken at 7:47 p.m. 
 
Motion negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 0 
 

NAYS — 8 
 
Thompson Koskie Engel 
Lingenfelter Hammersmith Lusney 
Shillington Yew  
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, only a few words with further regard to the motion presently before 
the House. In such, I would like to address my comments to the members of the Assembly. Now the Minister 
of Energy is in his place in this Assembly, and this motion is calling on this Assembly as a court to judge the 
Minister of Energy. I would simply ask the indulgence of this House that we allow the member for Thunder 
Creek, the Minister of Energy, to state his case at this point in the debate. I think that's a  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
737 

fair request for anyone. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — With respect to the comments of the Minister of Finance, I do not think that what the 
motion calls for is for this Assembly, per se, to make a decision in respect to the actions of the member. I 
think that the motion addressing what the Minister of Finance said — what it calls for is to use a procedure 
which is open to the House in dealing with the matter, and that's the referral to the elections and privileges 
committee. 
 
What I want to say is that, in your decision today, Mr. Speaker, you indicated the two ingredients, which 
were whether or not it was misleading and whether or not it was deliberate. You indicated, and we concur 
with that, that you found a prima facie case in respect to the first ingredient that was in fact misleading. It 
was not the decision of the Chair to make a determination with respect to the second ingredient, that is, 
whether or not it was deliberate. Your decision turns the deliberation of the matter over to this House to set 
into motion what method will be used for dealing with the matter. We are not here this evening to argue the 
case of the merits as to whether or not there was a deliberate act. The legislature has set up, as I indicated, a 
mechanism in order to deal with that. That is what the motion addresses and, accordingly, what I am saying 
is that there are various methods of dealing with a motion, with a matter which is referred to the House. 
Under such circumstances, there are precedents, I believe, where the member, when the prima facie case has 
been determined in the legislature, has the opportunity to come forward with a statement in respect to the 
actions, or alternatively we have the procedure set out in the motion. 
 
HON. MR. THATCHER: — The other day I explained to the House the events that led to the removal of 
an employee of the Department of Mineral Resources and the reasons I felt it correct to say I did not 
personally fire him. Hon. Members on the other side of the House have taken the same series of events and 
stated that I did personally fire him, and that I was deliberately misleading the House. Mr. Speaker, I give the 
Assembly my assurance that in answering the questions of the opposition I was at no time attempting to 
mislead the Assembly, deliberately, or otherwise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have ruled that a prima facie case of privilege exists. I accept your ruling. It is therefore 
protocol that I unequivocally apologize to this House, which I so do. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — All hon. members realize the effect of the statement of the hon. member that he has 
made an unequivocal apology to this Assembly. He has also made it quite clear that he accepts the ruling, 
Mr. Speaker. It now behooves the House to make a decision as to whether members wish to have a debate in 
the political arena such as the committee, or whether this Assembly is satisfied with the words of the hon. 
member and their import. And let no members of this Assembly demean or put little stock in the effect of 
those words and the words stated by the hon. member. 
 
I think we can now, Mr. Speaker, as the matter has been well aired, give the members an opportunity to put 
the matter in its proper perspective. And in that regard, Mr. Speaker, I am going to make the following 
amendment to the motion. I'm sorry, Mr. Speaker, after I finish my remarks, I will be making an amendment. 
 
Should the matter go to committee, the committee could have various options, one of which is to 
recommend no further action, one of which would be to reprimand the member. In all likelihood, without 
prejudging any committee, the penalty, so to speak,  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
738 

could be asking the member to apologize. I strongly suspect, and I say, only strongly suspect . . . Now, the 
hon. member opposite is shaking his head. I question, Mr. Speaker, (I suppose I shouldn't), what the 
intention is, but I suspect that the results of its going to committee would, in all likelihood, be an apology by 
the hon. member. 
 
I therefore move the following amendment to the motion, seconded by the member for Regina South, that all 
the words after the word "that" be struck out, and the following substituted therefor: 
 

this Assembly accepts the unequivocal apology of the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I find the amendment in order, and debate continues on the amendment and the main 
motion. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, it's not clear which "that" is referred to. Could you read the 
motion as amended? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The Table advised me that when it was not spelled out, it would be the first 'that,' 
which is the first word of the motion, so the amendment or the motion would read: 
 

That this Assembly accepts the unequivocal apology of the member for Thunder Creek. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Mr. Speaker, in speaking to the amendment — I'll be very brief — I think it's 
clear to all members of the Assembly that the apology was given in unequivocal terms. It is our view that 
that serves the integrity of the rules of this House, and that the apology should be accepted and the matter put 
to rest. We will therefore be supporting the amendment. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Condemnation of Federal Budget 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the conclusion of the remarks I'm about to make, I intend 
to move the motion which is found in the blues today, namely: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the federal government for its budget of June 28 which did not 
take the steps necessary to restore investor confidence in Canada and promote the continued 
expansion and diversification of the agricultural, mineral and industrial sectors of 
Saskatchewan and the other western provinces. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the federal budget of June 28 was not an economic statement; it was a political statement. It 
clearly stated that the Liberal Party is floundering and is currently leaderless. The result is that a nervous 
country has become a frightened country. The budget did nothing to reduce interest rates or to help the 
dollar, and virtually nothing to restore confidence, spawn investment or come to grips with any of the other 
major  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
739 

problems which we face. 
 
In last November's budget, the finance minister said: 
 

The first objective is the need for restraint on the part of government and restraint on the part 
of all Canadians. 

 
As a result of that budget, this year's projected budget deficit has jumped from $10.5 billion to $19.6 billion 
— so much for restraint by the federal government. We have a projected federal deficit of approximately $20 
billion, a doubling of the deficit since last November. This will require a dramatic increase in federal 
borrowing which is going, inevitably, to push up interest rates and plunge the economy deeper into 
recession. 
 
As a result, the broad economic picture does not appear to have been improved one bit by this budget. The 
federal government says, "Let's all tighten our belts," but the federal government, of course, is exempt from 
any belt tightening. A $20 billion deficit is the price that we are going to have to pay right here in 
Saskatchewan for two years of economic mismanagement, two years where the government has failed to 
take steps to create growth. The deficit will drive up interest rates in the private sector. Small businessmen, 
farmers and home-owners are going to be competing with the government for scarce investment dollars. 
 
MacEachen took a message to the Americans in Versailles earlier this year. He said, "Reduce your deficit." It 
is rather ironic, Mr. Speaker, because proportionately MacEachen's deficit is twice as bad as the American 
deficit. 
 
The federal government is proposing to legislate limits on the salaries of the federal public servants. But it is 
not making any serious effort to limit overall federal spending, which has increased 16 per cent and 15 per 
cent respectively in the last two years. 
 
Government spending this year, Mr. Speaker, will be equal to $8,251 per taxpayer in Canada. It compares to 
$1,692 per taxpayer in 1967-68, and that was the year before Pierre Trudeau took office. Government 
spending is now more than six times greater than it was then Trudeau first took office; 15 times greater than 
spending during any of the war years. One tax dollar in four is used to service the debt, compared to one tax 
dollar in nine a mere eight years ago. 
 
The government's financial requirements for 1982-83, excluding the foreign exchange requirements, have 
jumped from $6.6 billion to $17.1 billion. In addition, the government faces an additional $44.7 billion in 
debt which is going to be maturing over the course of the rest of the year. Therefore, the government could 
be trying to finance up to $60 billion before the end of the year. 
 
The cost of interest on the debt this year will exceed the total accumulated spending by the federal 
government during the first 70 years of confederation. So while preaching restraint for others, look at the rate 
at which the federal government spends money. 
 
I see, Mr. Speaker, I am competing once again with the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, to my right, 
who is making mock of my accent. I take it that his prejudice extends to all new Canadians and is not merely 
a discrimination against those of Scottish ancestry. 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
740 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — Perhaps his discrimination extends to further than new Canadians and perhaps his 
discrimination is an official party policy, as I encountered it during the election campaign, as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
However, to return to the prepared text, my good friend, you'll be happy to know . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I would love to give you a little Burns, because empty vessels carry the most wind, as we all know. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — To our tale of woe, Mr. Speaker, the federal government is spending money at the 
rate of $214 million a day. That even beats you, lad — $9 million an hour and $150,000 a minute. The post 
office has a deficit of $0.5 billion each year. That sum of money could buy 70 stamps for every man, woman 
and child in Canada. The federal government has an information and advertising budget of $235 million, by 
far the largest of its kind in Canada. That sum of money is 17 times the total cost of government for the first 
year of confederation. 
 
In 1980, the federal governments spent $10 million on food, alcohol and entertainment, and that's the 
equivalent of 700,000 bottles of liquor. And, this comes from a government that's preaching restraint. 
 
All projected borrowing in the next fiscal year will be swallowed up by interest payments on the national 
debt. Financing future economic growth, therefore, can only come about through higher taxation. 
 
Canadian and foreign companies have moved $21 billion out of Canada in the last five years, while bringing 
in just $3 billion worth of direct investment. 
 
And has the budget, the political statement, restored investor confidence? Of course not. The November 
budget attacked the incentives as tax loopholes. The June budget is now proposing several new tax 
incentives but they are to be the subject of a consultative process over the summer. The result means more 
uncertainty. Who will invest now, knowing it might be more beneficial to wait down the road till fall or early 
next year? 
 
Before the budget, investors, like everybody else, were concerned with inflation, high interest rates, a weak 
dollar, and a huge federal deficit. So what has changed? Nothing has changed. The attitude of many 
Canadian investors has changed from being negative to being downright pessimistic. Specifically, income 
averaging and MURBs (multiple unit residential building) have not been revived. Forward-averaging 
annuities are for hockey players and movie stars only. Interest on funds borrowed after November 12, 1981, 
in order to make contributions to RRSPs (registered retirement savings plan), registered pension plans, and 
deferred profit-sharing plans is still non-deductible. And the two investment stimulation tax incentives 
mentioned in the budget are to go through the test of a feasibility study before possible implementation in the 
fall. 
 
And what happened to agriculture in the budget? Our province revolves around agriculture. We all depend 
on agriculture in this province. When farming goes well, everybody benefits. When farming is going poorly, 
we all suffer. The budget did not address the problem of the high cost of product for our farmers. When the 
federal  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
741 

government has a farm fuel tax of 55 cents per gallon, surely, they could have helped by eliminating, or at 
least drastically reducing, this cost to the farmer, thereby cutting production costs. Instead of helping to 
reduce costs, the federal government is actually contemplating increasing costs by abandoning the crowrate. 
 
Does the budget help senior citizens? No. In fact, the senior citizens face a double blow from this budget. 
Not only will the old age security be partially de-indexed, but they are also going to have to pay more due to 
de-indexing of income tax. It's our public servants, in addition, who suffer a third blow because their 
pensions will be restricted to a 6 per cent rise next year. 
 
Liberals have broken promises in which they said and I quote: 
 

Manage the economy in such a way and interest rates would in fact come down. The 
economy would be administered in a sounder way to deal with inflation, to hold the line on 
government expenditure and to keep it under the rate of the GNP (gross national product), to 
reduce the deficit in a phased and orderly fashion, and to reduce unemployment through a 
program of responsible fiscal and monetary policy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that reads just like fiction, given the events that have followed both the November budget and 
the last budget we just had. 
 
In putting the deficit into perspective, this year the deficit exceeds the total spending in the year that Trudeau 
first took office. It is eight times greater than the deficit in any of the war years. The deficit is going to keep 
the interest rates high while our federal government is out competing in the money market for money. These 
high interest rates by themselves were set to generate more inflation. 
 
In private industry, any enterprise with revenue that only equals 75 per cent of expenditures, gross debt that 
was more than double the volume of its net assets, would be forced into receivership. Is that the direction in 
which our federal government is headed? The only thing that can restore confidence in the Canadian 
economy is the resignation of Pierre Trudeau and Allan MacEachen. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MAXWELL: — In November, Mr. MacEachen told us that in 1982 there would be real growth in the 
economy of 2.2 per cent. Employment would grow by 1.6 per cent. The unemployment rate would 7.8 per 
cent. Inflation would rise 11.7 per cent. Now, less than seven months later, he tells us we are going to have a 
drop in the real GNP of 2 per cent. The unemployment rate will be 10 per cent. Despite the oil glut and the 
lower than expected food prices, which, I may say, are being borne on the backs of our farmers, inflation will 
remain at 11 per cent. 
 
In the November budget, inflation in the United States was projected at 8.7 per cent. It ran at a 7.2 per cent 
pace in the first five months and at 6.7 per cent in May, compared to 11.8 per cent in Canada. 
 
The reaction of the Wall Street Journal to the federal budget is worth noting: 
 

It is well designed to deepen Canada's stagnation. When the huge deficit is coupled with the 
self-destructive policies the government has followed to try 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
742 

to build national unity, the problem worsens. 
 
So what do we have? We have no projections for employment, no projections regarding wages, no 
projections for investment and no projections for any 1983 economic indicators. The budget contains no 
measures to provide job creation or to stimulate a lagging consumer demand. Business must suffer ongoing 
uncertainty as investment provisions are submitted through a process of feasibility studies. The $1.3 billion 
tax increase that results from a de-indexing of income tax will do nothing to spurt the consumer spending 
necessary to create demand and get the economy moving again. 
 
Punitive taxation of employee benefits proposed in the November budget remains essentially unchanged, 
despite ample testimony as to the administrative nightmares it will cause. 
 
Canadians would do well to reflect upon the January 12, 1980 promise by Pierre Trudeau, and I quote: 
 

This party will not simply stand by and let the recession come. We will fight it and overcome 
it. 

 
Since then the problem has worsened, recession has deepened, and it's going to take an awful lot more than 
this budget to restore economic confidence throughout the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know we have other colleagues on this side who wish to speak to the motion and touch on 
other aspects. I would urge the member to my right to set aside partisan politics. Let's all get together on this 
one and send a message with one strong voice down to Ottawa: "We're tired of your failures, Mr. Trudeau. 
We're tired of bearing the brunt of your mismanagement." 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member for Regina North: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the federal government for its budget of June 28 which did not 
take the steps necessary to restore investor confidence in Canada and promote the continued 
expansion and diversification of the agricultural, mineral and industrial sectors of 
Saskatchewan and the other western provinces. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to say that I feel somewhat 
paradoxical about this motion. I agree in part with many of the comments which the member for Turtleford 
made. At the same time, I have to wonder how you people can pull the silver out of someone else's eye and 
neglect the beam in your own. I say to the members opposite that you are committing many of the sins which 
you are so desperately decrying in another level of government. 
 
It's fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that there is a lack of confidence. I have never witnessed anything like it in the 
10 or 15 years — I may be being generous to myself — that I've followed public affairs closely in this 
country. I've never seen anything like the current atmosphere. 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
743 

I was in Victoria last Thursday. I had the opportunity to sit in the House and listen to a guy for Vancouver 
Centre. His name escapes me. I listened to him speak on a supply motion. Mr. Speaker, he was telling the 
House what a terrible job the Socreds were doing. You know, it sounds like a movie, the actors changed but 
the roles didn't. The ministers were telling them that of course the whole thing wouldn't have happened if the 
NDP hadn't put it to the federal government. That was the cause of all the country's ills. But anyway, the 
member for Vancouver Centre said several times that they had a bank close to insolvency, and I thought 
nothing of it except that I thought he may have been overstating his case a bit. 
 
As it turns out, the next day the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, I gather, had a run on the shares, if 
not on the deposits. That says nothing about the Bank of Commerce. It does say an awful lot about 
confidence people have in economic institutions in this country — and I'm not being unkind to the member, 
but I think he was speaking off the cuff — when the poorly thought-out remarks of a member in the 
Vancouver legislature can set a run on a Canadian bank. It says something about the confidence, and I think 
that has become markedly worse since the federal budget was brought in. 
 
There was, I think, a hope in this country that the federal government could do something and it would bring 
in a budget and it would come up with some solution or other to the country's problems. But when the 
budget came in and there was no solutions, then just sort of a hopelessness spread over the land. 
 
I really do agree with the member for Turtleford. The federal deficit is a serious problem, but the member 
speaks about it as if it were a sudden decision, that MacEachen woke up one morning in May, and said, 
"Gee, a great day to ruin the country. I think I'll do it and bring in a deficit." That wasn't the process. The 
process was that the deficit built up over 20 years to the point that it has now become virtually 
unmanageable. 
 
The province, by way of contrast, has had two deficits (I think these figures are accurate; I wish the former 
member for Saskatoon Nutana were here — Mr. Robbins). But I think I'm accurate in saying that in the last 
20 years we have had two deficits . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Another 24 would do just fine; that's right. 
However, they're not here. But this province has experienced two deficits in the last 20 years. I think I'm 
correct in saying the federal government has had the opposite record, two balanced budgets in the same 
period of time. And thus the federal deficit has grown like Topsy. It was once manageable. It no longer is. 
When I say you people are pulling the silver out of someone else's eye and leaving the beam in your own, 
you are now starting Saskatchewan on the same process. You are no pikers, you members opposite. You 
people start off with a bang. You don't start off with a modest deficit. You are starting off with a deficit that 
looks like a minimum of $200 million, and accurately stated, Mr. Speaker, it is more likely to be close to 
$300 million. I'll venture to say that by the time we unscramble your budget, take out of capital the things 
that belong in operating, and state your budget fairly and accurately, your deficit will be closer to $300 
million. 
 
The federal deficit may be 25 per cent, but it has accumulated over 20 years. You people are growing to a 
deficit in excess of 10 per cent in one fell swoop. You people adopt one of two approaches to your deficit — 
either it doesn't exist or if it does, it all was created by us before we left. The fact that you have taken away 
$120 million or so in tax revenue has nothing to do, of course, with the deficit. The fact that you are adding 
another $50 million or $60 million on in the mortgage interest reduction program has nothing to do with 
your deficit. 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
744 

So when you talk about the federal deficit, keep an eye on your own, because your own is going to get 
unmanageable a lot sooner than the federal government one did. You people should at least have had the 
benefit of their experience. You should know that you can't deficit finance forever without getting yourselves 
into very serious trouble. You are starting off on the road that the federal government is on, and you are 
starting off with quite a vengeance, I may add. I don't want to absorb my entire time in speaking about your 
deficit, and I'm very close to having done that. 
 
I want to say that I think there are several things the federal government could do and only it could do some 
of them. I think the federal government could bring in exchange controls and lower interest rates, and that's 
something you can't do here, provincially. I think . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I'm not. I'm going to be 
supporting you people. I'm going to be suggesting . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — After what this House has witnessed over the last couple of days, it is apparent 
that you people need some ideas, so we're going to give you some. I'm going to give you people some ideas 
because there are some things the federal government can and should have done, and there are some things 
you people should be doing. 
 
At the end of my remarks, which must come very shortly by the look of the clock, I am going to be moving a 
motion. There are a number of things you people could be doing to alleviate unemployment and the dire 
economic straits in which this country finds itself. You could make a contribution to the solution of the 
problems that you decry with such vehemence, as if the federal government masterminded the whole thing, 
brought this all on their own heads. They didn't; they may not have suffered from good management, but it 
isn't entirely of the federal government's making. 
 
The solution, gentlemen, lies not just with the federal government, but also with the provincial government. 
There are some things you could do besides study, repeal, consider, and equivocate . . . (inaudible 
interjections) . . . Well, for one thing, the Minister of Highways might get off his duff and do something 
about the highway program that you've been stalling on for three months. The Minister of Health, who is 
continually reviewing his budget (almost a process of staring at his own navel), might try renewing, 
renovating, and constructing some hospitals. 
 
You people might just try keeping your own campaign promises. I don't know if you people remember your 
own campaign promises. I suspect not. I suspect you're suffering from selective amnesia. You could do a lot 
for employment . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I'm speaking to the amendment which I'm about to make. 
 
You people might try introducing your natural gas to every farm program. You might try to do something 
about that instead of studying it and reviewing it. The Minister of Labor is reviewing it, considering it and 
studying it. There is a great deal about that election promise of yours that needs review and consideration 
because it was, I think, virtually unaffordable. But there is no excuse from an engineering point of view for 
not beginning the engineering work when the design work is done. 
 
I suspect I am testing the patience of Mr. Speaker and the House, so I am going to move my amendment. I 
think I am over my 10 minutes, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
745 

member for Athabasca . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I am sorry, but the hon. member's time is up. The hon. member's time has expired. 
 
MR. HOPFNER: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you, and I hope that the member for Regina Centre will just bear 
with me a few minutes. He may hear some facts and truths. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Assembly has sat since June 17, 1982, and it is a fantastic feeling to hear my constituents 
speak of how well the new Saskatchewan government is doing in so far as initiating its policies. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HOPFNER: — However, Mr. Speaker, they do realize that it is not economically feasible, or sound 
business sense, to move too quickly so as to risk running too high a deficit — a deficit which they now 
realize cannot be avoided because of the mismanagement of the federal government and the previous 
provincial government. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, the June 28 federal budget was about the most thoughtless and disappointing 
budget since the previous budget, especially when Canadians were hoping for more national economic 
leadership in areas which are the responsibility of the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a total absence of any hope, which might have existed, of any importance for 
Saskatchewan and for its oil industry. There has been a total absence, Mr. Speaker, of any further relief from 
the national energy program, and a lack of relief from the federal government's high interest rates, and there 
was absolutely no relief whatsoever as to the encouragement of foreign investment policies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see no evidence of further willingness by the federal government to recognize the special 
circumstances and special problems surrounding and facing the Saskatchewan oil industry. To me, Mr. 
Speaker, this is about the most recessing, depressing, continuation of the federal government's 
mismanagement of the energy sector in general and it's complete ignorance of the Saskatchewan industry in 
particular. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I'm proud to report, in case it slips the minds of the members opposite, that the new 
Saskatchewan government, unlike the cynical methods of the federal government or the previous provincial 
government, has demonstrated a fresh approach. It has sparked new life by addressing problems in the oil 
industry which are under the province's controls. On July 6, 1982, just a few days after the federal budget 
came down, my colleague, the Minister of Mineral Resources, announced a five-point program of recovery 
for the oil industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HOPFNER: — It is a program which we all know has given this government a vote of confidence. Let 
me point out to this Assembly that we are looking to the future of our province. We are designing the 
initiatives to provide necessary incentives for the oil industry during our crisis period, initiatives that the 
federal government or its counterpart, now known as our opposition, were unable to design. The crisis was  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
746 

brought on by the combination of the onerous federal tax system implemented under the national energy 
program, continued high interest rates, lower than anticipated oil prices and a severe economic recession. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again I must say that this party, this government, acted to reduce the heavy provincial tax 
burden imposed by the previous government. We will show the members opposite that this government is 
committed to creating a business atmosphere in Saskatchewan and to getting the industry moving again. 
 
I would like to say that, perhaps most significantly for Saskatchewan, the federal government made no 
substantial modifications to its import compensation program. The federal government's import policy 
continues to reserve a sizable portion of the domestic market for foreign oil. In so doing, it sets a subsidy for 
eastern refineries to use it. I want to remind the members opposite that the result is that while production of 
Canadian oil is shut in in the West, Canadians have paid over $3 billion for foreign crude oil in the first six 
months of 1982. 
 
This import compensation program has provided a strong incentive for refineries to ignore Saskatchewan's 
medium and heavy crudes in favor of import oils. This is a situation that has prevailed for many years. The 
import compensation program does not consider quality price differentials when setting refinery 
compensation payments as all importers receive the same compensation irrespective of the type of crude oil 
they purchase. And may I say we hope that the national energy program will allow a special export of 
Saskatchewan light sour crudes to U.S. market. This oil is clearly a surplus to Canadian needs and would 
considerably improve market related shut-ins of this type of Saskatchewan product. 
 
Also, further federal measures could provide stimulus to Saskatchewan's oil industry — in particular, 
extending a lower petroleum and gas revenue tax rate for heavy oil and for all oil produced through enhanced 
recovery techniques and by expanding the number of categories of oil qualified for NORP (new oil reference 
price). 
 
The federal government should reveal its intentions with respect to the increment oil revenue tax. Does it 
intend to reinstate this tax? What about the promised productivity well allowance for marginal producers? 
Mr. Speaker, this government has brought forth a program providing a positive statement of the province's 
intentions to the oil industry. I'd like to contrast this approach to the previous administration's confiscatory 
oil royalty and taxes that provided such an inhospitable investment climate to the development of the 
Saskatchewan oil resources and contrast it to the previous administration's reliance on band-aid welfare 
programs such as the oil fields servicing and assistance program announced during the election. 
 
The new government's emphasis is on treating the problem, not merely alleviating the systems by assuring 
that these systems do not prevail. On July 6 we began to accomplish this by providing fair return for 
investors and by encouraging the private sector to get on with the job. 
 
All members in government or in opposition must now begin to promote a healthy industry and a healthy 
economy. The federal government must also co-operate. 
 
I have mentioned some of the areas in which we seek further federal action. But let me tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that this may not be easy. But I would like to remind Saskatchewan and indeed all of western Canada that if 
it were not for the arrogance, the deceitful 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
747 

initiatives and the undermining attitude of the previous government and their colleagues in Ottawa we would 
have had a federal government that we could have trusted; we could have had a federal government which 
would have had direction. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I must inform the hon. member that his time has expired. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I listened (and I must confess, intently) to the mover of the motion. I have no 
intention of adding insult to new Canadians coming to Canada, but he also must admit that when our true 
Canadian speaks in his mother tongue, it is hard to understand, and I imagine that in time he might learn our 
English accent as we speak it here, and then I could distinguish some of the numbers and words you are 
using. So my apologies to the member for thinking I was making a slanderous attack on his language. What I 
was saying was: slow down a little bit so we can hear you, and understand clearly what you are saying. 
 
The motion that the member for Turtleford brought to this Assembly really fails to keep one of your major 
election promises. And if I had equipped myself tonight with some newspaper advertising that many of you 
people have done, I could show that one of the things that members opposite stressed during the campaign 
was that they were going to take hold of the reins in Saskatchewan. They were going to administer this 
province, and they weren't going to get into this same category that we got into when we were members 
opposite, of blaming the feds for everything. And it doesn't take that long until they come along with a 
motion. And I can endorse everything that is in this motion — everything. I can endorse everything. 
 
But I would also like to add a few things, Mr. Speaker, and in the closing of my remarks I intend to move a 
motion . . . Maybe my colleague for Shaunavon might have to move it if I run out of time, but I intend to 
move motion that adds a little responsibility where the responsibility belongs. 
 
This motion starts by saying that this Assembly condemns the federal government for its budget of June 28. I 
would like to condemn the government across the way here for its lack of a budget. They are asking us to sit 
at the session; today it's nearly a month that we have been here, Mr. Speaker, and we still have no budget. 
We still have no indication of what direction you intend to take. And their budget didn't take necessary steps 
to restore investor confidence in Canada. I'd like to say that a lack of a budget here is taking giant steps for 
people of Saskatchewan to restore a lack of confidence in you people. If you want to gain the confidence of 
the people saying that with your 55-man majority you can offer some good government, give us some 
direction. 
 
Saskatchewan is a part of Canada. Those members sitting opposite who were on the former rules committee 
will well remember the trip we made down East, and for the new members I would like to tell them that we 
had a special committee that had a big part in printing the appendix to the little rule book and the changes. 
This particular motion we are dealing with today is part of the work of that rules committee. 
 
But while we were down in Ontario, Mr. Speaker, I had occasion to sit beside the Speaker of the Ontario 
legislature in Queen's Park. He is a good man, and I want you to respond also to what this man had to say. I 
told him that in the early '70s, as a delegate from Saskatchewan, I visited the Ontario legislature. Do you 
know how we were treated in Ontario in the early '70s? Exactly the same way as we treat a class of high 
school kids who come to visit this Assembly. We were introduced in the House as those guys who call 
themselves MLAs from Saskatchewan. That was 1971. 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
748 

Mr. Speaker, what happened in 1981, just 10 years later? For those of you who can remember, during that 
period of time we had an NDP government. Ten years later we visited that legislature. They didn't only 
introduce us in the House, they took us out and dined us, they fed us well, they entertained us, they took us 
into their committees, they taught us the rules, they held sessions with us, and the Tories were anxious to 
share. I said to this Speaker (who I just said was a good man) . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That's right, 
some of your members were part of that rules committee. Your Attorney General was along with us on that 
rules committee. And the Speaker said to me, "The people in Saskatchewan have come of age. They have 
grown up." When your son grows up and comes of age the community recognizes him not for what his dad 
did but for what he was able to do. And I want to tell the members opposite that Saskatchewan during the 
last 10 years came of age. 
 
We inherited a role in the Dominion of Canada, and you people had better recognize that you have a role to 
fulfill. You can't blame Ottawa for everything. Some of the actions you take right here in Saskatchewan are 
going to be measured by the rest of Canada. Your counterparts in Ontario are going to watch carefully to see 
if the health program improves as much as it did. Your counterparts in Ontario are going to watch the 
Department of Agriculture in Saskatchewan to see what stances you are going to take. What are you going to 
do to ensure that Saskatchewan really proves to Canada that it has come of age? You said, "That was a good 
Speaker." I agree that he was a good Speaker. 
 
This motion goes on to say that steps should be taken that are necessary to restore investor confidence in 
Canada, and promote the continued expansion and diversification of agriculture. 
 
What have we done to promote diversification in agriculture? We've really done a fantastic job. Today the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce stands up in this House and says he wasn't aware of Friggstad's closing 
down — a major industry in our country. That's really expansion of diversification, having Friggstad close. 
We are proud of what was happening in southern Saskatchewan in cultivators . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I don't own one. I own a Morris. But at the same time . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What color is it? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — My Morris is red. I could tell you a story about what happened to it yesterday. 
 
Today the Minister of Industry and Commerce admitted not knowing anything about the problems there. In 
fact he tried to inflate his ego by saying, "I opened eight new projects since I became minister." Does he try 
to tell this House that those eight projects were initiated by him? Is he really trying to deceive us? I was at 
that plant long before he was, where they make those artificial bricks. I knew about that plant. He hasn't done 
very much to restore confidence in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I run out of time, I want to read this lengthy motion. I would like to move, seconded by 
my colleague, the member for Shaunavon, that we amend this motion by adding: 
 

and further that this Assembly urges the Government of Saskatchewan to take steps to 
stimulate the Saskatchewan economy by proceeding 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
749 

immediately and without further delay with a major program of capital expenditures 
including: (1) the construction of 4,100 new housing units, (2) new and reconstructed 
hospitals at Lloydminster, Yorkton, Cutknife, Melfort, Nipawin, Maidstone, Indian Head, 
Watrous and Saskatoon, (3) new special care homes at Biggar, Shaunavon, Birch Hills, 
Weyburn, Fillmore and Saskatoon, (4) the extension of natural gas services to 50 
communities and thousands of farms in 1982, (5) major water supply project for 
Lloydminster, (6) over $13 million of highway construction on highways 105, 106, 155 in 
northern Saskatchewan, (7) a $100 million highway construction program in southern 
Saskatchewan . . . 

 
Let me just stop here and say that if the Minister of Highways thinks he is convincing us that a $9 million or 
$10 million highway project is a good thing for Saskatchewan, that's only 10 per cent of what you should be 
doing. That's 10 per cent of your budget. Do $100 million worth of construction in southern Saskatchewan 
now. 
 

. . . (8) construction of a provincial lab building and a provincial rehabilitation centre, a 
Saskatchewan archives building, courthouses in Saskatoon and Regina and a further addition 
to the Saskatchewan Technical Institute in Moose Jaw. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. JOHNSON: — Mr. Speaker, I don't know how to handle this amendment but I'm going to go ahead 
with my prepared speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it's a pleasure for me to rise in this Assembly and join with my colleagues in condemning the 
federal government's attitude, its approach, and its failure to restore confidence in the farming communities 
of Canada — especially western Canada. The federal government's proposal on June 28 have once again 
failed to meet the needs of the Saskatchewan agricultural industry. The taxation measures demonstrate the 
federal government's lack of understanding of the measures needed to provide a renewed confidence and 
promote continued expansion in our agricultural sector. Specifically, the budget did not address the problems 
created on November 12, 1981, let alone provide renewed confidence in our agricultural industry. 
 
The restrictions on farm transfers through the elimination of income tax averaging annuity contracts and the 
reduction of the capital gains reserves to the maximum of 10 years places continued hardship and increased 
costs on the intergenerational transfer of the family farm unit. The forward averaging annuity provision 
proposed as an alternative is not adequate because it results in most of the hardships falling on those on the 
lowest incomes. 
 
The federal government has chosen to index our personal exemptions and tax brackets at one-half of the 
current inflation rate. This policy alone will result in a heavy tax burden for our agricultural industry. Capital 
cost allowance restrictions and restrictions on family farm corporations are examples of additional tax 
burdens being placed on farmers, who can ill afford the increased costs. 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
750 

Mr. Speaker, the federal tax of 55 cents a gallon must be looked at immediately. Maybe the federal 
government should take a message from Saskatchewan's removal of the gasoline tax as a quick and certain 
way to help farmers and people. For example, trucking industries will be able to keep their freight rates in 
line. If fuel costs were reduced across Canada, as they were in Saskatchewan, this in turn would help 
shipping costs to be kept down to a minimum. The savings would be felt by all the people on everything 
from cans of beans to farm repairs and probably from toilet paper to medical supplies. (It's a good line, eh?) 
School buses have had to pay a 20 per cent tax on all the fuel they burn. They paid for this from school taxes. 
The removal of that tax should result in a saving of from $600 to $1,000 per bus per year. This saving should 
at least keep the mill rate down two or three points. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area of our society that will benefit from the savings of all these taxes is all the 
taxpayers in all the cities and rural municipalities in Canada. The reduction of the gas taxes will allow a 
tremendous saving in the operation of maintenance equipment and savings can translate into more tax 
savings to a Canadian taxpayer. 
 
These kinds of measures must be adopted by the federal government if agriculture is to survive in this 
country. High interest rates have crippled our agricultural industry. Increased costs of borrowing capital are 
causing many farmers to reconsider their farming careers and many are facing bankruptcy. 
 
The federal government has held its interest rate high in an attempt to bring down inflation and to bolster the 
sagging dollar. The reduction of net incomes through increased interest rates and federal government policies 
of increasing energy costs to farmers has resulted in curtailing investments, reducing growth and reducing 
employment, and I'm talking generally on the agricultural industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our agricultural supply industry is facing bankruptcy. Just look at the machinery lots. They're 
full of unsold machinery. A healthy agricultural industry benefits everyone in Canada. And the June 28 
budget didn't address this problem at all. Not only are firms on the brink of financial bankruptcy and disaster, 
many industries are just plain going under. We need to look just as far as our farm machinery industry to see 
the effects that the energy costs and interest rates have. When our agricultural industry is reeling in the face 
of an economic depression, the federal government has chosen to embark on further measures which will 
cause more financial hardships to farmers. 
 
The crowrate, a long-standing argument that guaranteed farmers a decent freight rate, is now going to be 
dismantled by the federal government. As with VIA Rail, they held meetings, there were delegations sent but 
to no avail, Mr. Speaker. They canceled VIA Rail anyway. 
 
Under the Gilson report that was handed down a few days ago, our farmers will be paying 30 per cent of the 
increased costs of transportation in 1983-84, and as high as 60 per cent in 1991-92. The loss of the crowrate 
and the increased costs of transportation cannot be afforded by our agricultural producers of Saskatchewan. 
And again I say the federal government's taxation policies, the interest policies and energy cost policies will 
cause considerable difficulty to the farm communities. 
 
It's obvious, Mr. Speaker, that the federal government policies in the past have not provided our economy 
with the incentive to increase investment and to increase growth and to reduce unemployment. I believe the 
federal government must put the  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
751 

necessary steps forward to restore investment confidence and promote continued expansion in our 
agricultural sector. The announcement of a $19.6 billion deficit and a predicted $22.5 billion federal loan by 
the Minister of Finance has forced the auditor general and his predecessor, James Macdonell, to speak out 
publicly in Canada, saying that Canada faces imminent economic collapse if something isn't done 
immediately. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to impress on the governments of the country that our food industry, its future and 
its security, remains threatened through farm bankruptcies, because the Minister of Finance has failed 
dismally to recognize the problems in agriculture today. Generally, all government programs have been 
designed to make people more dependent on governments through bad times. If some of these things aren't 
done, Mr. Speaker, agriculture will never become number one in Canada as we would all like to see it. I'm 
sure the members opposite will agree with me that if we make agriculture number one, that's the way it 
should be. Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask everyone in this Assembly to support this motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak on the amendment as distinct from the 
motion. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — You're only allowed 10 minutes per member in this debate, and you've had your 10 
minutes, so we can't allow you the time. 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, in seconding the original motion tabled, I would like to say that the new 
budget our federal government put in place on June 28, 1982, appears to be accepted by the people of 
Canada with the same degree of apprehension with which its earlier budget of November 1981 was met, and 
rightfully so. Its November budget has proven to be a miserable failure. Its new budget appears, again, to fail 
to address the very problems that caused that failure. The federal government should be condemned for 
presenting a new budget that appears doomed to the same disastrous results. 
 
Past federal Liberal policies have created a world-wide drop in demand for Canadian products. They have 
created a very serious situation in our economy, and have our country's finances in a very, very bad state. We 
now face a federal deficit which is expected to be $20 billion this year. Mr. Speaker, we face record low 
levels of business and consumer confidence, along with poor investor confidence as well. We face soaring 
levels of personal and corporate bankruptcies, and what did they do about it in their new budget? Nothing. 
The federal Liberal government chooses again to simply try to talk its way out of trouble, and its budget is 
simply a public relations exercise with very little substance. 
 
And yet the NDP members of parliament, the brethren of our members opposite, must recognize that they are 
responsible for these federal Liberal programs. Mr. Speaker, these NDP members of parliament supported 
the Liberals to put them where they are today. The Liberals now continue to implement their sorry programs 
that do nothing and accomplish nothing for us as Canadians, and, Mr. Speaker, this budget does nothing for 
Saskatchewan as well. 
 
For instance, the glaring problem created by our past Saskatchewan administration in  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
752 

conjunction with the federal government as it relates to Uranium City and the closing of that mine has not 
been addressed. This problem, combined with others, dictates that now we, as government, face rapidly 
rising unemployment levels reaching record proportions. We have in Canada now levels of unemployment 
that have not been seen since the Great Depression of the '30s. 
 
We were hopeful that the new federal budget would encourage industry, but it appears we will have to go it 
alone. We went alone on mortgage interest rates, and will soon be the envy of all jurisdictions in North 
American in this regard. I am sure we will be up to the challenge we now face of restoring confidence to 
industry and investors as well. 
 
Our industries have been subject to extremely high interest rates that have been affecting them for too long a 
period of time. We have seen many Saskatchewan businesses fail or simply shut down because they could 
not operate for any length of time in the face of those same interest rates. And yet, Mr. Speaker, our federal 
government, while recognizing this problem, still refuses to do anything in the line of a positive attack 
against these interest rates. 
 
At about the time the cohorts of our members opposite, the federal NDP, chose to side with the Liberals and 
return and keep them in power, Canada was growing. Canada was vibrant and healthy industrial climates 
existed across the country. Gigantic deficits were unheard of, and Canada was enjoying the respect of 
countries around the world. 
 
Over the years, the NDP kept the Liberals in power in Ottawa. They all failed to listen or pay attention to the 
many warnings that were sounded, and now look. Just look at the sad state of affairs across our land. Our 
industries and their employees are almost hopelessly involved in trying to assemble the fragmented pieces of 
our economy. 
 
It is unfortunate indeed, Mr. Speaker, that our Prime Minister can in fact get the support of our federal 
NDPers almost any time he needs it even if it imposes or creates more hardship on our Saskatchewan 
business climate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal budget truly contained a message that investment in Canada was not really wanted. 
A lot of our investors seemed to get the message, all right. They moved their money right out of the country. 
Our weakening Canadian dollar proves that. Those budgets continue to destroy the credibility of our federal 
government within the entire business community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, investor confidence was further destroyed by the federal government when it introduced notice 
of a ways and means motion to implement a large part of its November 1981 budget. This notice contains 
over 100 technically phrased changes to the Income Tax Act. Those changes are lengthy, complex, and will 
require much study and interpretation. This additional red tape will further discourage investment in our 
business community. Other reinforced measures that they added will discourage expansion of existing 
businesses and the start-ups of new enterprises. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our government has already begun its battle. Our Minister of Industry and Commerce has 
announced that an international conference will soon take place, and it is suitable entitled "Saskatchewan: 
Open for Business". At this conference, our minister will deliver in detail this government's industrial 
strategy — the opportunities for growth and investment as well as the ground rules for development. This 
conference, Mr. Speaker, is designed for businesses small and large and will  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
753 

attract investors and business people from Canada, the United States and Europe. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has been open for business since April 26, 1982. And this conference will be 
another step forward by our government to earn the respect and the trust of our business community. 
 
As stated earlier today, Mr. Speaker, our minister in his first month of office attended the official openings of 
eight new businesses in Saskatchewan, and you can expect many, many more to come. 
 
In the Globe and Mail, issued just last Saturday, the Royal Bank of Canada's index of leading economic 
indicators recorded its third quarterly drop in a row in the first quarter of this year. This is the first time since 
1974 that three consecutive quarters of decline have been recorded. The budget failed to address this 
situation. The Royal Bank's comments were reinforced similarly when the Canadian Imperial Bank of 
Commerce made a gloomy comment on the economy last month when discussing the latest results for its 
leading economic indicators. It said that data suggested an economic recovery no earlier, and possibly later, 
than the fourth quarter, and yet the federal budget still failed to address that problem. 
 
In view of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I must urge all members of this Assembly to support the motion put 
forth by our member for Turtleford. The motion, Mr. Speaker, states: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the federal government for its budget of June 28 which did not 
take the steps necessary to restore investor confidence in Canada and promote the continued 
expansion and diversification of the agricultural, mineral and industrial sectors of 
Saskatchewan and the other western provinces. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment put forth by the members opposite did not truly reflect, in our minds, what this 
original motion set out to do. I have stated here facts that have been brought about and that are now part of 
our economy and the way we live here in Canada. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I must inform the member that his time has expired. 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, under section 16(1) in the Rules and Procedures, it reads: 
 

A motion may be moved every other Tuesday immediately following Questions and Motions 
for Returns (Not Debatable) on the Orders of the Day with the topic of the debate to be 
chosen by Government and Opposition Members alternatively. 

 
It is my understanding that during the debate, the debate will go back and forth across the floor for 10 
minutes each. The government members just completed a 10-minute session, and I'm wondering why they 
are now allowed to get another 10 minutes. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I believe that the portion that you read was self-explanatory. The  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
754 

selection of the topic of debate is selected one week by the opposition, and two weeks later by the 
government. That does not refer to the members that may speak, but rather refers to the selection of the 
debate item. 
 
MR. MARTENS: — Mr. Speaker, it's always with a good deal of respect and a sense of honor that I rise to 
address this legislature. It's with a good deal of awe that I visualize a budget that has a deficit of $20 billion. 
When you calculate the deficit over the $78 billion budget, it becomes a 25 per cent overrun on government 
spending. When you calculate the deficit over the $58 billion that is estimated to be the revenue, then you 
have an expenditure of 34 per cent more than the anticipated revenue. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, we must again begin, as we have begun in this province, to place the opportunity 
before the people to use some of their own money for developing positive means of productivity in Canada. 
The federal government's proposal on June 28 once again failed to meet the needs of agricultural and mineral 
development and expansion in industrial areas. Where has the federal government moved in agriculture and 
in industry? Regarding beef stabilization, it suggested one in 1981. Where is it today? The Hon. Mr. Whelan, 
Minister of Agriculture, wants more than stabilization. He wants a beef marketing board. Where is the 
decent price on domestic wheat? We have a stale energy program. Mr. Speaker, I watch truck after truck 
hauling oil rigs out of this province and out of this country. A year ago, in spring (I live along the No. 1 
Highway), there was truck after truck moving oil rigs out of the province and down into the United States. 
Depending on the size of the rig it can take between 40 and 65 semitrailers to haul the equipment out of one 
place into another. 
 
What was going out was equipment that could produce, men who knew how to produce and expertise in the 
energy-related fields. Mr. Speaker, they were people who knew what oil was all about. In speaking to them 
and dealing with problems that they had in relating to the federal energy program, what they got $17 for in 
Canada they could get $27 for in Montana, $35 in Oklahoma and $42 in Texas. Incidentally, they just had a 
session in the legislature in the state of Oklahoma in which they assigned appropriated funds that were over 
the revenue received or the revenue needed to operate their budget and they placed that into reserves. 
 
It's clearly, Mr. Speaker, an indication to me that the problem exists in dealing with the federal budget. It 
deals with a section there related to the industrial development that needs to be changed and, indeed, needs 
to be restructured. 
 
Some of the problems related to the budget of June 28 that concern me a lot deal with interest rates. We, in 
the province of Saskatchewan, have been dealing consecutively in various ways to handle some of the 
problems related to interest rates. We dealt with it in relating to interest on home-owners; 13.25 per cent 
adjusted it. We've dealt with a problem related to energy and here again the federal government has created a 
problem for western Canada in relating to the agricultural industry with a 55 cents per gallon tax on farm 
fuels. It's related directly to the cost of production of food in this province and related directly to the cost to 
the consumer. And, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it's necessary for us to speak out against that and against that 
kind of development. 
 
The capital gains tax in this province has created a problem relating to the payment to the federal 
government. In selling farms and dealing with all those kinds of things it creates a considerable problem. 
 
Capital cost allowances have not maintained their original amount. It has created a  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
755 

problem for people dealing with taxes and tax structures. The capital gains tax, specifically, in dealing with 
farming and selling farms from fathers to sons, has created a major problem in dealing with this capital 
gains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have listened to the Gilson report; we've talked about it. This spring in Vanguard at a 
ratepayers' meeting, I had the opportunity to listen to Mr. Hazen Argue discussing some of the aspects of 
moving grain in western Canada. He indicated there that the cost historically of moving a bushel of wheat 
out of the province of Saskatchewan and out of western Canada has been 13 per cent of the price of grain. 
Now, if you took 13 per cent of the price of a bushel of wheat today, you would place that at roughly 65 
cents a bushel. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it's time that we urged the federal government in a clear, concise 
way that we need to have some record of improvement in dealing with western Canada, dealing with 
agriculture, dealing with minerals and dealing with the industrial sector. 
 
They have a common problem, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, in trying to develop budgets that have no 
concrete basis. We said in our campaign that we were going to put these things in; we have begun to do that; 
we will continue to do that. But what do they do with their budgets? They consistently say we will negotiate 
them through the summer. Last fall they said they'd work on it through the winter. And what do we have? 
We have utter confusion. 
 
People have indicated to me, Mr. Speaker, that when they deal with the tax problems in the Canadian sector, 
they get a new paper on their desk every month. When they deal with the same kind of commodity in the 
United States, they haven't had a legislated change in five years. Where does the security come in investor 
dollars? It doesn't come anywhere when you have continual change, when the federal government doesn't 
know what it's doing. And that seems to have created, in my opinion, a very serious concept of investor 
dollars in Canada. It has created a problem dealing with people in Canada wanting to invest their money. 
And, I think that that is really serious. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it's a necessary item for us to clearly support the original motion condemning the 
federal government on some of the problems it has had in the way it handles its money —$20 billion is not 
just a minor detail. 
 
I took the opportunity during our lengthy recess to figure out what a billion was. And if you took a billion 
minutes and stretched them out from here, in time you'd go back 1,982 years. You could be just a little bit 
before A.D. 1. And, Mr. Speaker, if you add 20 of them together, how much money is that? That's a fantastic 
amount of money in relating to what the common man considers. The hon. member for Turtleford indicated 
exactly what it was and it's an extremely important item to consider. 
 
Mr. Speaker, agriculture is a primary function in western Canada that deals with roughly 50 per cent of the 
total economic value in this province, and I think we have to deal with it in a constructive, concise way. 
Relating that to some of the things we plan on doing in energy and in improving the loans, the question has 
to be raised, Mr. Speaker: what is the federal government doing as its sense of responsibility? I believe that it 
needs to be actively encouraged in any way possible; I think this government wants to do that with this 
motion that we have here today. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! I must advise the hon. member that the time has disappeared. Our 75 minutes 
under rule 16 is complete. 



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
756 

MOTION 
 

Resolution No. 5 — Municipal Revenue-Sharing Program for Northern Saskatchewan 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to have the opportunity to place before this Assembly a resolution 
urging the Government of Saskatchewan to implement immediately a municipal revenue-sharing program 
for all local and municipal governments in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Such a step is absolutely necessary, Mr. Speaker, for further political and economic development in northern 
Saskatchewan, because without strong and effective local government in northern Saskatchewan there 
cannot be effective political development and there cannot be effective local government without a 
revenue-sharing program. This legislature has a responsibility to take action on this matter, and to take it 
soon. 
 
In speaking to this resolution, I want to explain a bit about the history of local government in northern 
Saskatchewan. Those of you who are familiar with the North will know that we have not had local 
governments in the North with the powers and responsibilities of local governments in southern 
Saskatchewan. The reason for this has a great deal to do with the history of the North, and it tells a lot about 
the North and the situation of its people. 
 
As most of you will know, northern Saskatchewan was the first part of Saskatchewan to receive the attention 
of eastern Canadian and European interests. The fur trade attracted the earliest commercial activity know in 
Saskatchewan, and it was as a result of this that the first settlements were established. Cumberland House is 
the oldest community in Saskatchewan, and it was originally established as a fur-trading centre. 
Communities such as Ile-a-la-Crosse, Buffalo Narrows, Wollaston Lake, and many others can likewise be 
counted as among the oldest communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Despite the tremendous wealth generated by the people of these communities, they did not receive the right 
to municipal self-government during those early days. The reasons were complex, but the main factors were 
the fear that the fur-trading companies and the government had of losing the tight control they maintained 
over those communities. 
 
Through time, the economic importance of the North declined, and the economic importance of the South 
increased. Trapping, fishing and forestry continued as important economic activities, but agricultural 
settlements and developments became the main concern by the beginning of the 20th century. By the time 
the province of Saskatchewan was formed in 1905, politicians generally looked upon the North with 
disinterest. It was not considered to be of great economic importance. The land remained in the hands of the 
federal government, and the people were generally thought of as backward people who could not be given 
the responsibility of governing themselves, even at the local level. As a result, no provision was made for 
local government in the North in the early days of the province. 
 
In 1930, when crown lands were handed over to the province, the Department of Natural Resources was 
formed to administer these lands. DNR administrators began to look after government activity in the North, 
including the administration of local communities. With the exception of Creighton, La Ronge and Uranium 
City, these situations remained unchanged until the 1960s. 



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
757 

In 1964, Mr. Speaker, changes were made to provide for the establishment of local community authorities, 
referred to as LCAs, which provided some communities with very limited forms of local government. In 
1969, many other communities were given the right to form local advisory councils, LACs, which could 
provide advice to the minister. However, generally little progress was made toward the creation of any real 
local government. 
 
Starting in the 1970s, however, some real efforts were finally directed toward the development of local 
government in northern Saskatchewan. In 1972, the province made a decision to proceed with a unique 
manner of providing services to the northern part of the province. The Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan was created to be the single agency responsible to deliver a wide variety of programs which 
were formerly the responsibilities of southern departments and southern agencies. In addition, the 
department was charged with the responsibility to provide the administration of the North and to support the 
development and strengthening of local governments. 
 
The administration of The Northern Administration Act was transferred to the minister responsible for DNS, 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan. The act was amended in 1973, providing for the creation of a 
northern municipal council, referred to as the NMC. This council was to have powers and duties similar to 
municipal councils in southern Saskatchewan and to assume related responsibilities. The DNS and the NMC 
provided ongoing assistance, co-ordination and resources for the existing local government bodies in the 
North and provided municipal administrative services in those other small communities without elected or 
appointed councils. 
 
A further amendment to the act in 1978 provided for the LACs to act in an advisory capacity to the NMC 
instead of the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. The northern municipal council co-operated with local 
councils and with the department in planning and priorizing the delivery of capital infra-structures in 
northern Saskatchewan. The council was intended to be the municipal representative body for all the 
communities in the North and to play an advisory and consultative role to the department in the formation of 
policies and programs. 
 
Local community authorities in northern Saskatchewan matured over the years to the point that they were 
prepared to assert a degree of independence in terms of handling their own financial affairs. 
 
The Northern Administration Act was again amended in 1979, providing the option for local community 
authorities to act independently of the northern municipal council in administering their grant moneys. The 
NMC thus concentrated on acting as the financial agent for the smaller local advisory communities and 
provided administrative services and support to those communities. 
 
Despite the various amendments, local government authorities repeatedly expressed the opinion that The 
Northern Administration Act did not clearly outline the responsibilities, and did not provide them with 
enough power to undertake some of the projects which were needed in their communities and in the areas 
surrounding their communities. Several studies supported this view. 
 
In 1972, the new Department of Northern Saskatchewan provided funding assistance  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
758 

for the Metis Society of Saskatchewan to enable it to prepare a report to the provincial government 
respecting the development of local government structures in northern Saskatchewan. This report was 
submitted in January 1973, and contained numerous recommendations. The report of the Association of 
Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan, in addition to recommending the establishment of both local 
and regional governments, went on to point out in some detail some significant areas of responsibility which 
should be exercised at the local and regional levels. 
 
Then in 1978, the Cluff Lake Board of Inquiry presented its report to the government, recommending 
strongly that new and unique forms of self-government be introduced for the North. That report pointed out 
that the North had become an important source of wealth and income for the province, and that a 
revenue-sharing program should be introduced to help finance northern local government. 
 
In February 1980, the northern municipal council presented to the Hon. Jerry Hammersmith, the Minister of 
the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, a report calling for changes in The Northern Administration Act. 
The report centered mainly on the need for a clear and concise establishment in legislation of the duties, the 
powers and the responsibilities of both the northern municipal council and of the local advisory councils. 
The clear need for higher levels of government funding, particularly to communities with low taxation bases, 
was also identified in the report. This report was the culmination of three years of discussions and 
considerations which began in the summer of 1977, when the Hon. J.R. Bowerman, then minister of DNS, 
announced at a meeting at Buffalo Narrows that, and I quote: 
 

The provincial government would be prepared to introduce new legislation in the form of a 
new northern municipalities act on the basis of the input and aspirations of northern local 
governments. 
 

A paper was prepared entitled "Options '80," and this paper was introduced by the minister at a meeting held 
in La Ronge on April 14, 1980. The meeting was attended by representatives of all levels of northern local 
governments. In order to stimulate discussion and input into the extensive consultation process, which was 
being initiated by the meeting, six local government structure options were set forth in the "Options '80" 
paper. 
 
The options presented by the department were not intended to be all-encompassing or to preclude the 
introduction of other forms and concepts of local government structures. During the summer and well into 
the fall of 1980, officials of the Department of Northern Saskatchewan met with local government 
representatives in both joint and local meetings. These meetings were held to discuss the department's 
recommendations to the minister respecting the future structure of northern local government. 
 
A joint set of recommendations was submitted to the minister from a task force, composed of representatives 
of SANC (Saskatchewan Association of Northern Communities), the northern municipal council, 
representing itself, the 24 local advisory councils, and the Northern Lights School Division, representatives 
of the nine local community areas, at a meeting held on October 29 and 30, substantially endorsing the 
recommendations of the task force with its amendments. 
 
As a result of these extensive consultations, draft legislation was prepared and  



 
July 13, 1982 

 

 
759 

introduced in this legislature. That legislation was clearly based on the wishes of northern people. It came 
from listening to and involving people. That is the way things must be done in the North, if government is to 
serve the people and not simply to run people's lives. 
 
I am confident that at the next regular session of this legislature, we will consider and pass that legislation. I 
am also confident that the members opposite will agree with me on the importance of doing so. In doing so, 
they will be taking a major step in providing northern people with democratic control over their own local 
and regional affairs. Not only will this provide a measure of equality with the South, but it will provide 
northern communities with unique opportunities for independent social and economic development. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, that legislation will not be enough. It will also require a commitment from the 
government to provide the financial assistance provided for in that legislation. I think we all recognize that 
most northern communities have a very limited tax base, and, in fact, some communities have no tax base 
whatsoever. 
 
The major developments in the North are generally outside of the communities. These developments do 
generate a tremendous amount of provincial revenue for the provincial government, and some substantial 
amount of that was revenue needed in the North to support northern development, including local 
government development. 
 
In addition, many residents of northern communities have limited incomes. As a result, as individuals, they 
have limited ability to contribute directly to local taxation. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, local government 
development in the North requires a provincial government commitment for a revenue-sharing program. 
Such a program should provide a large proportion of the money needed to finance the activities of northern 
local government structures. And the program should provide money on an unconditional basis, just as the 
southern one does, so that local governments can decide what should be done on their own. 
 
The previous government agreed that this should be done. A commitment was made for a $55-million, 
five-year program. I would hope that this government will not only support this program but that it will 
expand and improve it. This is the only way that local government can develop and succeed in the North. 
And today the North must have strong local government. That is the only way people in the North can take 
responsibility for their own communities. By taking such responsibilities, the lives of the people will be 
greatly improved. That is surely what we all want. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my colleague, the member for Athabasca: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Saskatchewan to immediately implement a 
municipal revenue-sharing program for all local and municipal governments in northern 
Saskatchewan. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MYERS: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend the people of northern Saskatchewan for their 
heritage of independence. But, before I move an amendment to the motion put forward by the hon. member 
on my right, I would like to remind those now sitting in opposition that it was their policies under the former 
government that segregated the northern half of the province from the rest of the province. It was under  



 
July 13, 1982 
 

 
760 

the former minister of DNS that this department was described as a department that had run amuck. It was 
also the former minister who wrote a letter prior to his presence in this legislature which also described 
inadequacies of the department of northern services. We, as the new government, do not intend to follow 
those segregationalist ideas of the former government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I therefore move, seconded by the member for Nipawin, that this motion be amended to read: 
 

That this Assembly commend the Government of Saskatchewan for its initiative in its 
approach to DNS and urges the Government of Saskatchewan to study a municipal 
revenue-sharing program for municipal governments in northern Saskatchewan. 

 
This motion is seconded by Lloyd Sauder, the member for Nipawin. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — There's just a technicality here that's giving me some difficulty. I would ask the 
permission of the House to add to the motion that has been submitted that the motion be amended by adding 
"after the word 'that'" and then continuing with the wording that was used. You neglected to do that and 
therefore it was really a completely new motion. Will the House permit those words? Agreed. Debate 
continues concurrently on the motion and the amendment. 
 
MR. SAUDER: — Mr. Speaker, being close to the North, the fringe of the area concerned with the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, I have watched it with much interest over the last number of years. I 
have worked in that area at times and talked with many of the people there. 
 
The amendment to the motion that was just put forward commending this new government on its approach 
to dealing with the people of northern Saskatchewan is a very valid one, I feel. We have a new government 
here which started out with consultation with the people of Saskatchewan. Our Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan has shown that. He has been in the North, has been listening to the people of the North, and 
coming out with things for the people of the North. Also I think our whole government has shown that 
approach to all of Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of the North, I believe, want an opportunity to participate and they have to be given some 
autonomy. That's something that is going to be given to them by this government, but with autonomy also 
comes responsibility to manage their own affairs, and responsibility can only be learned. Education is a key 
part of that. And this government is going to be taking steps to see that the people of the North receive an 
education, to see that they learn the responsibility, and have these people fitting into the society of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time, because there is so much more that has to be said about this and that is going to be 
said in the weeks and months ahead by the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and by this government, I 
would just ask leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:51 p.m. 
 


