






















































Hansard: July 06, 1982


561 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
July 6, 1982 

 
The Assembly met at 7 p.m. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 20 — An Act respecting Elections in Urban Municipalities and School Divisions and 
repealing The Urban Municipal Elections Act. 

 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce the deputy minister of urban 
affairs, Mr. Dave Innes; also from urban affairs, Kevin Hayes and Lou Hudson; since education is involved, 
from the Department of Education, Mr. Bill Wells. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 3 to 44 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 45 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 46 to 57 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 58 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 59 agreed to. 
 
Clause 60 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 61 to 73 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 74 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 75 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 76 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 77 to 83 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 84 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 85 to 107 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 108 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 109 to 111 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 112 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 113 and 114 agreed to. 
 
Clause 115 as amended agreed to. 



 
July 6, 1982 

562 
 

Clause 116 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 117 agreed to. 
 
Clause 118 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 119 to 133 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 134 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 135 to 162 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 

 
Bill No. 24 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the 

enactment of The Local Government Election Act. 
 

Clauses 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for the Imposition of Taxes on and the Collection of Taxes from 
Certain Purchasers of Certain Fuels and for the repeal of The Fuel Petroleum Products Act. 

 
Clause 1 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I'd like to introduce Alan Carr, the deputy minister, (inaudible) and R.A. St. 
Michael of the planning bureau. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — We just have a few questions, Mr. Chairman. I would like to thank the 
minister for bringing in her officials. I understand that she is not feeling well and we will try not to make it 
worse. Can the minister tell us what the total amount collected under this act in 1981-82 fiscal year was? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — $138.5 million. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Can you tell us what portion of that was collected from interprovincial 
trucking companies? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Do you mean national trucking firms? 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Yes. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — $20.2 million. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That includes the Saskatchewan ones that are interprovincial, Jerry? 



 
July 6, 1982 

 

 
563 

MR. HAMMERSMITH: — What portion of that is from Saskatchewan firms that are interprovincial, in 
order to satisfy the query of the Attorney General? Thanks Gary! 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — $10.1 million for Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — What portion of that total amount in 1981-82 was paid by Amok Ltd. Or Cluff 
mining, Key Lake mining, Gulf Minerals, for starters? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We don't break down the figures that way. It's taken as a lump sum and we don't 
have returns for individual truckers. It's all massed together as the returns come in. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — What lump sum category? What do you call them? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Revenue from all trucking firms is $30.3 million. Our own provincial ones are 
$10.1 million, which leaves $20.2 million for national firms. The total for all types of trucking firms is $30.3 
million. 
 
MR. HAMMERSMITH: — Is there no way of breaking out the amount for large companies, such as the 
examples I gave, which are not in the main trucking firms but do a considerable amount of trucking under 
their own banner? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Not realistically. It would have to all be done manually on monthly returns. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 11 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 12 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 18 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 20 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 21 agreed to. 
 
Clause 22 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 23 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I'd like to introduce Mr. Ron Hewitt, acting co-ordinator of the  



 
July 6, 1982 

564 
 

policy and legislation branch of the Department of the Attorney General. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 25 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 26 to 70 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 71 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 72 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to address a couple of questions to the minister with respect to 
this bill. 
 
As indicated in the bill, there are provisions for the appointment of an associate chief judge or more than 
one. I wonder if the Attorney General could outline, in a general way, his plans for the disposition and the 
allocation of the chief justice and associate justice as it relates to the various centres in the province. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I think I have already indicated to the hon. member the reason behind the legislation. 
It is our present intention that there be one associate chief judge in the city of Saskatoon, and that's as far as 
it goes. You'll notice it says one or more, but certainly our present intention, in the foreseeable future, is for 
one associate chief judge. 
 
There is on-going debate whether the chief judge should be in Saskatoon or Regina, and I believe that matter 
has been debated in this Assembly in the past. There seems to be a pretty strong indication that the chief 
judge should, in fact, be in Regina, given that the superior court chief justices are in this city. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Just a couple of other questions, Mr. Chairman. I note that when the bill was being 
introduced the Attorney General indicated that consultation is very high on his agenda. Certainly when it 
comes to the appointment of additional justices to the court of appeal, he felt that consultation is a very 
meaningful thing. I just wonder, in introducing the amendment of establishing an associate chief judge, 
whether the Attorney General had an opportunity to discuss the proposed changes with the bar society and 
with the chief justice of the Queen's bench for the wisdom he may give. Did he also discuss it with the chief 
justice of the court of appeal? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I am a little surprised that the hon. member is not aware that each of the judges of 
those courts believe that the courts operate independently one from the other. I had a lengthy discussion and 
as a matter of fact the reason for the change came from the chief judge of the provincial court. Ample 
discussion took place. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Could I specifically repeat a part of my question? I wonder whether the minister had any 



 
July 6, 1982 

 

 
565 

discussion with representatives of the bar association of Saskatchewan vis-a-vis the addition of an associate 
judge and vis-a-vis whether the chief justice should be in Regina or Saskatoon. Does the minister have any 
views from such a discussion? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — No, I felt that the argument put forth by the chief judge of the provincial court was 
sufficient to sway me as to the need of the appointment. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Obviously, the Attorney General will in the future be appointing (he said in the 
immediate future) one judge to a position — either chief judge or associate. I wonder whether or not there 
will be any consultation process prior to the appointment of such judge or legal representative to that 
position? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Well, I would certainly give the undertaking to the hon. member that when the 
vacancy becomes known I will take representations from any interested parties as to suitable appointments. 
And prior to making such appointment, I would undertake to discuss that with representatives of the bar and 
perhaps of the provincial court. I can give the assurance that we are obviously looking for lawyers of the 
highest calibre who are well-regarded in the bar and by the bar. The normal consultation will be undertaken 
by me in my office as Attorney General and the judicial counsel of the provincial court will also be consulted 
in the normal manner. 
 
I would suggest to the hon. member if he is advocating his own appointment to let us know as soon as 
possible so we can deal with it in the appropriate manner. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I don't have any more questions but I can assure the hon. Attorney General that I 
certainly can come forward with some highly qualified individuals and accordingly will look forward to 
receiving your every consideration. I hope that in his capacity of Attorney General that he and I will have an 
opportunity to discuss the qualifications vis-a-vis those I put forward vis-a-vis the one that he decides on. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I would have thought after the last election that the hon. member would have been 
looking for some job security and perhaps had his application in already. If the hon. member has names of 
barristers he wishes to submit, I would be more than pleased to consider them. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 



 
July 6, 1982 

566 
 

Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 13 — An At to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — I would like to introduce to you Stan Wilox, general manager of Sask Housing 
Corporation. 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to present the president of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, Robert Moncur. 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would like to introduce Mr. Al Palmer and Ken Orr. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, as I mentioned in second reading, we are supporting this bill, 
but there are a couple of questions I would have before we whip through it. It won't take a minute. When this 
bill was originally thought about and worked on by a previous minister, there was an amendment to clause 
38 which would allow the option of transfer from the old plan to the new plan of employees. What I am 
wondering is why that was deleted, and if it is not possible to include that in the bill, because there is a large 
number of employees who in 1977, for one reason or another, didn't transfer to the new plan by the deadline 
in 1978. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — In response to that question, that option has not been available, as I understand, 
since 1978. It seems to me . . . I question the panic. It has not been available since 1978. Now all of a sudden 
you want to have it available going into an election campaign. I can advise the hon. member that we haven't 
ruled that option out. We will be looking at it in the next fiscal year and we will be looking at bringing in 
amendments with regard to that question. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, the minister indicates that he is wondering why the panic now. I 
don't consider it to be a panic. It was something which came to light in 1980 after the deadline was reached. 
The situation has been building to where there is a large number of people out there (when I say a large 
number, I don't mean thousands) who are interested and concerned that they should be allowed to transfer to 
the new  



 
July 6, 1982 

 

 
567 

plan. If it is considered to be a good idea (and the minister has, in a sense, indicated that), I am wondering 
why we can't move with an amendment now in order to allow that number of employees who would like the 
option of transferring to the new plan to be included in the bill at this time. I know it is a concern; they have 
raised it with us. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — What I am simply saying is that we are not necessarily committing ourselves to 
that particular program. I think the hon. member can recognize the fact that pensions are a rather complex 
issue. We simply want to look at that particular segment. We came into an early session of the legislature 
and we wanted to ensure that the people out there, the retired civil servants and the spouses of those civil 
servants, would in fact be taken care of. We've brought in the legislation to take care of them, with regard to 
part one and part two. The third part we want to have a look at. That's basically what we are saying. At this 
point in time we are not prepared to proceed with it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I wonder if the minister could indicate whether or not they have had time to 
look at that area. How many people could possibly be affected, if that number is available? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The advice I have is that it could perhaps be in the neighborhood of 100 to 200 
people out of a potential 10,000 people who would be interested in qualifying. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Now, just let me get it straight. There are 100 or 200 who would want to move 
to the new plan. How many would be eligible to move to the new plan? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I take it all of the 10,000. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I suppose the next logical question, as I understand that under the old plan the 
government didn't contribute to the pensions, is: what would the estimated cost be if those people were to 
move to the new plan? 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Again, this has to be a very rough estimate. We are not aware of just exactly how 
many would pick it up. The rough estimate would be about $500,000. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, this is Ross MacLennon, the director of wildlife of the 
Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources. 
 
Clauses 1 to 10 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to establish the Department of Energy and Mines and to repeal The 
Department of Mineral Resources Act 



 
July 6, 1982 

568 
 

Clauses 1 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 
Bill No. 15 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the 

enactment of The Department of Energy and Mines Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act by eliminating the Mortgage Interest Tax 
Credit as a consequence of the establishment of the Mortgage Interest Reduction Plan 

 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — An Act to amend The Education Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. member, I move the bill now be read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 20 — An Act respecting Elections in Urban Municipalities and School Divisions and 
repealing The Urban Municipal Elections Act 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I move the amendments now be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. member, with leave, I move the said bill 
now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 
Bill No. 24 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the 

enactment of The Local Government Election Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. member, with leave, I move the said bill 
now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 3 — An Act to provide for the Imposition of Taxes on and the Collection of Taxes from 



 
July 6, 1982 

 

 
569 

Certain Purchasers of Certain Fuels and for the repeal of The Fuel Petroleum Products Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, by leave, I move this bill be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division and bill read a third time. 
 

YEAS — 52 
 

Devine Currie Young 
Muller Duncan Domotor 
Birkbeck Schoenhals Embury 
Taylor Smith (Swift Current) Dirks 
Andrew Boutin Hepworth 
Berntson Weiman Folk 
Lane Tusa Morin 
Rousseau Sveinson Myers 
Muirhead Sauder Zazelenchuk 
Pickering Petersen Johnson 
Sandberg Schmidt Baker 
Hardy Parker Thompson 
McLeod Smith (Moose Jaw South) Koskie 
McLaren Hopfner Engel 
Garner Klein Lingenfelter 
Katzman Rybchuk Hammersmith 
Martens Caswell Lusney 
Yew   

 
 

NAYS — 0 
 

 
Bill No. 4 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move the bill now be read a third time and passed 
under its title. 



 
July 6, 1982 

570 
 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 6 — An Act to amend The Provincial Court Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 5 — An Act to amend The Legal Profession Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 7 — An Act to amend The Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 13 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 25 — An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 21 — An Act to amend The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 19 — An Act to amend The Wildlife Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 14 — An Act to establish the Department of Energy and Mines and to repeal The 



 
July 6, 1982 

 

 
571 

Department of Mineral Resources Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 
Bill No. 15 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to certain Acts resulting from the 

enactment of The Department of Energy and Mines Act 
 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 2 — An Act to amend The Income Tax Act by eliminating the Mortgage Interest Tax 
Credit as a consequence of the establishment of the Mortgage Interest Reduction Plan 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division and bill read a third time. 
 

YEAS — 42 
 
Devine Garner Hopfner 
Muller Katzman Klein 
Birkbeck Martens Rybchuk 
Taylor Currie Caswell 
Andrew Schoenhals Young 
Berntson Smith (Swift Current) Domotor 
Lane Boutin Embury 
Rousseau Weiman Dirks 
Muirhead Tusa Hepworth 
Pickering Sveinson Folk 
Sandberg Sauder Morin 
Hardy Petersen Myers 
McLeod Schmidt Zazelenchuk 
McLaren Smith (Moose Jaw)  

 
NAYS — 7 

 
Thompson Lingenfelter Lusney 
Koskie Hammersmith Yew 
Engel   

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 



 
July 6, 1982 

572 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill No. 
9 — An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments with respect to this particular bill. 
 
As members will have appreciated yesterday, the former premier commented on the extent of this legislation 
and also indicated a possible modification of it but not with the total delineation of a limit as to the number 
of legislative secretaries that can be appointed. 
 
I want to say that I was rather surprised at the Attorney General, who rejected any limitation with respect to 
the number. He tells us to eliminate any of the numbers. That's right, he says we're responsible, that we don't 
need the legislature of this Assembly to put any limitations on this government. I want to say that I suppose, 
if you follow his logic, you might as well, with respect to the various boards and commissions (because their 
numbers and methods of appointments are set out), eliminate them and just say that the minister shall 
appoint a board of the size that he wishes. 
 
The minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Power Corporation came forward today asking for an 
amendment to the act with respect to the amount of borrowing. I suppose you can start following the 
Attorney General's crippled logic (and I think that you could come to the same conclusion) and say, "Oh, let's 
allow the minister who's running the power corporation to set the limit, because, after all, he is responsible." 
 
The thing that I see in this particular bill, Mr. Speaker is a trend developing. It seems to me that this 
government is on a course of unfettered power grabbing. Unfettered power is the direction of this 
government. I think we can look, with respect to this legislation, at total non-accountability, at no limitation. 
Certainly, if they wanted to increase it, and they put forward their case, we in the opposition would agree 
with a modest increase. But, no, they are above this legislature now. They have that vast majority and, as a 
consequence, they don't want to be bothered coming back here to debate the merits of whether or not it 
should be increased. 
 
I want to tell the backbenchers of the government side to be on guard. Don't sit idly by and watch a course of 
development of unfettered power by a few in the front benches. 
 
Let us look at this legislature, too, during this session. I will say that there is evidence of a shift to unfettered 
power, including mass firings with no accountability or reasons, and The Education Act, with the repeal of 
an act that already had support and had been investigated. I look at further indications of direction such as 
gross overpayments of political hacks who are brought in from other provinces. They have the power. That's 
where the power is. I want to tell the members of the backbenches to take a look at the mass firings which 
were done for no reason, to look at the total abrogation of civil rights, and at The Education Act repealing 
the provisions. Look at The Interpretation Act and the provisions of that. Then ask yourselves, in what 
direction is this government going? 
 
I want to say that this government is seeking unfettered power. I want to say to the members of the 
backbenches that unfettered power leads to misused power. I want to  



 
July 6, 1982 

 

 
573 

say that, in the end, it's going to lead to the defeat of the vast number of the boys and girls in the 
backbenches. With respect to this bill, as I've said before, if the Attorney General had come forward, 
presented a case, indicated some direction as to numbers, we would not have to be here debating it. Exactly 
what he is saying is that he will have no control on him, that he is supreme. I want to tell the backbenchers 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I just want to say to that member who keeps opening his mouth while nothing 
comes out that the empty barrel makes the most noise. You seem to qualify for the empty barrel on that side. 
 
I want to tell these backbenchers not to sit idly by and get sucked in, because this government is heading on a 
course of self-destruction. 
 
I want, therefore, to seek the intelligent support of all of those honorable people on that side of the House 
who believe that the legislature still has a function, who believe that the Attorney General does not have total 
control. I call out to the backbenchers (and there are some intelligent ones among you) to take a look at what 
is happening. The empty barrel raises his hand. I tell you that this is not a laughing matter. We have seen 
evidence, here, Mr. Speaker. With respect to the amendments to The Interpretation Act, they laughed, and 
now they laugh with respect to The Executive Council Act. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are concerned and will be concerned. I'll tell you that the legal profession across 
this province is concerned. 
 
I think of the university and the legal professors, who see the unfettered power growing, and I will tell you 
the trend that is developing is that the power has gone to their heads and they no longer want to make their 
cases before this legislature. And I want to say to these hon. backbenchers — way back — to make sure that 
when you consider these bills consider them carefully, because I want to say that every time this legislature 
no longer has a right to make a determination or review power is taken away from the public. It's taken away 
from the public, first of all, because they don't want to justify their actions. They don't want to justify their 
actions, and I want to tell those hon. people in the back benches to join the concerned people in 
Saskatchewan, and I'll tell you that your political careers could last longer. 
 
I want to say that each and every one of you can laugh; you did yesterday on the interpretations, led by the 
Attorney General. You have a lot of fun, but I'll tell you there are people out there who do not want a 
dictatorship and unfettered control by a few members in the front benches. I want to say that you were given 
an opportunity and a trust to carry out in good faith a type of government that upholds the democratic 
process. 
 
I want to say to each and every one of you that this is, indeed, a serious matter. I think that, coming back to 
the main portion of the bill, obviously there is a possibility that additional legislative secretaries can in fact 
be deployed. But I want to say that it is our position here, clearly, that a limit should be installed in respect to 
the number that can be appointed. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — There is a limit. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Where? 



 
July 6, 1982 

574 
 

AN HON. MEMBER: — One per cabinet minister. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Yeah, isn't that great? Maybe you'll start having two. Yeah, keep talking. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to say I realize, Mr. Speaker, that with the cabinet material they have over 
there obviously they need one or two legislative secretaries to help them carry out that role. But I want to tell 
you that here, today, we are witnessing again an Attorney General and a few members in the front benches 
wanting to eliminate the basic function of this legislature to review, to act as a check in order to evaluate that 
which the government is performing. 
 
And I want to say that the Attorney General's logic did not impress anyone. Either he was ill-prepared in 
putting forth his case or his lack of concrete, well thought out reasoning was lacking. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I think I convinced about 90 per cent of the House, Murray. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I'll tell you that you haven't convinced this side of the House. And I'll tell you in 
respect to the abrogation of the rights of this House, the rights of citizens of this province, that we're 
prepared to continue to stay in this legislature to debate it, to send forth what is happening with respect to 
The Interpretation Act, and with respect to the unfettered power that is requested here. Certainly we are 
prepared to continue to discuss the principles that are at risk here. I won't be hurried in formulating a 
conclusion to my remarks. In fact, I'll have a drink. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Kill the clock. Is this a filibuster? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I'll tell you, Mr. Attorney General, that we should obviously have a filibuster for 
legislation of this nature. I want to say that the Attorney General did not come into the House and indicate to 
the House any of the precedents which are followed in other legislatures. He did not come forward here to 
indicate that there is an unlimited number of legislative secretaries who can be appointed in other provinces. 
He probably didn't look it up or doesn't know. 
 
But certainly, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that here indeed is a principle. I think that we, on 
this side, would be prepared to consider a modest increase tied (as the former premier indicated) to the 
number of cabinet ministers plus a number of legislative secretaries adding up to a total of 26 or 27. I think 
that would be a step forward, and I think it is reasonable that we as an opposition request that the 
government indicate the specific number which it has in mind. 
 
I do not think that we, as an opposition, can in fact sit idly by while the Attorney General and the Premier 
seek further and further unfettered control. It seems to me what is happening is that very clearly the 
government, overwhelmed by its electoral success, has suddenly decided that because of that success it no 
longer needs to come before the legislature to discuss the merits. 
 
I want to say, as has been said, that we indeed in this House when we were government, had a large number 
of members: 45 in number. I want to say that we indeed operated within the allowable number within the 
legislation. In fact, the most we ever had was four. I don't necessarily say, Mr. Speaker, that it is magic, but 
the principle about which we are speaking here is whether or not the basic control of numbers should be 
subject  



 
July 6, 1982 

 

 
575 

to the approval of the legislature, or whether it should be left totally in the hands of the Attorney General. 
 
I also want to say that, with the apparent movement toward the amendments in The Interpretation Act and 
the concern that it has created, I am equally concerned with respect to this legislation. 
 
I want to urge the Attorney General, in his concluding remarks, to take seriously what the Leader of the 
Opposition and I have been urging here tonight. It is that, yes, we are prepared to agree with an amendment 
increasing the number. Of course, we will have a legislature, presumably, open this fall. If it can be 
demonstrated to this House that additional numbers are needed, then what is the problem with coming back 
with an amendment? Certainly, at least in that way, it gives accountability of government to this legislature 
and to the people of Saskatchewan. So I urge the Attorney General to seriously consider the representations 
which we have made on this side. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I also want to make a few comments on Bill No. 9. I think it's important that 
some of the areas are aired regarding legislative secretaries and positions that relate to being a legislative 
secretary. I would like to take just a couple of minutes — maybe two — to indicate what I saw as the role of 
the legislative secretary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I wish the Premier were here so that he could spell out what he thinks and what he sees as the role of the 
legislative secretary. A legislative secretary will sit in this House. He tactfully asks questions from the 
opposition as to his goings about. It's possible to go as the legislative secretary on behalf of the government. 
I know that. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How did you know? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I did. I reviewed; I studied; I did things. In that role I was on behalf of the Minister of 
Agriculture, and you couldn't ask any questions about that person. 
 
How many of those positions do you want? The question I really would ask, Mr. Speaker: is an appointment 
as a legislative secretary a little deal where you have a chance to provide a little extra turkey feed for some of 
your people that may be hurting? Is that what the part really is? That's what I wanted to hear, there. That's 
what I wanted to hear the Deputy Premier talk about. He's speaking as the — he' the Deputy Premier. He 
says, Mr. Speaker, so that Hansard records what he's saying, that they want to provide some turkey feed 
here. That's what it's all about. That's what he's saying . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I hope you do. 
 
Tell us, really, what role do you see that you need more than six people for? I felt that it was a good role to 
be responsible for a certain area. I was given an assignment to look after Saskatchewan's International 
Development Program. I went to council meetings with the SCIC (Saskatchewan Council for International 
Co-operation). I sat in on meetings on behalf of the Minister of Agriculture. I listened. I carried a message to 
the cabinet. I did a good job. I figure it was an excellent job. 
 
I haven't heard a report yet on whom this government has put in charge of international development. I don't 
know which one of you is going to be . . . Are you responsible for international development? I'd like to visit 
with you about that. We could talk about the role that this government has. I hope the Tory government here 
doesn't do what  



 
July 6, 1982 

576 
 

Sterling Lyon did in Manitoba with international development, for example. When you get around and you 
see the need in the world and you see what you can do with a couple of million dollars . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Maybe you're asking: what has this got to do with the role of a legislative secretary? It has a 
lot to do with the legislative secretary. That's what the role is. How many of those positions do you want? . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, sir, I did. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You're starting to get to them, Al. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I'm starting to get to them. I don't know how many of those positions you want. Do you 
want 20 positions like that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Premier says that he would require 30. That's why they want the ceiling raised: so 
they could have 30 legislative secretaries, 30 people getting an additional $6,000 a year. That's the role. They 
have these people sitting behind them. The member for Moosomin is one of them. If he can't get into cabinet, 
at least give him a legislative secretary job. That's what he's saying. That's why they want the ceiling 
removed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that six is an ample number. I'm going to raise my objections to raising it beyond that 
limit. I'm going to indicate that I can't support a wide-open ceiling so that they have a pork barrel where they 
can blatantly . . . (inaudible) . . . the funds that are available. They can freeze the minimum wage but they 
don't want to do it for their members who are sitting here. That's why the backbenchers are so anxious to see 
the ceiling taken off, because that's going to give all of them an opportunity get one of those jobs. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, in closing debate, I want to raise a couple of matters. We had a very 
shocking principle proposed by members of the opposition tonight. They proposed an amendment to limit 
the size of the government's cabinet. That was a suggestion that they made. Let me remind . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh yes, you did, when you said that there should be a fixed number of 17 plus 8 to 28 —- I 
think the figure was that you gave. Let me tell you something; you people are going to have to learn 
something that you haven't learned yet through this whole session. That is, you lost the election, fellows. 
You aren't the Government of Saskatchewan anymore. You don't call the shots anymore. You lost. On April 
26, you went from this side of the House, all along here, to a little corner on that side of the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — On April 26, you went from 47 per cent of the vote down to 37 per cent, and I 
suspect that in reality it would have been a lot lower than that, if you had had a smaller plurality going into 
the election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are sitting over there as they have been since the day this session started, figuring they are 
still the government and that they are still calling the shots and still running the province of Saskatchewan. 
Now they propose, probably for the first time in any of the British parliamentary jurisdictions, that it is the 
opposition's priority and prerogative to establish the size of cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do they ever have a lesson to learn! They didn't learn it on April 26, and I suspect they are 
going to learn it again in 1986 and 1990 and 1994 and the year 2000. 



 
July 6, 1982 

 

 
577 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, we were given a mandate on April 26 to give a government to the 
people of this province that started to listen to the people of this province. That former government quit 
listening, and I suspect, Mr. Speaker, if the former government had listened to some of these members now 
that are criticizing this bill — had made a couple of them legislative secretaries — then maybe they would 
have had some input into that very closed cabinet they had before. Maybe they wouldn't have embarked upon 
the policies that led to their defeat on April 26. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — It has been a commitment of the new Premier of Saskatchewan, and it has been a 
commitment of this party, that we were going to listen to the people of this province. And anything we can 
do to make cabinet more responsive to the people of this province we will do, and we won't apologize to 
anybody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the more members of this Assembly who become aware and confident in the administration of 
government, the better off this Assembly is, and I suggest to the hon. members that's an argument they did 
not address. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well, the more the cabinet ministers can stay out in touch with the people of this province, 
the better government this province will have. I think the people of this province will be well satisfied when 
they see the action we propose to take as a result of this bill. 
 
Let me tell the hon. members something; let me give them a bit of advice. You lost in a very big way on 
April 26, and one of the reasons you lost, as I say, is you quit listening. You should learn. You should learn 
that in fact if you had kept listening to the people, you might not be in that rather embarrassing position you 
are in today. Let me tell the hon. members we are going to do everything possible that we can to make sure 
we don't make the embarrassing mistakes that you made and not bring in the embarrassing policies that you 
brought in. Above all, Mr. Speaker, this bill is proof that we intend to listen to the people of this province 
and we are going to ensure that the members of the treasury benches listen to the people of this province. In 
fact this bill will guarantee better government for the people of this province. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of 
the whole at the next sitting. 
 

YEAS — 43 
 

Devine Schoenhals Caswell 
Muller Smith (Swift Current) Young 
Birkbeck Boutin Gerich 
Andrew Weiman Domotor 
Berntson Tusa Maxwell 
Lane Sveinson Embury 
Roussear Sauder Dirks 
Muirhead Petersen Hepworth 
 



 
July 6, 1982 

578 
 

 
Pickering Schmidt Folk 
Sandberg Parker Morin 
Hardy Smith (Moose Jaw South) Myers 
McLeod Hopfner Zazelenchuk 
McLaren Klein Johnson 
Garner Rybchuk Baker 
Katzman   
 

NAYS — 7 
 

Thompson Lingenfelter Lusney 
Koskie Hammersmith Yew 
Engel   

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Lane that Bill No. 18 
— An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Public 
Utilities Review Commission Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:43 p.m. 
 
 
 


