






















































Hansard: November 22, 1982


949 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
First Session — Twentieth Legislature 

 
Monday, November 22, 1982. 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. SWAN: — It is my pleasure to introduce to the House a visiting Clerk at the Table. Mr. 
Geoffrey Mitchell, Clerk of the Legislative Assembly of South Australia. Mr. Mitchell is here for a 
brief visit and will be a guest at our Table for the day. I hope that all members will welcome him to 
the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Compensation for Citizens of Uranium City 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Premier. In the 
Leader-Post of April 21, the Premier is quoted as saying that he promised to find a fair way of 
compensating home-owners and businesses whose investments are suddenly worth much less 
because of the mine closure at Uranium City. On June 25, in this House, he repeated that promise 
and on page 319 of Hansard we note: 
 

We have made a commitment to look after the people of Uranium City, to find a fair solution 
for them in response to the terrible situation that was developed by the federal government. 

 
Today’s news reports indicate that Mr. Dana Spencer, a former mayor of Uranium City and a 
representative of the chamber of commerce, has indicated that a demonstration is being planned by 
his group here at the legislature in order to get some response from this government to meet the 
commitments made to the people of Uranium City by the Premier. 
 
My question to him is this: when is he prepared to tell the people of Uranium City what his 
government will do to honor the commitments he made on April 21 and again on June 25? 
 
HON MR. DEVINE: – Mr. Speaker, in response to the question from the hon. member, the ongoing 
negotiations with respect to Uranium City between the province of Saskatchewan and the federal 
government have led to a reallocation process to finance and help finance the transformation of the 
lives of people in Uranium City. I understand the population has gone from something like 3,000 
people to about 400 to 500 people. They have requested a great deal of money with respect to the 
reallocation process and we are contributing in that regard. Currently the minister responsible for 
northern Saskatchewan is in constant negotiations with other jurisdictions about increasing the 
assistance with respect to reallocation, and it’s an ongoing process. To that extent we are fully 
committed to helping the people of Uranium City cope with a situation initiated and started and 
responsibly in the hands of the federal administration. 



 
November 22, 1982 
 

 
950 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – A brief supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The federal government, as I 
understand it, has committed itself to contribute to a pool of funds to compensate home-owners and 
businesses but not specified the amount. I am further advised that Eldorado Nuclear has agreed to 
contribute to a fund to compensate home-owners and businesses. Has the Government of 
Saskatchewan committed itself to contribute to a fund to compensate home-owners and businesses, 
so that the sole issue is distribution? Or, has the Government not committed itself to contribute to a 
fund to compensate home-owners and businesses? 
 
HON MR. DEVINE: – Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that the federal government has committed 
itself to a block of funds for compensation for real estate values. Now to that extent, I would perhaps 
ask the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan to comment a little further on the details. But, to my 
knowledge, the federal government has not set aside a block of funds to compensate for the loss of 
real estate values as a result of their move of pulling Eldorado out of Uranium City. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, if I may ask a further supplementary. I obviously did not 
make myself clear. 
 
I am not alleging that the federal government has committed a block of funds. I am reporting what I 
am advised: that they have committed themselves to contribute an unspecified amount to compensate 
home-owners and small businesses, home-owners and businesses. What I want to know from the 
Premier is this: has the government of Saskatchewan committed itself to contribute an as yet 
unspecified amount to compensate home-owners and businesses in Eldorado because of the Eldorado 
shut-down? 
 
HON MR. DEVINE: – Well, Mr. Speaker, the problem is the whole question of “unspecified” and 
that’s indeed indicative of the federal government’s method of operation. They have not said what 
they are prepared to do. If there are any more specific figures with respect to their package or what 
they are prepared to do, I would be glad to turn this over to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan 
as maybe he has more information with respect to specific figure that the federal government is about 
to come out with, but they haven’t, so far as I am concerned. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. 
Since the Premier is unwilling to state what the position of the Government of Saskatchewan is and 
simply wishes to criticize the position of the Government of Canada, I ask the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan: has the Government of Saskatchewan committed itself to spend any more money, any 
sum of money, in compensating home-owners and businesses? I am not asking what the amount is. 
Are you committed in principle to the proposition that the Government of Saskatchewan will assist 
in cash in compensating home-owners and businesses? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: – Mr. Speaker, the hon. member doesn’t make a clear distinction between 
compensation and relocation money. We certainly have committed in cash in co-operation with the 
federal government an amount of $9,000 per family in Uranium City for them to be able to relocate 
out of that particular location. 
 
Since we took office, this particular issue was on the plate from day one. It was certainly on the 
former premier’s plate when he left office. There was no commitment from them at that time for 
compensation or relocation or anything else. We have very clearly said  



 
November 22, 1982 

 

 
951 

that we have compassion for people living there. Understanding the very great problem of the 
distances and the geography of the area, we have committed with the federal government, as I said, 
$9,000 per family. We expect about 100 families to take advantage of it, and to be moving out of 
there. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, hon. members opposite wish to answer every question 
except the one that is asked. I will repeat once again the commitment made by your leader at 
Uranium City. 
 
He promised to find a fair way of compensating home-owners and businesses whose investments are 
suddenly worth much less because of the mine closure. This has nothing to do with relocation 
money. It is compensating people whose investments are worth less. 
 
Now what I want to know from the minister is: are you committed in any way to contribute any sum 
of money to compensate home-owners and businesses for the loss in their investments because of the 
mine closure, as your leader promised April 21 in Uranium City? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: – What the Premier promised when he was in Uranium City was that we 
would do everything possible to see that compensation, or that relocation, or that some type of 
understanding from senior levels of government was given to people in Uranium City. We certainly 
have done that. I entered into discussions with Mr. Lalonde when he was minister responsible for 
Eldorado Nuclear. We in no way feel responsible, and we in no way feel that the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan feel that the Government of Saskatchewan is responsible for 
compensation. We certainly feel responsible for the citizens of Uranium City, as citizens of Uranium 
City, to say that we will do everything we can, as we did go to bat for them with the people who 
made that fateful decision, Eldorado Nuclear, and no one else. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – A further supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do I take the answer of the hon. 
minister to mean that his government does not feel committed to find a fair way of compensating 
home-owners and businesses whose investments are suddenly worth much less because of the mine 
closure? I took your answer to mean you feel no such commitment, and I ask you to confirm that. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: – That’s no what I said. I said that we would try, as the Premier said earlier, 
to find the commitment. Now the commitment has to come from the federal government who made 
the decision to close it down. It certainly was no responsibility of the Government of Saskatchewan – 
the former government or the present government. We didn’t make the decision, and we are not 
planning to pay compensation. We have said that we will pay relocation, and we are paying 
relocation money. That’s been made very clear. I talked to the mayor of Uranium City less than two 
hours ago. She called me. We had ongoing discussions for some time. And she isn’t asking for that 
compensation either, by the way, in the form that the hon. member would intimate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 

Business Closures and Job Losses 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, I’ll try another minister. I thank the Hon. Minister 



 
November 22, 1982 
 

 
952 

 of Northern Saskatchewan for passing on to me the views of the mayor of Uranium City. She’ll be 
interested in them. My question is to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. We are advised by the 
press that he proposed to lead a delegation to get new industries and businesses for Saskatchewan, 
and I commend him for that. Certainly we need some new businesses. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Many of us are aware of the ones that are being lost, and I think of 
Great West Garments with 150 jobs lost. One could spend a great deal of time in this House 
outlining other industries which have gone out of business. What I ask the minister is this: how many 
businesses have closed in this province since May 8, 1982 and at what loss of jobs? How many jobs 
have been lost either permanently or for a duration of three months or more because businesses have 
closed since he became the minister? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. member’s question, the kind of 
statistics he is asking me for would be more in line for estimates, the crown corporations, or 
something else. He asks how many were closed. I note he does not ask how many were opened, how 
many were interested in coming, or how many industries we are talking to at the present time. 
 
I would like to tell the hon. member that the deputy minister advises me that my department has had 
(since the Open for Business conference, I might add) literally hundreds of inquiries from different 
companies to come into the province of Saskatchewan to start a business and get involved in this 
province, and from businesses already established in Saskatchewan to expand. He also advises me 
that they are, on an ongoing basis, negotiating with 40 to 60 companies which are very close to 
making a decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number of new businesses that have already started is probably not in line with the 
number that have closed, which is not any different than it has been in the past during their 
administration, I might add. The Open for Business conference that we had has created some great 
excitement and anticipation of new businesses coming into Saskatchewan. If the hon. member is 
interested in exact figures, I’ll take notice and get him the answer. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for his undertaking to give us 
some figures. I’m not looking for precise figures, but I’m looking for a general statement as to the 
number of businesses, which have closed, and the approximate number of jobs which have been lost. 
 
I have a supplementary question. With respect to the trip to Europe, which the hon. member 
proposes, as I understand it, to promote trade, to sell Saskatchewan products and to attract business 
and industry to our province, I wonder if the minister would indicate what products, in general terms, 
he hopes to sell and, specifically, what industries or firms he hopes to talk to. Undoubtedly, he will 
talk to the chambers of commerce and the business groups. That’s good. What I’m asking, however, 
is: what particular firms does the minister propose to talk to in order to attempt to attract them to 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, I am surprised that the hon. member would ask 



 
November 22, 1982 

 

 
953 

that question. As he well knows, any particular company, which I may discuss, is in fact confidential 
information. I can tell the hon. member that I have specific companies that I am meeting with in 
three countries in Europe. I will, on my return, hopefully be able to announce decisions. I am hoping 
for a firm commitment by some of them during my trip. I’m trying to think of the second part of your 
question. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – What we going to sell? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – What were we going to sell? Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe that the 
Leader of the Opposition would ask that question. It almost sounds as if he doesn’t know what 
Saskatchewan has to offer; in 11 years of his administration he hasn’t learned yet what the products 
of Saskatchewan are. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – Just to inform him, I might tell him that we do have in Saskatchewan 
potash, coal, heavy oil, farm products and forestry products such as pulp and plywood. We have high 
technology. I could go on and on, but I’m sure the hon. member knows what they are. I might also 
tell the hon. member, the Leader of the Opposition, that some of the specific industries, the ones that 
I’m going to be meeting with, relate to manufacturing, processing and to some of our mineral 
resources. If he wants any further details on that, Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid he is going to have to wait 
until I come back with information that there are many people around the world who today want to 
come to Saskatchewan, because we have a free enterprise system in Saskatchewan now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask a further supplementary. I take it from the hon. 
minister that he proposes, when in Europe, to attempt to sell potash, coal, and steel. My 
congratulations will go to him if he can sell any Saskatchewan potash in France or Germany, any 
coal in any of those European countries, or any steel in any of those European countries. My 
congratulations will go to him. I ask him, again to indicate what products he intends to push in 
Europe. Don’t give me a list of all the ones that cannot possibly be sold. Tell us what you expect to 
sell in Europe. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe the Leader of the Opposition would put 
forth that kind of question, First of all, he knows very well that recently I announced, through a press 
interview, that this particular trip to Europe was more on the principle of selling Saskatchewan rather 
than selling Saskatchewan products. Where the opportunity arose, certainly we would promote 
Saskatchewan products. What I said is: where the opportunity arose. This particular trip that is being 
taken by my officials and me (and I have stated this in the press interview) is based on, and is for the 
purpose of selling Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — the new Saskatchewan, the Open for Business 
Saskatchewan – and the industries that we can attract to Saskatchewan that they have taken 11 years 
to do absolutely nothing about. They have attracted nothing from the trips that they have taken. My 
predecessor, Mr. Speaker, did in fact do a same missionary trip some two or three years ago, and I 
am still waiting to see some of the results of that trip. 
 

Construction of Pulp Mill and Newsprint Plant in Prince Albert 



 
November 22, 1982 
 

 
954 

 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce. My apologies to him but I think he will not be with us for long. 
 
On June 18 in this House, in answer to the question, “Is it the intention of the government to proceed 
with the construction of thermo-mechanical pulp mill and a newsprint plant in Prince Albert?”, the 
minister answered, “No.” Is that still the policy of the government? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – Is the question . . . I am not sure if you said, “the government to proceed 
with the . . .” 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: – Is it the intention of the government to proceed with the . . . 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, the simple, straight answer to the question as put by the 
Leader of the Opposition – is the government going to do it? – is no. However, having said that, I 
want to assure the Leader of the Opposition that our departments and our government have been 
pursuing the possibility of that expansion. We can do it in many ways. There is the possibility of 
doing it through a joint venture. There is the possibility of doing it by attracting an investor into 
Saskatchewan and purchasing what is there now and adding to it. 
 
However, I will make this commitment, Mr. Speaker, to the hon. member: the Government of 
Saskatchewan today will not sell the P.A. pulp mill, as such, on today’s market with the commitment 
from someone that the expansion will take place if we do in fact sell it. I am surprised. Are you 
unhappy with that situation? I’m saying to the Leader of the Opposition that the expansion after the 
studies have been completed, the feasibility of the use of the aspen wood in northern Saskatchewan, 
does in fact warrant the investor or through a joint venture, whichever is possible. We do not want to 
get into business where it belongs in the private sector. That is the intention of this government and it 
always has been. 
 

Investment in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address a question also to the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce. As the minister may be aware, the investment in Saskatchewan in 1981 was $4.2 billion 
or $1.6 billion in 1971 constant dollars. I want to know: can the minister give us his assurance that as 
a result of his initiatives of the business conference and his junket to Europe, that as a result of those, 
there will be an increased level of investment in Saskatchewan in 1982 and 1983? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – I’m sorry, I didn’t catch the last part of that question. Would you mind 
saying it again? 
 
Mr. KOSKIE: – I indicated to you that the total investment that had taken place in 1981 is $4.2 
billion, and what I am asking the minister is: because of the recent initiatives of the business 
conference and his own junket to Europe, will he in fact guarantee or indicate to the House here that 
there will be increased investments in Saskatchewan in 1982 and 1983? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, he wants my signature on the bottom of the line of the 
document. I’m not too sure that I am in a position to do that. Whether he says that 



 
November 22, 1982 

 

 
955 

my personal guarantee that there will be investment coming in . . . Let me give the hon. member my 
assurance . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know how far I can go with mine. I would like to give the 
hon. member this assurance: under our administration and this government there will indeed be 
increased investment in this province. They seem awfully concerned, all of a sudden, about attracting 
business to Saskatchewan about creating jobs and creating the wealth that is required. They spent 11 
years trying to do it, and other than doing it through some crown corporations, they accomplished 
absolutely nothing. 
 
In almost every instance, Mr. Speaker, (and we are running across cases today of industries that 
wanted to come here, but were discouraged by that government from coming), they didn’t want 
them. 
 
The atmosphere has changed in Saskatchewan. The concern about job creation – I would like to tell 
the hon. member, for example, the first nine months of this year, as a result of our government’s 
action, my government’s action in Saskatchewan since May 1, there’s an increase in housing starts in 
Saskatchewan of 48 per cent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: – Mr. Speaker, in the first nine months of this year housing starts were 
4,511. Last year when they were in government, it was 3,186 – at the same time as every other 
province in Canada, Mr. Speaker, is down. The total in Canada is down; Saskatchewan is up by 
almost 50 per cent. The concern is that we may not, through our form of government, our system of 
government, our free private sector involvement in the economy of this province, attract business. I 
can assure the hon. member that there will be far more, and I don’t know whether it will be 1982. 
1982, Mr. Speaker, is almost finished. There is only a month and a half left. In 1983, I don’t know 
whether it will be increased significantly, but I can assure the hon. member that by the end of the 
term that we were given this mandate for, there will be a significant increase in the investment in this 
province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – Before I proceed down the order paper, I want members on both sides of the 
House to take note of what occurred in question period today. I didn’t check you up when you asked 
your questions, and I didn’t check the ministers when they responded, but these were pretty 
far-ranging questions and the answers corresponded to the type of questions. Beginning tomorrow 
we’ll have to tighten it up and I would ask the indulgence of both sides. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Committee on Student Employment Program 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: – 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Minister of Culture and Youth, I wish to take this opportunity to inform the 
legislature of another step this government has taken in the fight against unemployment. I will be 
striking a committee comprised of officials representing the Department of Culture and Youth, the 
Department of Labor, the Department of Industry and Commerce, and the Department of 
Government Services. The purpose of this committee will be to develop, in consultation with 
individuals and groups such as the Premier’s youth advisory council, a student employment program 
for the summer of 1983. In order to accomplish this task the 



 
November 22, 1982 
 

 
956 

committee will seek input of employer groups such as provincial government departments and 
agencies, municipal governments and, most importantly, from the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during my years of teaching and coaching I learned that Saskatchewan’s youth possess 
abundant energy, drive, enthusiasm and optimism. Saskatchewan’s youth, as our Premier has said 
many times, is indeed our most important natural resource. However, during those same years I 
discovered that much of that youthful optimism turned to pessimism as young people found limited 
opportunities at home, and consequently migrated to neighboring provinces such as Alberta and 
British Columbia. 
 
It is the intent of this government to stop this outflow of Saskatchewan’s youth, and bring them home 
to stay. This will be accomplished as we create a provincial climate in which young people can 
realize opportunity for employment, for advancement and for growth. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, the 
student employment program must be geared toward providing students with meaningful temporary 
employment. At the same time the program must emphasize the opportunities available to those 
students within the province of Saskatchewan after they graduate. In this way, we hope to 
accomplish the short-term goal of summer employment for students whose initiative is evidenced by 
their desire to earn the money to allow them to continue their studies. At the same time we hope to 
accomplish the longer range goal of matching the employer with the potential employee who will be 
graduating in the near future. 
 
This committee, Mr. Speaker, is part of the economic strategy of this government. It is a strategy we 
are confident will result in a more prosperous, active and exciting Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Only this government would think that worthy of 
a ministerial statement – a statement that they’re going to strike a committee to study a program, 
which this province has had, in one form or another, dating back to the ’60s. While we haven’t seen a 
single new job come out of this statement, I may say that it’s typical of this government that it will 
try to solve a problem by setting up a committee. We haven’t seen one new job. What we have seen 
since last summer is this government studying one problem after another as an excuse for taking any 
action. What this province needs is some action on unemployment. What it does not need is an 
announcement by this government that is going to study a program which we have had, in one form 
or another, for 15 or 20 years. 
 
I want to say as well (though I perhaps am being a little unfair, given the speed at which this 
government moves), that it may be none too soon to start now to design something eight months 
hence. Certainly they haven’t proved to date that they can set up a program in any reasonable length 
of time, so it may not be unreasonable to start, before the winter begins, to try to get a program ready 
for the summer months eight months hence. Given your speed, you may not be starting too early. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution for Members on Committees 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by Mr. 
Koskie: 



 
November 22, 1982 

 

 
957 

 
 

That the name of Mr. Koskie be substituted for that of Mr. Hammersmith on the list of 
members comprising the special committee to compose lists of standing committees. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Further, Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by 
Mr. Koskie: 
 

That the name of Mr. Thompson be substituted for that of Mr. Hammersmith on the list of 
members comprising the crown corporations committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by Mr. 
Koskie: 
 

That the name of Mr. Shillington be substituted for that of Mr. Hammersmith on the list of 
members comprising the privileges and elections committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by Mr. 
Koskie: 
 

That the name of Mr. Koskie be substituted for that of Mr. Hammersmith on the list of 
members comprising the continuing select committee. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the 
member for Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That the name of Mr. Katzman be substituted for that of the Hon. Mr. Rousseau on the list of 
members comprising the standing committee on public accounts, and that the substitution be 
effective retroactive to October 13, 1982. 



 
November 22, 1982 
 

 
958 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Night Sitting 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Health: 
 

That on Wednesday, November 24, 1982, rule 3 (3) be suspended so that the sitting of the 
Assembly may be continued from 7 p.m. to 10 p.m. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 39 – An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly (and this has to do with a bill 
for which I have provided an advance copy to the opposition), I would ask leave to move first 
reading of An Act to amend The Urban Municipality Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and by leave of the Assembly the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next 
sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – I beg to inform the Assembly that Tim Hustak, Suzanne Johnson, Lori Kydd, 
Beth Miller, and Rob Verhelst will be pages for the present session. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 

Vacancy in Representation 
 
MR. SPEAKER: – I beg to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the Legislative Assembly has 
received from the assistant chief electoral officer notification of the following vacancy in the 
representation. That is in the constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake, pursuant to a judgment under 
The Controverted Elections Act invalidating the election of Jerry Hammersmith, Esq. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 30 – An Act respecting The Department of Culture and Recreation 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: – Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this bill is to change the name of the 
Department of Culture and Youth to the Department of Culture and Recreation. In the last few years 
there have been several recommendations both from within the department and from outside groups 
that the department’s name should be changed to  



 
November 22, 1982 

 

 
959 

reflect the broad and varied nature of its mandate and activities. 
 
For example, in 1979, the recreation study which involved approximately 300 representatives of 
community, regional and provincial recreation associations, agencies and authorities concluded that 
the name “culture and youth” did not take into account the roots of the department, its activities, or 
its emphasis upon recreation for all the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
More recently, the report of the cultural policy secretariat suggested a change in the name of the 
department that reflects its activities more accurately. To give some background to this change in 
name, I’d like to talk briefly about the roots of the department. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has been involved in the development of recreation in 
Saskatchewan since 1908, but its major involvements began in the year 1944 when the provincial 
government passed The Physical Fitness Act. The division of physical fitness commonly referred to 
as the Saskatchewan recreation movement was created in the Saskatchewan Department of Public 
Health later that same year. In 1946, the title of the division was changed to the division of physical 
fitness and recreation, and in 1948 the responsibility for this division was shifted to the Department 
of Education. 
 
Its programs and services, which are worthy of note, include the following: an annual provincial 
playday for children, drama services, scholarships for teachers and instructors in skill areas, 
consultative and financial assistance to provincial and local sports bodies, publishing of a regular 
magazine entitled Saskatchewan Recreation, and the sponsoring of conferences, workshops and 
seminars. 
 
In 1953, the fitness and recreation division amalgamated with the adult education branch as part of 
the continuing education branch of the Department of Education. The amalgamation brought with it 
the inclusion of the department’s arts and drama component and this structure remained until 1966. 
In that year, the establishment of a youth review committee and the releasing of a report called 
Youth: A Study In Our Time led to the formation of the provincial youth agency. Two major goals of 
this agency were to promote physical and social activities, and to create a climate and provide 
leadership to make it possible for young people to explore, develop and utilize their talents in 
leisure-time programs. During this period, the youth agency emphasized the development of 
recreation boards, provincial sport and recreation associations, and leadership training. 
 
In 1972, the passage of The Department of Culture and Youth Act brought about the formation of the 
Department of Culture and Youth. The department was formed by merging the provincial youth 
agency with other existing government programs. A significant area was added when the cultural 
program became a branch of the new department. A consolidation of programs in recreation, sport 
and culture thus was brought about in 1972 with the formation of one government agency to deal 
with all these programs. 
 
I have given this brief history to indicate that the department has its roots firmly planted in the 
concept of recreation, yet the word “recreation” does not appear in the name of the department. 
Someone may ask: what is in a name? The division, agency or department responsible for culture 
and recreation has been called many different things since its origin in the ’40s. However, I would 
like to emphasize that the name “culture and youth” is misleading and inaccurate, while the name 
“culture and  



 
November 22, 1982 
 

 
960 

recreation” accurately reflects the breadth and varied nature of the department’s mandate. More 
importantly, it recognizes the department’s roots in the provision and development of social, physical 
and cultural recreation. One of the other tangible benefits of the new name is that it will eliminate 
any misconceptions regarding the department’s target groups. 
 
The Department of Culture and Youth and its predecessors were designed to ensure equal 
opportunity to all residents of Saskatchewan for participation in recreation. However, some people in 
the province, particularly many of our senior citizens, have not understood that the services of the 
department were available to them. In fact, the Saskatchewan Gerontology Association as well as 
many individual senior citizens recently recommended the name of the department be changed so 
that all residents, regardless of age, understand that they have the opportunity to participate in the 
department’s cultural and recreational programs. 
 
At this point, it is important to emphasize that the change in name will not change the types of 
programs and services that are offered. The department will continue to provide support for the youth 
groups it has supported since 1944. The new name, the Department of Culture and Recreation, will 
not adversely affect this support and will not single out youth as an isolated segment of our 
population. 
 
I should add, Mr. Speaker, that this government is continually in search of better methods to deliver 
cultural and recreational programs. We will be constantly reviewing the organization and 
administrative aspects of those delivery systems. 
 
To sum up, as I have said before, the new name – the Department of Culture and Recreation – allows 
us the opportunity to indicate the roots of the department and the opportunities it provides to all 
citizens of Saskatchewan. I can see no reason why this bill should not be passed this session. I urge 
all members to support it. With this resolve, I move the second reading of this bill. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: – . . . (inaudible) . . . equal time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – That’s right. I should announce I’ll be at least 40 minutes on this bill. 
 
I just want to say that the minister said he saw no reason why it shouldn’t be passed this session. I 
frankly see no reason why it should be passed today. I think we might have amended the name to be 
culture, sport, and recreation, but I don’t feel strongly about it. I think a change of name in this 
regard is probably not untoward, so we in the opposition will not be opposing this bill. I may add, 
while I’m on my feet, that we will not be opposing the next bill either – which I gather is purely 
consequential to this one. 
 
Motion agreed to, the bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next 
sitting. 
 
Bill No. 31 – An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment 

of The Department of Culture and Recreation Act 
 
MR. SCHOENHALS: – I move second reading of Bill No. 31 which is simply consequential to the 
previous bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole of the next sitting. 



 
November 22, 1982 

 

 
961 

Bill No. 32 – An Act to amend The Lloydminster Hospital Act 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: – Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to explain the purpose of the proposed 
amendments to The Lloydminster Hospital Act. The major purpose of the proposed amendment is to 
establish legal authority for the Lloydminster Hospital board to operate a special-care home. Mr. 
Speaker, the board of the Lloydminster Hospital, and the board of the Vermilion River auxiliary, 
hospital and nursing home have proposed that the two boards be amalgamated. Amalgamation of 
these boards were also recommended in a study of hospital facilities in Lloydminster conducted by 
Dr. Graham Clarkson. The proposed amendment creates a legislative authority for this amalgamation 
to take place. However, I should emphasize that the legislation is only enabling legislation. 
Amalgamation will occur only if the final decision to amalgamate is made at the local level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also point out that the proposed amendments parallel those of a bill drafted by 
the Alberta government. Since 1948 the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan have had parallel 
legislation governing the operation of the Lloydminster hospitals. For example, the Alberta and 
Saskatchewan legislation provides for the establishment of a hospital district covering areas in both 
provinces. The proposed amendments before this legislature continue the tradition of parallel 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other amendments to the act are of a housekeeping nature; therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
move the amendments to The Lloydminster Hospital Act be given second reading. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, I have a number of things that I want to speak about on this 
most important bill and therefore I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 33 – An Act to Amend The Department of Revenue, Supply and Services Act 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: – Mr. Speaker, I would like to move second reading for two amendments 
to The Revenue, Supply and Services Act. These amendments are purely housekeeping in nature. 
 
The first merely transfers the authority presently vested in the Minister of Finance, to make 
remissions or to exempt any person from the payment of the tax, to the Minister of Revenue, Supply 
and Services. This transfer of authority, Mr. Speaker, was recommended by the Department of 
Finance on the grounds that the records of assessment and payment are maintained by my 
department, and thus the bulk of the recommendations originate there. 
 
The second amendment, Mr. Speaker, is simply correcting the present ad hoc department policy of 
obtaining approval for grant programs by supplementary appropriations and authority vested in other 
acts. Seeking such approval, Mr. Speaker, imposes an undue burden on other ministers who are 
unable to exercise independent judgments on the merits of the program, but must exercise the powers 
vested in them under their departmental act. 
 
This new provision is similar and has the same safeguards that are built into The Attorney General’s 
Act, The Beef Stabilization Act, The Department of Rural Affairs Act  



 
November 22, 1982 
 

 
962 

and The Department of Intergovernmental Affairs Act. The safeguards I allude to, Mr. Speaker, are: 
approval must be obtained from the Lieutenant-Governor in Council prior to making any grants in 
excess of $10,000; grants cannot be made unless the money is appropriated by the legislature; and all 
grants shall be recorded in Public Accounts. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, these amendments, as I’ve said previously, are purely of the internal 
housekeeping variety and were approved by the previous administration in February 1982. I 
therefore move second reading of Bill No. 33. 
 
Mr. KOSKIE: – I have listened to the comments of the minister, and I recognize the merits in 
respect to the approval of grants. This has been done I know in other departments – up to $10,000 in 
the Department of Social Services. Obviously, if you have to run for the approval of all of them it 
becomes a tremendous burden of moving paper. I recognize that. And I recognize in respect to the 
other provision (and that is the transfer of the authority from the Minister of Finance to the Minister 
of Revenue, Supply and Services), that this indeed has been done on other occasions. I want, 
however, to check in detail in respect to the concurrent power that is being transferred here to 
determine the exactness of other legislation, so I beg leave to adjourn the debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 34 – An Act to amend The Marriage Act 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: – Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to explain the purpose of the proposed 
amendments to The Marriage Act. The purpose of the amendments is to transfer responsibility for 
The Marriage Act from the Department of Health to the Attorney General’s department. The 
administration of The Marriage Act involves issues, which are primarily legal in nature, such as the 
determination of eligibility to marry or validity of certain marriages. For this reason, administration 
of the act properly belongs to the Attorney General. In addition, transfer of responsibility to the 
Attorney General will facilitate handling of the steadily increasing number of civil marriages in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the change will also strengthen the administrative support system for marriage 
commissioners whose numbers were recently increased by the appointment of selected justices of the 
peace and court officials. 
 
Mr. Speaker, administration by the Attorney General’s department will also ensure that The 
Marriage Act is co-ordinated more closely with other legislation dealing with marriage and family 
law, which is administered by the Attorney General. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I should mention that, while administration of The Marriage Act is being 
transferred to the Attorney General, the registration of marriage will continue to be handled by the 
Department of Health under The Vital Statistics Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments to The Marriage Act be given second reading. 
 
Mr. KOSKIE: – On behalf of my colleague for Shaunavon, Mr. Speaker, who is absent at the 
present time, I ask that the be adjourned until next day. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
November 22, 1982 

 

 
963 

 
Bill No. 35 – An Act to amend The Land Surveys Act 

 
HON. MR. GARNER: – Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of this bill which is of a 
housekeeping nature. It merely allows that the administration of The Land Surveys Act can be 
assigned to any member of the Executive Council. 
 
I would like to give you just a little background to clarify the reason for the change. In 1976, the 
previous government initiated the development of a centralized survey and mapping unit which, 
when fully developed, is intended to provide legal survey and mapping services to all government 
departments and agencies. The development process was assigned to the Department of Highways 
and Transportation because this was the department with the greatest need for legal survey services. 
 
On April 1, 1981, a further step in the centralization of the service was accomplished by transferring 
the surveys branch of the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources to the highway 
department. The Land Surveys Act currently assigns the administration of the act to the Minister of 
Natural Resources, now the Department of Tourism and Renewable Resources. The amendment will 
allow transfer of the administration of the act to the minister of the department which provides the 
service. Presently, this is the Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like to move second reading of this bill to amend The Land Surveys Act. 
 
Mr. KOSKIE: – I request to adjourn this until next date. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 — An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: – Mr. Speaker, financial security for the residents of Saskatchewan in 
their retirement years is an issue of great concern to our government. We believe that the best means 
of providing future financial security to our retired citizens is to ensure that more adequate provision 
is made now for the retirement years of those presently working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today and introduce amendments to The Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Act. The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act was originally passed by the 
Saskatchewan legislature in 1941. The original act included benefits for secretary-treasurers of rural 
municipalities only. In the years following the legislation, it proved to provide a beneficial pension 
plan for municipal employees. The act was progressively amended to where it stands today and 
includes members from all forms of local government. As of December 31, 1981, the municipal 
employees’ superannuation plan had 4,800 members and 800 superannuates. In 1981, the fund paid 
out $1 million in pension benefits. 
 
The amendments I am introducing will, for the most part, bring The Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Act in line with The Pension Benefits Act, which was amended July 1, 1981. These 
amendments enhance employee rights, increase employer obligations, and strengthen the safeguards 
required of private pension plans in Saskatchewan. 
 
Initially, we would be amending the section which deals with the responsibilities of the  



 
November 22, 1982 
 

 
964 

Minister of Finance. We will be streamlining that section of the act and placing greater fiscal 
responsibilities on the commission itself. To ensure that the plan receives maximum benefits from 
investment, we will be including a section that allows the commission to levy interest charges on 
employers for late submission of contributions. This amendment is very important in today’s 
economic times, as late payments by employers can only reduce the funds’ capital and, in turn, have 
a detrimental effect on the fund’s dollar growth. With the inclusion of this section, every plan 
member will be assured of receiving maximum benefits for their retirement. 
 
In bringing The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act in line with The Pension Benefits Act, 
we will be increasing the minimum interest rate payable to the plan by 3.25 per cent for 1982. In 
future years, the interest will be maintained in accordance with rates as determined by the 
superintendent of pensions. This, again, is another positive step in ensuring maximum benefits for 
plan members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a brief explanation of the amendments to The Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Act. This bill proposes several important changes to the pension plan for municipal 
employees, changes that improve their retirement benefits and clarify some of the problems and 
some of the phasing out in the act. These amendments are responsive, positive steps which ensure 
maximum benefits to superannuates. With the passing of these amendments, Saskatchewan will 
again lead the way in pension plan legislation. I am looking forward to discussing this bill in full 
detail during committee of the whole. With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: – Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: – Mr. Speaker, my colleague will be speaking on this bill at a later date 
and therefore I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 37 – An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 
 
HON. MR. PICKERING: – Mr. Speaker, today it is my pleasure to introduce several important 
amendments to The Rural Municipality Act. These amendments, Mr. Speaker, were developed, for 
the most part, through extensive consultations between the Department of Rural Affairs and councils 
of rural municipalities. 
 
This illustrates the close relationship my department enjoys with rural municipal councils and the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. I will make an effort to respond positively to the 
needs of local government. 
 
Our support for local autonomy will ensure that rural residents have an effective say in the 
day-to-day matters that affect their lives. 
 
The amendments I will outline today are designed to enhance the opportunities for rural residents to 
participate in the election of their own local government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural municipalities, through their provincial association, have requested additional 
time between nomination day and polling day in rural municipal elections. The proposed amendment 
to section 99 of The Rural Municipality Act will address the concern of rural councils that the 10 
days provided in the current act for conducting rural municipal elections does not present sufficient 
time for the election administration  



 
November 22, 1982 

 

 
965 

or for candidates and residents to fully review the local issue. 
 
The proposed legislation will extend the election period by seven days by advancing the nomination 
day one week. The dates for polling and appointing the returning officer will remain as they 
currently are. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, currently, notice of abandonment of a poll must be posted at the polling 
place, which could be a farm resident or a closed school. The proposed amendment to section 108 
provides for general publication of the notice so that the ratepayers will be better informed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regular October council meeting in many rural municipalities is held prior to the 
last day for the receipt of petitions for advance polling. Therefore, a special meeting of council is 
now often required to authorize advance polling. 
 
The proposed amendment to section 147 will allow petitions to be received prior to the regular 
October council meeting, and eliminate the possible need for a special meeting. Present legislation 
provides for different notice of voting periods for by-laws and for council elections. Municipalities 
often wish to schedule voting on municipal by-laws to coincide with the election of a member of 
council to reduce costs. Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment to section 174 will permit this to 
happen. 
 
Rural municipalities have expressed concern that the present penalties on late payment of taxes are 
far behind interest rates. As a result, some ratepayers will not choose to pay their taxes until the end 
of the year. Consequently, Mr. Speaker, rural municipalities and school divisions may be required to 
borrow money at high interest rates for current operations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the present legislation is not flexible enough to cope with the changing bank rate. 
Penalty rates must be high enough to encourage payment of taxes rather than an investment of funds. 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendment to section 339 makes provision for penalty rates to be 
adjusted with changing interest rates. In 1982, the maximum interest penalty on unpaid taxes will be 
12 per cent, with the penalty rate for 1983 determined by the prevailing Bank of Canada rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bill responds to a number of concerns expressed by local governments and clarifies 
some of the phrasing of the acts. 
 
I am pleased to move second reading of Bill No. 37, An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act. 
 
Mr. KOSKIE: – Mr. Speaker, on behalf of my colleague for Pelly, who unfortunately is not here 
today. I ask leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – Mr. Speaker, I just want to take a minute to welcome members back 
after a three-month holiday back on the farm, and to indicate to all members that it does take a day or 
two to get things in the hopper after resumption of the session. Through a mild, unfortunate 
misunderstanding opposite, we were not able to deal with the Urban Municipalities Bill today. 
Tomorrow will be private members’ day. I would ask now that this House stand adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:12 p.m. 


