






















































Hansard: December 01, 1983


403 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
December 1, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PETITIONS 
 
CLERK: — According to rule 11, sub 7, I hereby lay on the table, read and receive the petition of His 
Excellency, James P. Mahoney, Roman Catholic bishop of Saskatoon; the Very Reverend Leonard Morand, 
rector of St. Paul’s roman Catholic Cathedral; Winifred O’Rourke; Robert Ferguson; and Ronald Olson of the 
city of Saskatoon, praying for an act of incorporation. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure today to introduce a special 
delegation that is with us from Cumberland House. I want to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and members of 
this Assembly, Mr. Rod McKay, councillor of Cumberland House; Mr. Leonard Morin, deputy mayor; and the 
mayor, Mr. Winston McKay. This delegation is from the oldest community in our province, and they are 
members of the council for Cumberland House which is on the north-east side of Saskatchewan. The delegation 
is here today to meet with the Minister of Highways and Transportation about the serious transportation 
problem that I raised during question period yesterday. I wish them all the best in their efforts, and ask all 
members of the legislature to join me in welcoming them here today. I wonder if the members would stand 
please. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the opportunity — and I’m a little out of line because 
I’m not introducing a guest, but this is the festive season coming upon us, and tonight the religion which I am 
part of, the Jewish religion, starts its portion of it, which is known as Hanukkah. I wish everybody a happy 
season and, for those of my faith, happy Hanukkah. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Freeze on the Saskatchewan Income Plan 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of Social Services. It has to do with 
the freeze that has been in place since his government took office more than a year ago, not the minimum wage 
which has affected a great number of people — 60,000 in total — but a freeze that has affected a large number 
of senior citizens in the province, that being the freeze on the Saskatchewan Income Plan. The minister will 
know that seniors have received $25 per month, if they are single, or $45 a month per couple. That rate has been 
frozen since his government took office in April of 1982. I wonder if the minister could inform the House, and 
the senior citizens of the province who are affected by this freeze, when, in fact, he will have the courage to take 
to cabinet a recommendation that this be increased, to have an impact on the high utility rates that these seniors 
now are faced with as a result of his government programs. 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure for me to rise and participate for the first time, as a 
minister of the Crown, in question period, and I’m pleased to respond to the member’s question. I think it will 
be worth while for me to remind the House of the record of the former government as I respond to this question. 



 
December 1, 1983 
 

404 
 

 
In the year 1975, single seniors here received a supplement of $20 and married couples a supplement of $36; 
and in 1976, when I’m sure the seniors requested an increase, the rate remained the same — $20 for singles and 
$36 for couples. And, then, in 1977, when the former government requested an increase, or at least the seniors 
requested in increase, the allotment stayed the same, Mr. Speaker — $20 for singles, and $36 for couples. Three 
years running — frozen. Then, in 1978, when an election ensued, they decided that it would be appropriate to 
raise the allotment $5, Mr. Speaker, from $20 to $25 for singles, and for married couples from $36 to $45. Then 
in 1979, when the seniors, I’m sure, requested an additional increase, did they receive one? No, Mr. Speaker, 
they did not. In 1980, when the seniors requested an increase, did they receive one? No, they did not, Mr. 
Speaker. And in 1981, Mr. Speaker, when the seniors requested an increase, did they receive one? No, Mr. 
Speaker, they did not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for seven years running the seniors received an increase once, in the amount of $5, which averages 
out to 71 cents monthly per year as an increase over a seven-year period of time. 
 
Mr. speaker, this government does care about seniors; we have indicated that in numerous ways. We have 
increased representation on the senior citizens’ advisory council. I have met with seniors in Saskatoon. We have 
established a seniors’ bureau in the province of Saskatchewan, and we will naturally be looking very seriously 
at the income needs of seniors in the years ahead. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a supplement to the minister. As he will know, the New Democratic 
government instituted the Saskatchewan Income Plan. They also instituted a home-care plan for senior citizens. 
They implemented a home repair program which has since been cancelled by your government. They lowered 
the nursing homes rates to 390, which you . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please! The member is giving information instead of seeking it, and if the member 
has a question, would you proceed with it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, in attempting to respond to the long answer that didn’t deal with the 
previous question, I thought I would be given the same opportunity and leeway in my question. My question to 
the minister is this. In light of the fact that you have cancelled a number of senior citizens’ programs, namely 
the home repair program, and others where you have had cutbacks, will you now admit that you have a freeze 
on the Saskatchewan Income Plan that is impacting negatively on seniors who are facing increases in telephone 
rates, power rates, and natural gas, and when, in fact, will you make your announcement of an increase? 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Well, Mr. Speaker, whatever announcements will be made with regard to any increase 
will naturally be made at the appropriate time, and this isn’t the appropriate time to make announcements about 
SIP (Saskatchewan Income Plan) increases. 
 
I do want to remind the members of the House that the former government placed a moratorium on the 
construction of senior citizens’ nursing homes. I happened to come across a document which indicated that the 
former government had, in fact, in cabinet, agreed to a $500 charge on senior citizens for nursing homes in the 
province of Saskatchewan. This government presently is at $400-and-some instead of $500. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would like to remind the members on both sides of the House that questions should be 
brief and right to the point, and answers should be the same. I would ask you to proceed in that fashion. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of social Services. 
The minister will be aware that members of senior citizens’ organizations, are upset by the actions of your 
government with respect to the supplementary income program, and with respect to charges which senior 
citizens are facing. 



 
December 1, 1983 

 

405 
 

 
I want to quote from a brief recently received by you. It is from the senior citizens’ Action Now group, which 
you met with this week, and in part they say: 
 

Previous to the election of the present government, many statements were made by the Progressive 
Conservative members of the opposition to the effect that seniors should not suffer hardship due to 
increases in electricity, natural gas, and telephone rates. In view of the substantial increases, we urge this 
government to make an increase in the provincial income subsidy to seniors. 
 

Now, in view of unprecedented increases in natural gas and power rates — unprecedented increases two and 
three times the inflation rate — are you prepared, either to increase the amount of the payments under the 
Saskatchewan Income Plan, or to shelter senior citizens against these unprecedented increases in natural gas, 
power, and telephone rates? 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to tell this House that we increased senior citizens’ rates 
much less than you were going to. We froze utility rates which assisted seniors. We will be looking at the needs 
of seniors and their income, naturally. I want to tell the member opposite that when I met with Action Now 
yesterday, they told me that they pled with your government for years to give them representation on the senior 
citizens’ advisory council, and you never listened to them. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Aside from items of representation on council, are 
you prepared to make any increase in the Saskatchewan Income Plan payments to senior citizens, or are you 
prepared to act to shelter seniors from the very sharp rises in power, gas, and telephone rates which they are 
forced to pay? 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, I can assure this House, I can assure this House that we will increase the 
supplement to seniors far more than 71 cents per month average over a seven-year period of time, which is your 
government’s record. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary. Would the minister advise when this is going to take place? 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, the former government had a 70 per cent increase in utility rates over a 
seven-year period of time, and they increased the senior supplement by $5. And they have the gall to say that 
this government is not interested and concerned about listening to seniors. Certainly we are, and we will be 
making any announcements in due course. 
 

Transportation Across Saskatchewan River to Cumberland House 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, in response to a question that I took notice of yesterday from the 
member from Cumberland House . . . Cumberland constituency, pardon me. I’ve met with so many people from 
Cumberland House this morning, it seems to be an obsession with me. I would just like to inform the members 
of this Assembly, and also the delegation from Cumberland House, that the department will enter into an 
agreement with the northern village of Cumberland House to reimburse them for services provided during the 
period from termination of ferry services until such a time as the ice can carry the traffic across it. 
 
In addition, the department will set a crew there to assist in the clearing and flooding of the ice in the initial 
stages, to build up the ice thickness. With the community, and that, and working with the community, we will 
continually monitor the ice thickness. We will also be in contact with SPC regarding discharge from water from 
the Squaw Rapids dam. 



 
December 1, 1983 
 

406 
 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to add one more point: that the member opposite yesterday was accusing this 
government of doing nothing. I think this is a prime example of responding to the needs and the requests of not 
only just the people from that part of our province, but from the council as well, and we had a very worthwhile 
meeting. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the previous administration, you know . . . as they accuse us of a problem. I hold before me, 
Mr. Speaker, $500,000 worth of studies done by the previous government, and no results. The studies, Mr. 
Speaker, were not . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: —. I would just ask the members to give brief replies to questions, and I would ask all 
members to follow that guide-line. 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to comment on the minister’s statements of a moment ago. 
I want to thank the minister at this point in time for taking the advice of this side of the House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — But I also encourage, I also request, that the members on that side of the House arrive at the 
permanent solution of providing permanent access to Cumberland House by way of providing a bridge to the 
oldest community in this province. Thank you. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try and give a very brief response to the member opposite. This 
government today has acted on the requests of the individuals from Cumberland House, because the mayor 
came down. Mr. Speaker, I want to share two points o information with you. Never had a previous minister of 
transportation ever committed or been up to Cumberland House. I gave that commitment to those people today. 
Point number one. 
 
Point number two, Mr. Speaker: this government didn’t spend $500,000 on studying the problem, and then on 
top of that they never even shared it with the council from Cumberland House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Free Telephones for Senior Citizens 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to address a question to the Premier, and it has to do with 
the problems facing the Saskatchewan senior citizens. I want to indicate, Mr. Premier, that your government 
could ease the impact of the outrageous utility rate increases by making good some of your election promises. 
My specific question is this: when will your government make good on its 1982 campaign promise to provide 
senior citizens with free telephones? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. When you ask a question I think you should give the hon. minister a chance 
to answer. It’s your time that’s running out on the clock, so I think if you want to keep calling the clock will just 
run down. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of things I would like to say in response to the minister’s or the 
hon. member’s question about seniors, about the taking care of seniors and the  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

407 
 

money to take care of seniors, and rates, Mr. Speaker. And rates. If I could have their attention, Mr. Speaker, I 
will talk about utility rates: power rates, gas rates, and telephone rates. Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Social 
Services said, we froze all the utility rates, including telephone rates, for a year. We froze them. And one of the 
reasons that we froze them, Mr. Speaker, for a year was because of the previous record. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: —What has this got to do with free telephones? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — We are talking about telephone rates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason that we froze the rates was to protect people like the seniors. The other reason that we 
froze the rates was because of the previous record. 
 
On November, 1975, the general rate increase was 18 per cent. In April of 1977, there was a general increase in 
telephones of 9 per cent. On April of 1978, there was another increase of 8 per cent. In April of 1979, there was 
another increase of 6 per cent. In August of 1980, there was another increase of 6 per cent. A general increase of 
approximately 6 per cent for residential and 11 per cent for August of 1981, Mr. Speaker, for a 62 per cent 
increase. A 62 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second rates, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look at natural gas rates — natural gas rates. In 1980, Mr. Speaker, there 
was a 4.6 per cent in crease in February to senior citizens — 4.6 per cent. In September, there was an 8.7 per 
cent increase, 1980. In November, there was another 13.3 per cent increase, for a 30 per cent increase in 1980. 
 
1981 — 5.8 per cent increase in May, 5.5 per cent increase in July, and, Mr. Speaker, in February of last year, 
18.7 per cent increase. Mr. Speaker, in 1981-82, the rates went up almost 70 per cent — 70 per cent in ’81-82 to 
the senior citizens. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite ask about telephone rates and about utility rates. We froze them for a 
year because in the past they had been increased by as much as 70 per cent in two years. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, they asked about money. As I spoke the day before yesterday in this Assembly, if they 
are looking for extra money all they have to do is look at their own policy of losing $600 million on uranium 
mines. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please! I would encourage the members to stay on the subject of the question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that a booklet called Pocket 
Politics: A Quick Reference to PC Policy for Candidates contains the following under senior citizens’ items on 
page 29, “A PC government would provide free telephones for senior citizens,” would the Premier answer the 
question: when will your government make good on its 1982 election campaign promise to provide, as I say at 
page 29, free telephones to senior citizens? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we made a lot of promises in the campaign. Mr. Speaker, we have kept 
the majority of those promises. And, Mr. Speaker, we will keep the rest of those promises. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we will be proud to announce when we will keep those  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

408 
 

promises, and we’ll be proud to send the information on to the following members. In the first 18 months of our 
administration, Mr. Speaker, we have done more for senior citizens in this province than has been done in the 
last 10 years of the previous administration. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A further question to the Premier. I ask the Premier: are you aware of yet another 1982 
election promise made to the senior citizens, wherein you promised to eliminate the 5 per cent provincial sales 
tax from all utility bills. I want to say that a lot of the seniors voted for you on a commitment that that would be 
carried through with immediacy. What I’m asking you: when are you in fact going to carry out yet another 
promise which you intend to break? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, senior citizens voted for us because they were not satisfied with the 
previous administration. They voted for us because we said that we would make some commitments and we 
would follow up on them. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t know and we didn’t know, until we opened the books, that 
there was no money in the heritage fund. There’s no money in the heritage fund. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t 
decide they were going to take $600 million and dump it in the hole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we said that we would provide the things that we promised in the campaign, and we will. And we 
will announce when the time is right to provide those to the people of this province. We’ve made the 
commitments and we’ve kept them, and we will continue to keep them. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I would like the Premier . . . Can the Premier explain why it has 
taken so long to implement these relatively cheap programs you promised to the seniors which you . . . On the 
other hand, you made no promises to the big oil companies, and you have so readily found $100 million to pour 
into the oil companies, but you have no money for the senior citizens. I ask you: when are you going to live up 
to the promises to the senior citizens? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that the members opposite are trying to leave the impression 
that we didn’t do what we said we were going to do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — All right. Mr. Speaker, if that’s the case, I’d like to respond to it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had made a list of promises, and I believe there was about 50, 50 in the promises. And, the 
members opposite are saying we didn’t keep our promises. So, if they wouldn’t mind, I could go through the 
complete list. They want to know what it is. They want to know why we haven’t kept our promises. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we went through promise after promise after promise, and we kept them. Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order please. I believe the question was ably asked by the member for Quill Lakes, and I 
don’t think he needs any assistance from the other members. Would you give him an opportunity to answer it. 
 
Order please. I had just asked for order. Before I’m back on my chair, you’re blurting out again, and I’m going 
to caution the members for the last time that we want some decorum in the Chamber. Proceed. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, if I could continue. The members opposite are trying to leave the 
impression with the House, and with the public, and with the media, that we didn’t keep our promises. I would 
like . . . 



 
December 1, 1983 

 

409 
 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to review the promises we made, and the accomplishments 
that we have completed, since we went into that. Mr. Speaker, we said when we began our program, that we 
would open the books and find out what happened to all the money. That’s one thing we promised. Second, we 
would freeze utilities for a year, we promised that. We’ve opened the books and we examined it, and we can’t 
find the money; two, that we froze utilities. 
 
Three, we promised the senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, that we would set up a public utilities review commission 
to examine utilities. We’ve done that. We promised, Mr. Speaker, that we would remove the tax on gasoline — 
$135 million. We removed that. We promised, Mr. Speaker, that we would provide 13.25 per cent mortgages to 
everybody in Saskatchewan with a mortgage. We did that. We promised, Mr. Speaker, that we’d come in with a 
farm purchase program at 8 per cent and 12 per cent money. We’ve done it. We promised, Mr. Speaker, that we 
would provide a rural natural gas distribution system to the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve done that. We 
promised, Mr. Speaker, that we would lower royalties and taxes to encourage industries to get back to work in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and we’ve done that. We promised, Mr. Speaker, that we would build the best 
health care system in Canada, Mr. Speaker, and we are now spending more money than anybody else in the 
history of Saskatchewan. We promised, Mr. Speaker, that we would increase homes and home care facilities for 
senior citizens, and we did. We promised, Mr. Speaker, that we would change the image of Saskatchewan, and 
we would be open for business and not closed for business. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we promised that we would bring home the children, and people would 
be coming home to Saskatchewan as opposed to be leaving. We promised, Mr. Speaker, that we would open 
more businesses and get businesses opening in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we promised that 
we would encourage profit and allow people to make profit in the province of Saskatchewan. We promised, Mr. 
Speaker, that we would build schools and educational facilities in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
we promised that we would reduce the dominance of the crown corporations and make them run like a business 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I would like . . . Order, please. I would like both sides of the House to realize what 
happens when you ask long questions or questions that provoke debate. I think that the question period today 
. . . If you review that happened during the question period, all of you will realize that they were the type of 
questions that you expect that kind of answers to, and I would encourage members not to proceed with that type 
of questions and answers. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 11 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I move first reading of a bill to amend the Statute Law. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 — An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I move first reading of a bill to amend The Surrogate Court Act. 



 
December 1, 1983 
 

410 
 

 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — An Act to establish the Women’s Secretariat 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with pleasure that I rise today to move second reading 
of Bill No. 1, An Act to establish the Women’s Secretariat. It is my intention to talk a little philosophy of future 
direction in the role of the proposed secretariat. 
 
This bill, in my opinion, represents a significant initiative and a milestone, not only for the women of this 
province, but the government. This initiative puts Saskatchewan as one of the forerunners in Canada. Two 
others are before us, Ontario and Quebec, in establishing a similar agency. 
 
Saskatchewan women over the years, Mr. Speaker, have been forerunners in many categories, from our 
grandmothers and our great-grandmothers who made the trek across a very barren undeveloped prairie, and 
willingly took up the task of what was called homesteading. Homesteading included everything from making 
one’s own soap to ploughing the fields and growing and preserving foods for the family, sewing the clothing. It 
also included acting as midwifery. 
 
For many of our women the raising and providing for a family was often done in loneliness and isolation. Their 
task at hand was one of caring and nurturing and contributing to and for a future within a community. And they 
had a vision, Mr. Speaker, a vision of a land that gave them equal opportunity. It not only gave them equal 
opportunity, but it challenged their abilities and skills and accepted them for themselves. 
 
Equal opportunity for our women has not come easily. And it was on March 14, 1916 that Saskatchewan 
women first won the right to vote. It took four years of petitioning before the powers that be were convinced 
that yes, indeed, women could handle a vote. 
 
And it was another three years, in 1919, before this Assembly saw its first elected female member. Now that’s 
not too bad if one is to look at the record — only three years from the time of the right to vote until a female 
was actually elected. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what has happened since? Quite frankly, the record is not as good as it should be. In the 
history of this Assembly we have had a total of 13 women elected, a total, Mr. Speaker, that includes the five 
women elected in April of 1982. 
 
But perhaps what is more interesting than the total numbers is the number that the NDP have had out of that 13. 
The NDP party in Saskatchewan continues to tell the women and the men and the children that we are the party 
that believes in equality, in sameness. We are the party that believes in women’s rights. And we believe in 
affirmative action. And we w ill look after you and we will protect you. And on and on it goes. How many of 
the 13 women have the NDP elected? Maybe half. If not half, maybe a third. No, Mr. Speaker, they have elected 
two — two out of 13 in 31 years of being in power. 
 
Now, how can that be, after those years of being in power, a believer in equal rights, a saviour of the oppressed? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what we have had in this province under the NDP was pure and simple socialism. Some 
other people would define it as something else. It is a philosophy that dictates the state is supreme, and we are 
the same. The individual, whether it be man,  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

411 
 

woman or child, is only secondary to the basic goal of socialism, for the state is first. 
 
Now, when one is in a secondary position, what does it matter what my rights or my freedoms are, and of the 
oppression? Well, perhaps the bottom line is that actions speak louder than words. And let us look at other 
actions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 1974, this province saw an advisory council on the status of women established. And that’s good. But it was 
only five short years later, in 1979, that the very same advisory council had their grant cut, and they were 
informed at that time that they would be phased out in total over two years. Mr. Speaker, five members of the 
council in ’79 resigned in protest over that action. And the women’s groups spoke out in anger, and the NDP 
premier of the day received a letter from the Regina Status of Women that said it best all, and I quote: 
 

The government’s recent action is a betrayal which affects the morale of all concerned women. 
 

Betrayal, Mr. Speaker, and that was not the end of what I consider a betrayal to women. And I think back to 
1981, about late October, maybe early November, only two years ago, the debate and the negotiations were 
taking place in this country on what the federal constitution should include and what it shouldn’t. The then 
premier of the province saw fit to use women’s rights as a pawn in his constitutional negotiations. That was in 
1981 when women had assumed that they had at least gained some ground in equal rights. But it was 
understood that equal rights were there. What happened? Well, they had good reason to think it was not 1981 
but it was beginning to sound more like 1881, particularly when a premier, a reported statesman of the country, 
is willing to pit the rights of one group against another -–women against natives, and natives against women. 
 
Now, certainly some people are going to say he was misunderstood; he was misinterpreted. And was he? He 
will say he was. His party will say he was, but I wonder. The party that says go for it in uranium in one year, 
and in another year says don’t go for it; we’ll cancel that order. You really do wonder. 
 
The most deplorable aspect of the entire debate on the constitution was the lack of recognition and 
understanding and acceptance on his part that women’s rights are strong enough to stand on their own, and 
native rights are indeed strong enough to stand on their own. What does it mean to me as a woman, if I have 
gained recognition of rights when the native that I work and live beside does not have that very same 
recognition? And how would the native feel with long-awaited rights that were traded for women’s rights? 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, he simply didn’t understand, and he still doesn’t understand that the equality of rights 
should not be subject to negotiations for the political expediency of the state. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those are actions past and we’re into the present in setting the groundwork for a positive 
future. Since April of 1982, this government has seen elected five female MLAs, and for the first time in the 
history of this province, we have two women in cabinet. We have a female, and our youngest MLA, as a 
Legislative Secretary. And we have two females as caucus committee chairpersons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment to increasing the participation of women into the mainstream of society is 
obvious. One only has to look at some of the inroads made in just 19 short months . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Mr. Speaker, the opposition has much to say about how this government has not put women into responsible 
positions. I reject that criticism based on facts, not rhetoric — facts. 
 
For example, besides the five female MLAs, we have for the first time in the history of the Teachers’ 
Superannuation Commission, a woman as the executive director, appointed  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

412 
 

November of 1983. In August of 1982, we appointed a woman as the Provincial Librarian in charge of . . . We 
have a woman as chairperson of the minimum wage board. For the first time in the history of the Saskatchewan 
Transportation Corporation, Mr. Speaker, we have a woman as a chairperson. 
 
And I look further at some of our boards and I see an increase in the number of female membership on several 
of the appointed boards and commissions, boards and commissions that have traditionally been thought of as a 
male domain. 
 
We have seen in the Potash corporation of Saskatchewan an increase from zero percent under the NDP to 16 
percent female representation under the Conservative government. The Saskatchewan agricultural research fund 
has gone from 14 percent to 28 percent female participation. Sask Tel, one of the higher, bigger profile 
corporations, they have seen an increase from 8 percent under the NDP to 27 percent female representation 
under the Conservative government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have made a concerted effort, and the proposed secretariat will enhance and increase 
the efforts made to date. We have seen 42 percent female representation on the public utilities review 
commission. Saskatchewan’s economic development advisory committee has 20 percent female representation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in another area outside of the boards and commissions, we have made a deliberate effort to 
improve female participation in the work-force in the non-traditional areas. For one example, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Sask Power. Sask Power has a 30 percent increase from 1982 to 1983 in the number of women that 
have been put into the non-traditional trades. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the authority of the women’s secretariat, and the expertise and commitment of the 
women’s services branch through Advanced Education and Manpower, this government is dedicated to 
improving job opportunities for our women. 
 
The advisory council on the status of women, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has been expanded and strengthened and for 
the first time in its history, women’s organizations were formally invited to submit names. We have a 
membership of a total of 19, with a balanced geographical representation that was lacking before. Rural women 
had very little to say through the advisory council that was then speaking to the NDP government. 
 
Three men have been appointed to that council and that council can only benefit from the diverse cross-section 
of its total membership, which includes interest from the community worker, to the teacher, the professor, the 
business woman, the housewife, the farm wife, the nurse, business man, union, doctors, and lawyers. 
 
In another area, Mr. Speaker, our Attorney General has taken a most important first step in helping to address 
the issue of wife battering, and that was the matter of the policy laying charges with the incident. He has also 
followed that up with the announcement that they will be collecting data in order to help better address the 
problem in the very near future. Our Minister of Social Services has indicated that his department will set as 
their priority the issue of violence against women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these numbers and these initiatives that I have given you are facts, and I would suggest to this 
Assembly that it is only a beginning. It is a beginning that must be maintained and strengthened if we, as 
women, are to have an equal opportunity for participation at all levels of our society, including the democratic 
process. 
 
Now for myself as a woman, that’s all I ask for and work for. Not special status — just equal opportunity and 
equal recognition as a human being. Equal opportunity to participate and contribute according to my abilities 
and my interests. Equal opportunity to make decisions and  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

413 
 

choices, and choice means more than deciding one way or anther. It is not a simple yes or a nor. A choice has to 
be made objectively, free of the pressures created by biases, attitudes, and stereotypes, whether they are held by 
female or male on either side of the spectrum. 
 
Now, the forces that one works against to gain that equal opportunity are varied — from one’s own family, 
friends, the work place, the norm of society, from colleagues, female colleagues. And perhaps for many women 
the opposing force can be from within. We have another force — did have — in this province, and I consider it 
to be the force of socialism that says we are all the same. It does not recognize the worth of the individual and 
what that individual may have to contribute regardless of their sex. 
 
Out of those opposing forces there is another one that is very seldom talked about, and if it is it’s not readily 
admitted to, and that is the force in the intangible matter that one calls attitude. Society’s attitudes towards 
women are often steeped in myth and rhetoric, much of which is subscribed to by both men and women. And 
we’ve all heard them. I hear them periodically in here from across the floor. 
 
For instance, women talk too much. Women gossip; men share information. Women change their minds more 
often. Women have no interest beyond their homes and their families. Women go to university only to get a 
Mrs. Degree. Women work just to fill in time between school and getting married. And have you heard of the 
myth, “Hell hath no fury like a woman scorned?” Everyone knows women are poor drivers; the Minister of 
Highways may not agree with me. Women cannot balance a cheque-book. And everyone knows women get sick 
more often; so if they do, why would you want to give them an important job? And the list goes on. 
 
While we have some myths about women, we have the same number for men. All women face these myths. I do 
as a legislator and a politician. The working woman does as she pursues her career goals. And the homemaker? 
Well, the homemaker faces these also but with added pressure. The added pressure comes from the realization 
that her work is often thought of by the rest of the people that it lacks status either socially, legally, or 
economically. 
 
How much importance is attached to these myths? Do they really influence people’s lives? Why are three out of 
five poor adults in Canada female? Why are most working women found in a narrow range of low-paying 
women’s jobs? And why are approximately 65 per cent of single women over the age of 65 poor? 
 
Could this be related to the historic undervaluing of the work that women do? To the false assumption that 
women don’t need as much income as men because women are not heads of families? Or is it simply because 
women are not seen to rely on the themselves for financial security? Is this linked to the fact that young girls 
lack an identity and have trouble visualizing their future beyond 21 years old, a wedding, and a couple of kids? 
Although the realities of life do not match most of those assumptions, they continue to prevail and to influence 
society and the way we think. I would suggest that the crux of the problem is that a myth is the result of 
people’s expectations and attitudes, including their own biases. And perhaps the only way to debunk the myth is 
to change the underlying attitudes. Attitude and myth do not change quickly nor easily, and it is a very slow and 
painful process for all concerned. Nevertheless, that’s where the greatest need and the greatest potential for 
meaningful change exists. 
 
When we consider long-term goals, attitudinal change needs to be at the top of the list. The question becomes: 
how are they changed? What factors facilitate or speed up the process, and which ones have the opposite effect? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, education is a key factor — education in a very broad sense. It includes all forms of 
education, ranging from the public education system to personal life styles, to the heightened awareness which 
comes from media attention. Now, taken together, these represent a multitude of opportunities for movement 
down the road towards equal rights and  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

414 
 

equal responsibilities. 
 
Another important factor in achieving the attitudinal change is the cultivation of a very broad base of support. 
And in a democratic society which sometimes we forget, support for change is a prerequisite to that change and 
this support is absolutely essential in order to legitimize the issues. And of course the third key factor is 
government and attitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot has happened in the history of women, even from the time that the feminist, Betty Friedan, 
wrote the book, The Feminine Mystique. And some of it has been positive and some of it has not been positive. 
As I see it, one of the least positive aspects of the women’s movement has been its alienation of a great many 
people, men and women alike. So where does that leave us today? Are there wounds to heal? Should future 
strategies attempt to attract men and women who have been left behind? I suggest they must and as I see it, that 
is a challenge, and an exciting one, to the women’s secretariat in the future. 
 
The feminist philosophy continues to evoke mixed reactions, much of them characterized by confusion, 
misunderstanding, fear, and anger. And perhaps in looking at it, it’s predictable given the far-reaching and 
intensely personal implications involved. Unfortunately, this has often resulted in very destructive 
confrontations, lack of understanding, and a loss of acceptance. 
 
It is the secretariat’s intent to pursue the opening of doors for our women through understanding and 
acceptance. Some people might not support such an approach, because they are going to tell me it’s going to 
lead to too many compromises and perhaps even stagnation. And my response to that is that changes achieved 
any other way will only be superficial, they will certainly be short-lived, and they will probably not be worth 
the cost. 
 
Our goal has to be one that looks beyond the stereotypes that limit our humanity as well as our femininity and 
our masculinity. And our strategies need to be based on understanding, sharing, and co-operation. 
 
Now, in considering some of the activities various groups have been involved in over the years, I’ve often 
wondered if the objective was to attract attention or achieve change. Perhaps they assumed that the attention 
would bring change. Unfortunately, the process of change is considerably more complicated than that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a momentum for change and it’s growing every day. Some people recognize it. 
About eight people don’t. In some quarters it grows more quietly and more slowly than in others. But it is 
growing, none the less. We need to tap the momentum and we need to protect it from the fragmentation by 
strategies which pit women against men and women against women, often in anger. The energy that is 
consumed by anger and confrontation must be diverted to achieving constructive change. 
 
And so it is, Mr. Speaker, that this government seeks constructive but committed change. This past spring, this 
government began its process of change when it announced the reorganization of its women’s division. At that 
time this government, through our Premier, stated no longer should women’s concerns, and aspirations be 
isolated to one single department nor group. 
 
The reorganization of the women’s division last spring resulted in three separate units with specific 
responsibility for women’s programming. Number one, responsibility for employment and training matters rest 
with the women’s services branch in the Department of Advanced Education. The Public Service Commission’s 
affirmative action unit is responsible for developing affirmative action programs for women within the public 
service. The labour standards branch in Saskatchewan Labour continues to monitor compliance with the equal 
pay and maternity leave provisions of The Labour Standards Act. 
 
I want to emphasize, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the work being done by these units is essential  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

415 
 

and imperative. However, the range of issues affecting women, and indeed all society, goes far beyond the 
parameters of these established programs. 
 
The women’s secretariat will provide a focal point for the integration of women’s concerns and aspirations into 
government’s basic policy development and decision making. The time has come to incorporate women’s 
concerns into the mainstream. The days of confining the so-called women’s issues to a single department are 
over. Our women’s concerns will no longer be defined in terms of whether or not they come under the purview 
of the Department of Labour or any other department. 
 
And no longer will the women be in only a monitoring position. That is what the women’s branch in the 
Department of Labour had been in. And I recall a statement by a man by the name of Gordon Snyder who used 
to be a minister of labour, and at that time he defined the women’s branch as being the watch-dog of 
government — the monitor, the watch-dog, in a very adversarial role. A watch-dog is on the outside looking 
and never on the inside where the decision making takes it process. 
 
Our objective is to develop mechanisms to ensure that all policies, all legislation, and all programs are 
examined for their potential impact on women. And it is our intention to become pro-active in the development 
of positive policies and legislation. 
 
The establishment of a women’s secretariat is a signal to all government departments and agencies that they 
need to think about and to analyse their policies and programs for their effect on the female population. They, 
too, need to be pro-active. The secretariat’s plans will be to provide the overall framework for this new, 
co-operative approach. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps the most significant factor facing the female status is the issue of violence against 
women, and it is indeed a serious problem with no easy answers. Legal status and protection from 
discrimination is another large and complex area. Native women, rural women — how can we ensure that their 
changing roles and needs are considered in the development of new social and economic policies? 
 
Violence against women, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a social issue and a health issue and a legal issue, but it is also 
an economic issue — all rolled into one. It is clear that most of these matters do not concern women 
exclusively, nor are they straightforward issues which can be dealt with by any single department or agency, 
and they do indeed require an approach that allows the co-ordination to take place. But perhaps the most 
important factor is that they require a thorough understanding. 
 
Up to now, the capacity to generate a co-ordinated and integrated response has been absent. The establishment 
of a women’s secretariat will correct that deficiency. 
 
The secretariat, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be a free-standing agency, with its own legislative authority, a 
separate budget, and a direct reporting relationship with the minister responsible for the status of women. In the 
past, they answered to a deputy minister. They never had a direct line to the minister that was responsible. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I suggest that these indeed are important gains, not only symbolically but from a practical 
level. Each of these factors will give the secretariat a degree of credibility and authority that they have never 
before achieved. 
 
The secretariat will have broad and government-wide responsibility. The proposed legislation formally 
recognizes the responsibilities and directs the secretariat to develop mechanisms to fulfil them. Its work will be 
concentrated on the co-ordination of provincial legislation, policies, and programs to the extent that 
co-ordination is needed to ensure that women’s concerns are appropriately reflected. In order to be effective, the 
secretariat will need to develop strong communication links and close working relationships right across 
government. I am confident, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this process will be greatly facilitated by the strong 
commitment which  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

416 
 

exists by the Premier, the cabinet, and in caucus. 
 
In addition, the secretariat will provide a central contact point for women’s organizations and also on 
federal-provincial matters pertaining to the status of women. It will also act as a liaison between the minister 
and the Saskatchewan Advisory Council on the Status of women. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, this legislation recognizes that women have legitimate and diverse concerns regarding 
their social and economic and legal status. The establishment of a woman’s secretariat will enhance the 
government’s ability to respond to those concerns in a way which will benefit all of Saskatchewan society. 
 
Mr. speaker, it is indeed that I respectfully move second reading of The Women’s Secretariat Act. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to say initially that this bill 
represents a major retreat by this government. It represents, first and foremost, a reaction to the outrage which 
greeted the actions of the then minister of labour in abolishing the women’s division. 
 
I have to congratulate the women’s movement in Saskatchewan. They have done something that no one else has 
been able to do. They’ve got to this government. They have got a bit of action out of this government. And no 
one else, apart from the big business community, no one else has managed to do that. 
 
I want to remind members, as well, that the record of this government on women’s issues is nothing sort of 
abominable. It is terrible . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . A-B-O-M-I-N-A-B-I-L-E. 
 
Terrible, rotten, no good — typical Conservative, typical Conservative. It is terrible on virtually every front. 
 
This government boasts of having five women in caucus. I wished, I really wished it were able to boast of 
having some effective women in caucus. It is obvious that the women in the Conservative caucus either don’t 
understand women’s issues or don’t care. 
 
I am waiting for a speech from the member from Saskatoon Westmount, the member who clapped, who 
applauded so loudly when the women’s division was done away with. And I may say, I’m looking for a speech 
from the member from Saskatoon Nutana, who applauded so loudly when the women’s division was done away 
with. I expect that you will at least be consistent and vote against this bill, because what the government is 
doing is bringing back what it abolished. It is a retreat; nothing more. 
 
I also believe that this bill represents little more than cosmetics, cosmetics brought about by a complete failure 
on women’s issues. The minister commented on a number of appointments to boards. That’s easy, and it is 
often largely symbolism. What marks the test of whether or not you have any commitment to women is whether 
or not they’re employed at senior levels in the public service. 
 
I noted a distinct absence of comments by the minister on the women appointed to senior positions in 
government. This government had an unparalleled opportunity to appoint people to senior positions, because 
you canned virtually all . . . you canned virtually all of the incumbents. 
 
And you didn’t appoint any until yesterday, when the minister of international trade and economic 
development, the member from Cannington, appointed someone who I did not know, as deputy provincial 
secretary — first permanent head so appointed. I do not know the women who was appointed. I do know 
something about the position, and the duties are largely nominal. That nominal position is the first one that you 
had the confidence to appoint a woman to. 



 
December 1, 1983 

 

417 
 

 
Your record on appointment of women in the senior levels of the public service is terrible. And I address that to 
the member from Kindersley who has a direct responsibility for the public service commission, if I recall. I may 
be mistaken; it used to be, last year. You people are shuffling around so fast, no man can stay up with it. 
 
Marjorie Gerwing achieved prominence under our government when she was active in the Bayda commission. 
That was the first time she was active. You haven’t appointed a single permanent head. You have not appointed 
a single permanent head. You may have appointed them to boards, which is all you did with Marj Gerwing — 
she’s president of a board — but in the permanent public service your record is terrible. You fired three 
permanent heads and you replaced them with men. And the first exception to that was yesterday, in a post 
which is largely meaningless — the deputy provincial secretary. 
 
But your brilliant record of promoting women’s affairs doesn’t stop there. The affirmative action program, a 
program with admittedly some difficulties, begun by the former government, which has been put in the 
deep-freeze by this government . . . There have been no significant advances under the affirmative action 
program with this government. 
 
Women in the public service who telephone me, most of whom supported you people in the last election, tell 
me that the affirmative action program in government is virtually dead. There’s nothing being done. There is 
nothing being done. 
 
On policy issues, the record of this government is worse. Minimum wage largely impacts on women. The 
majority of people who earn minimum wage are women, and you have chosen to freeze it. You have chosen to 
take the position that it is the women on minimum wage who are somehow or other fuelling inflation, and it is 
they who must bear the brunt of the cost of recovering — in contradiction to the way you have treated your own 
political wheel-horses, your own assistants, and yourselves, with this bloated cabinet. 
 
The issue of violence. We have heard a lot of platitudes about violence against women. I really wished women 
could make some use of those platitudes that you people substitute for action, but that is all the women have got 
from this government —platitudes. Violence against women isn’t going to be materially affected by the 
Minister of Justice, although I support what he does in calling for stricter enforcement of the Criminal Code 
sections that relate to sexual offences. But that is not going to solve the problem, nor is all the hot air which 
comes from the Minister of Social Services on the subject. 
 
I will tell you what will go a good distance towards solving the problem of violence against women. It is clear 
that unemployment is a major factor in the violence against women. Violence against women has increased 
dramatically with the recession, and will continue so long as the strains caused by unemployment impact upon a 
family. 
 
It is caused by excessive consumption of alcohol — that is a part of virtually every violent act against women. 
And this government is promoting alcohol by advertising its sale. And you are saying, “It doesn’t matter, 
doesn’t care; who cares?” I’ll tell you who cares. The people who are the victims of alcohol care. 
 
I saw an advertisement in the newspaper, in the Star-Phoenix, actually, over the week-end, that I thought was 
very apt. The advertisement stated: “Drunks Aren’t Funny,” and it had a picture of some children hiding from 
two parents who were fighting. And alcoholism isn’t funny. It may be the stuff of stage humour, but it’s not 
funny to the children who are the subject of violence. It is not funny to women who are the subject of violence 
brought about in part by alcohol. And you people, in promoting alcohol, are promoting violence against women. 
You are promoting a whole host of other social problems, but you are promoting violence against women. 



 
December 1, 1983 
 

418 
 

 
The Minister of Social Services has had any number of platitudes to lay before this Assembly on violence 
against women. I am waiting to see what he does with respect to the funding to non-government agencies, 
because they played a major role in assisting troubled women in troubled circumstance. And your predecessor 
in office was niggardly, and I am putting it kindly. Some of the non-government agencies were cut out 
altogether. Some had their funding reduced. Virtually none had their funding in any sense increased. And I am 
waiting to see what your record is with non-government agencies. I am talking about your record when you 
were minister of social services on non-government agencies and it is terrible. 
 
It is hypocritical, Madam Minister, for you to stand up and talk about violence against women, and read what I 
suppose was the 13th chapter out of The Feminist Mystique — I can only assume that’s where you got your 
speech from — and ignore your own record, and ignore your own record . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now, 
don’t talk nasty. And ignore your own record on the funding of non-government agencies, because it is one that 
you should not be very proud of. As a former president of the Saskatchewan school trustees, you should 
understand what violence to children does, violence in the family can do. 
 
But undoubtedly the blackest mark in the record, and this is quite a feat — this is no small feat — but the 
blackest mark is earned by the Minister of Labour, who abolished the women’s division. It was by almost any 
mark, and almost any test, one of the best women’s divisions in Canada. It had earned a national reputation for 
the quality of its work. And you people — I can only assume charitably that it was through ignorance — you 
people through ignorance abolished that division. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You are showing your true colours. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, perhaps. Perhaps the views espoused publicly by the members from Saskatoon 
Nutana and Saskatoon Rosemont were felt secretly by all of them. Saskatoon Westmount, I said. You’re 
Rosemont; she’s Westmount. I know these are trying and confusing times for members of the government 
benches. Yes, she’s right behind you. She’s the good-looking one from Saskatoon Westmount. You’re the one 
from Saskatoon Rosemont. 
 
Undoubtedly, the blackest mark, the blackest mark was the abolition of that division because . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You mean, I’m not the blackest mark? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, you’re not, although you are probably competing. You are probably competing 
for it. 
 
It was easy to abolish the women’s division. It is very difficult to re-establish a division of that quality, that 
produces that kind of work, because you can’t do it with an act. You cannot recreate that with a piece of 
legislation such as what was put on my desk. It takes people, and you’ve lost most of the people. Most of them 
are gone. I will get to that in a moment . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I’m glad you’re listening. I’m glad you’re listening, because you are going to have a real problem in staffing 
that women’s secretariat. And I may say before I go on any further that I hope you break precedent, you do 
something you have not done before, and concern yourself with something other than the person’s membership 
in the PC Party when you go to appoint the director of this secretariat. I hope you find a person who has 
credibility and independence, because the kind of issues upon which this secretariat should be speaking are the 
kind of issues that I don’t think this government’s going to want to hear about very badly. 
 
I don’t think this government’s going to want to hear from the secretariat on minimum wage, on alcohol, on 
unemployment, on funding to non-government agencies, because those are the very issues which have impacted 
on women and so negatively. 



 
December 1, 1983 

 

419 
 

 
The strains are beginning to show in the political bulwark of this government. I am informed, reliably, that 
Allan Gregg’s polls told the government that they’re losing the support of women and that this was an issue 
which was hurting you. That’s why you brought back the women’s secretariat: because women are concerned 
about the minimum wage; they’re concerned about the abolition of the women’s division; and they are 
concerned about day care. 
 
I am sorry that the member from Riversdale is not here to hear this. I don’t think she’s going to be in the House. 
Ah, she is. Well, I’m pleased to see she’s back behind the bar of the House. But I don’t think the member’s 
going to be in the House long enough to complete the study on day care, so it may be an academic subject. I 
suspect before this House resumes we will have another, and a different, member from Riversdale. But day care 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, don’t extend the deadline or you will abort the whole study. 
 
It’s not surprising you’re finding that, because studies which have been done in the U.S. point to a gender gap, 
and they note the gender gap in the U.S. Those studies note that the conservative policies of Ronald Reagan 
have cost him support among women. That may have made some impression on this government because you 
have been . . . because, unlike this government which is so secretive, the U.S. government publishes those 
studies. The U.S. government publishes its studies. The last thing you people published was the . . . The studies 
which have been done by the U.S. government are done by the Senate. They are public and you can go and get 
them from the library. 
 
If the member from . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’m sorry if my remarks do not find favour with the 
member from Regina North. I was making them only because I thought he might be impressed. I am deeply 
disturbed that the member from Regina North does not find my remarks enlightening. 
 
When you abolished the women’s division, you outraged . . . I have made a list of 60 organizations which were 
outraged by the abolition of the women’s division, and they were not, as the Minister of Finance said, all a 
bunch of NDP women. At least one of them, Dolores Honour, who was a Liberal candidate, took exception to 
that, being lumped in with a bunch of NDP . . . I can see the Minister of Finance desperately trying to ward off 
the comment. You made it. It was reported. They reacted to it, and they reacted pretty negatively . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, why don’t you just go up and write the story for them? I’ll excuse you, and I’ll send you 
a copy of this speech if you want. 
 
I list some of the groups that protested the abolition of the women’s division: Action Day Care; the Canadian 
Advisory Council on the Status of Women; here’s bunch of NDP women — the Elizabeth Fry Society, a society 
which has been in existence for well over a hundred years; I suppose another bunch of NDPers — the 
Saskatchewan Association on Human Rights; the Communication Workers of Canada, a group called Working 
for Women, Saskatchewan division of the Canadian Union of Public Employees. And no doubt here’s another 
bunch of NDP women — Saskatchewan Federation of Business and Professional Women’s Clubs. Now here’s 
another bunch which are rock-rib NDP — Saskatchewan Law Union, Saskatchewan Council of women. As I 
say, there are 60 and I will not mention them all. No doubt your establishment of this secretariat is a reaction to 
that. I only wish this government were honest enough to admit the error, and then you could go about setting up 
an agency which would do a proper job. 
 
We are disturbed that this government refuses to assure the legislature that the secretariat will be free to publish 
its reports, will be staffed with people who are independent of the Conservative Party in this government, and 
will be provided with sufficient financial resources. And I’m going to come back to that. That is a key concern, 
and we will be bringing that concern to the attention of this government on more occasions than today. 
 
Another action of this government is hurting women, and it is the cut-back in legal services. And I quote from 
the comments by Diane Fisher, speaking to the Elizabeth Fry Society at their annual  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

420 
 

meeting. She stated: 
 

Social assistance is cutting back on their (read “women’s”), on their access to money, so they shoplift, 
but legal aid is cutting back on their access to legal aid, so they have no defenders. 
 

This government has proved to be anything but open in dealing with women. The Saskatchewan Action 
Committee on the Status of Women has experienced a good deal of frustration in dealing with this government. 
I quote from April 28 edition of The Western Producer, April 28 of this year, and the quote is as follows: 
 

As soon as the Progressive Conservatives got into power, Buswell, the action committee’s president said 
the Saskatchewan Action committee requested a meeting, and after two letters were unanswered, they 
contacted Paul Schoenhals, Minister of Municipal Affairs. A meeting was set up, but later cancelled. 
 

Well, that describes their frustration in trying to meet with the government after it was elected. 
 
The Regina Healthsharing Incorporated, who I think have done some excellent work in researching problems 
related to women, who raised for the first time the issue of Saskatchewan’s abnormally high pre-marital 
pregnancy rate. That statistic has been available to this Assembly in the library for years. They were the first 
people who I heard raise the issue, and it ought to alarm all members of this House. 
 
Regina health-sharing region, who have dealt with that among other issues, with 350 members, spent three 
years researching women’s health problems and nine months’ research into a proposal to prevent the problem, 
only to have this government turn thumbs down on their request. And, I’m quoting from Leader-Post, April 22, 
1983. According to The Leader Post, the 10-member health-sharing board has come to the conclusion that the 
Devine government doesn’t see women’s issues as a priority and they say that they shared that impression with 
virtually every other women’s group as well. 
 
The same minister, I may add, who brought the legislation for the women’s secretariat to the legislature, who 
pretends to masquerade as a friend of women — after all, he tells the House, he married one; a noble gesture, a 
noble gesture. I am referring now to the Minister of Social Services. 
 
When she brought the legislation for this act to the House, she came wearing true Tory blue, the same true Tory 
blue colour she wore as minister of social services when she cut household and clothing allowance, those 
portions of the social assistance benefits for unemployed workers. How the minister squares that philosophical 
speech she just gave with her actions as minister of social services, I will never know. 
 
If I can find it quickly, and I will not waste much time of the House, I want to find a quote of the Minister of 
Finance. The Minister of Finance has trouble with the upper portion of his body — his mouth tends to fall open 
at times. I am quoting, Mr. Minister, from one of the periods when you distinguished yourself by some loose 
comments, and I am reading from the Prince Albert Daily Herald of Thursday, November 24, 1983. The 
headline is — I can read it from there: Andrew Urges Alterations in Welfare, Unemployment Insurance — so 
more can be done with taxpayers’ money. The Minister of Finance apparently envisions reducing the cost of 
welfare by reducing the benefits, so that more can be done with taxpayers’ money. He has an . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . No, I certainly do not, and I’m going to comment on that in a moment. 
 
He apparently envisions the welfare rates being so startlingly high under this government that people prefer to 
be on welfare rather than work, in the face of all evidence. And this, Mr. Minister . . . You may quarrel about 
the headline; the quote is a direct quote from your speech, and I want  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

421 
 

to quote it back to you: 
 

We must insure our safety net programs, unemployment insurance and social insurance, do not destroy 
the initiative to seek out new, and perhaps different employment or training. 
 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What’s wrong with that? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What is wrong with it is that it suggests that the level of social assistance is so high 
that it encourages people not to work. I suggest there isn’t a scintilla of evidence to support that, and I suggest 
that the Minister of Finance speaks out of both sides of his mouth. He has one set of comments which he uses 
for his more liberal friends — small “l” liberal friends. He has another set of comments which he saves for the 
business community, and the two don’t always meet. 
 
And I wonder, Mr. Minister, to what level will you be urging the Minister of Social Services to reduce benefits 
in the up-coming budget? To what level will you be urging her to reduce them? And that impacts pretty directly 
on women. That impacts more directly on women than a lot of what your colleague, the Minister of Justice, and 
the current Minister of Social Services have said. The vast majority of people getting social assistance are 
women, single parents, and for the minister to suggest that money should be taken away from them because 
they should be working, never mind how, or because you need the money elsewhere, as the headline suggests, 
never mind the injustice and inequity of that, doing women a lot more harm than the present Minister of 
Education will ever do for them. So I’ll be interested in your contribution, Mr. Minister, and I’ll be interested in 
knowing to what level you plan on driving social assistance rates down in the current budget so that you may do 
more with taxpayers’ money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the House that our caucus will be supporting the bill. We will be seeking . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . It is better than nothing at all. It is a good deal short of what you had when you came 
into office with the women’s division, but it is better than nothing at all. We will be seeking to make some 
changes in the agency and we will be moving some amendments, the substance of which I will describe in a 
second. If those amendments are passed, we will vote for it again on third reading. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is key that this secretariat have the authority and the independence to publish its reports and 
make them public. The secretariat isn’t going to serve any function if all its work is censored by the minister, 
whoever that may be. I don’t think the minister is going to public what women would have to say, and I hope 
this secretariat reflects what women have to say. I don’t think the minister’s going to publish what women have 
to say about the minimum wage, about unemployment, about the other issues I raised. 
 
We think it is key that this secretariat have the power to make its reports public and we are going to be 
introducing an amendment to that effect which will, in effect, include reports and a publication of its work in 
the annual report. And I don’t envision having any difficulty getting government members to accept that — 
none at all. This, we will all recall, was the government which came into office in a spirit of open government. 
Let the taxpayers in. Let them participate. I don’t envision any difficulty, any difficulty at all, in a government 
of that ilk adopting a simple amendment which says that their research work and their reports should be 
published with the annual report. I don’t envision any difficulty at all, because I believe you people when you 
say when you believe in open government. 
 
I’m not like 99 per cent of the other people in Saskatchewan who don’t believe you. Not me. You got me. So I 
believe you will adopt it. I believe it will be consistent. I believe you will be consistent, and I believe you will 
adopt the amendment. For those reasons, I and my caucus will be supporting this bill in second reading. 



 
December 1, 1983 
 

422 
 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I beg leave to introduce a guest. 
 
INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 
 
MRS. BACON: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have in our midst today Mr. Bert Cadieu, a former 
member of the House of Commons in Ottawa for the Progressive Conservatives under the administration of 
John Diefenbaker. He served the riding of Meadow Lake. Je dis pour mes amis, bienvenue. Would you please 
all welcome him. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — An Act to establish the Women’s Secretariat (continued) 
 
MRS. BACON: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would initially now just like to thank the Lord for 
endowing me with the patience of a woman to sit so politely through the rhetoric of the member from Regina 
Centre. We are here today debating the birth of a new vehicle, a new vehicle to assist some of the Saskatchewan 
women to achieve their goals. This is not a retreat, as was said by the member from Regina Centre, but is an 
expansion that is going to be positive and more productive. And I ask the member from Regina Centre: I sat 
quietly and politely throughout your speech; perhaps you would offer me the same courtesy. 
 
The term of reference will be the women’s secretariat, but will all women use it? No, I think not. Could this 
vehicle be used by the men in our province who are genuinely concerned about the women’s future? I hope so, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. For quite simply put, the problems indicative to women in today’s world are the results of 
attitudes toward women which have evolved over generations and generations, and only with the co-operation 
of men and women in Saskatchewan will the secretariat achieve its goal. 
 
I wish now to backtrack to my first paragraph to clarify why I said, “some” women and not “all” women, for I 
believe the practice of collective judgment is primitive and dangerous. Many women in Saskatchewan do not 
want their role changed, the role involving homemaking or the rearing of children. Many women are content to 
delve into hobbies rather than a career. Many women are extremely confident. Those women will take on a 
challenge and go it alone. And then there are the career wishers, the battered, and the abused. They are neither 
confident nor content, the group who want to change their lives but know not how to go about making that 
change nor whom they should consult. 
 
This is the group that I believe will be using the women’s secretariat and making it the function al body it is to 
be. And for those women in the province who do not want such a body, it will not interfere with their lives. For 
those who have already attained their goals, the valuable resource of experience will be offered and shared with 
the women’s secretariat. 
 
People helping people in a good slogan, Mr. Speaker. And really isn’t that what life is all about? I mentioned 
earlier that attitudinal problems are largely responsible for many of the problems and tasks the women’s 
secretariat will be dealing with. An attitude is a settled mode of thinking and with the Home Sapiens’ ability to 
reason, we know that attitudes can be changed. A particular mode of thought can become unsettled. Attitudes 
cannot be legislated, nor were they formed overnight with regard to women. 
 
The attitudes out there in the real world are products of evolution, just as were you yourself and myself, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Racism is an attitude. Bigotry is an attitude. They are simple attitudes, primitive attitudes, 
negative and destructive. They have moulded and  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

423 
 

changed their ugly format through time, and they are not consistent throughout the world, but they have been 
there since the beginning of time. 
 
And so it is with that that I should like to dwell for a while on the reality of the situation before us. 
 
I deal with basic concepts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for I am a realist. The reality is as follows: women are people 
first, as are men. Children are simply small people. We are mammals. We are warm-blooded. We have hair or 
fur on our body. And we suckle our young on milk. We are of the genus Homo, and of the species Sapiens. 
Humans are called Home Sapiens. The order of division is further broken down to variety or breed, or from the 
sale of humans, race. And each breed or race can further be separated by sex. There are males and there are 
females. By chromosome structuring, I am of the latter category. 
 
A further biological division is also a reality. It is the physical structure of the Home Sapiens. Females are 
usually of a finer bone structure, usually display a more compassionate nature, and are equipped to bear young. 
Physically, I speak only for myself, for I am inferior to most men in the area of strength. I can shingle a roof 
along with any man in this room, but I cannot get a bundle of shingles to the roof. I can assist at birth and pull a 
calf, but I cannot lift that calf. 
 
But mentally, the faculties that form attitudes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the faculties that assimilate and analyse 
information mentally, I ask: am I inferior to the men? I think not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have the same 
computer between my ears as has the male of my species. It controls my sight, the movement of my body, the 
workings of my heart. It performs the same tasks for the men. Simply put, we all have the same psychological 
equipment to work with to gather, to store, and to form attitudes. 
 
Some people, I acknowledge, have more ability than others, but I have always put my faith in: it is not how 
much ability you have, but what you do with what you’ve got. 
 
So what makes me so different? What sets me apart from my colleagues? What sets me apart from the majority 
of members in this House? Can I don a three-piece suit and tie? Of course, I can. Could I learn to play billiards? 
I’m sure I could. Could I achieve a law degree? Become a medical doctor? An architect? An engineer? A 
welder? Of course. In realty, the similarity of the sexes are infinite. The differences are factual, functional, and 
biological. 
 
I am, simply put, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a female person. I am a wife; I am a grass root woman. And I represent 
the grass root women. And that is why I am an MLA. 
 
In the PC Party, with this government, women have the greatest opportunity ever afforded the female gender in 
the history of the province. There are five elected women on the government side of the House, two of which 
are in cabinet. 
 
What are the female statistics for Allan Blakeney and the NDP 11 years of tyranny? 
 
And let me relate to you a little campaign story when I was pounding the doors in Nutana. I would hand my 
brochure with my picture on the front to an NDP card-carrying person, and they would say to me, “Are you 
married to Bacon?” And I would say, “Well, yes.” They couldn’t believe that they had a woman out on the 
doors. 
 
Did you elect a woman in 1982? You did not. You had some candidates, but they were all defeated. Was it 
because they were women? Apparently not. Was it because they were NDP? Perhaps so. Was it because they 
were so radical they did not want to nor were able to effectively represent women like me — women like me, 
Mr. Speaker — the wives, the moms, and the non-abrasives of society. 
 
How many women have the NDP elected? Did you do it in 1978? No. did you do it in 1975? No.  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

424 
 

Did you do it in 1971? No. In fact, in 31 years you’ve only elected two. What is the women’s role in your party? 
Is it making tea cakes and coffee? Doing what you’re told? Can a woman ever try again? 
 
But Mr. Blakeney says he really cares, and we know that Mr. Blakeney is an honourable man. 
 
Interesting statistics, Mr. Deputy Speaker, facts that every man, woman, and child in Saskatchewan should note 
and question. Why? Why were women ostracized, and are they ostracized by the NDP? It is my opinion that the 
NDP is a simple party for simple men. Was it not the Hon. Leader of the Opposition who, December last, stood 
up and pointed to our government and said, “Stand up and fight it like a man,” neglecting of course to say the 
other half of the story — which is his problem — of telling me how I should stand up like a man. Well I didn’t 
think we stood any differently. 
 
And I address the opposition now. Did you know that if we five women were members of your caucus we 
would be the majority? We would be running the caucus for you. We could even choose a new leader for you. 
The possibility just boggles the mind. 
 
And what of the administration of Premier Devine and the Conservatives? As I stated earlier, we have five 
MLAs, two in cabinet. We have appointed more women to boards and commissions than you ever did. We have 
a woman in Executive Council — first in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the opposition portrays a caring for women. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are not so easily 
conned. They know better, and I intend to remind them regularly about the former premier and his Santa’s 
helpers. Or is it Ali Baba and the 40 thieves? But Mr. Blakeney says he really cares, and Mr. Blakeney is an 
honourable man. 
 
I was at a banquet last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was a fund-raising banquet and I sat at a table with a large 
group of people from the riding of Riversdale. And no sooner had I settled myself than they were anxious to say 
that they were relatively happy they had an MLA at their table — not happy because I wasn’t theirs — but to be 
very sure that I noted that they didn’t vote for me. That was fine. There was a challenge ahead of me. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I cannot tell you how shocked these people were to find out that I was not a liberated woman 
— that I wore a bra, and I wasn’t radical. Furthermore, they could hardly stand it when they found out I was a 
wife, I was a mother, I had been married one time, and I still lived with my husband. What do they expect from 
female politicians? Exactly the kind of propaganda that they rammed down the throats of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’m sorry that the Leader of the Opposition is not here this afternoon, for I should like to question him. As 
the Minister of Education said, “What was your position on women’s issues during the formation of the 
Canadian charter?” I’ll remind you, and I’ll remind the people of this province. You shamefully used my rights 
and the rights of other women as a bartering tool, and for that I will never forgive you. 
 
But Mr. Blakeney said he really cares, and Mr. Blakeney is an honourable man. When in power, the Leader of 
the Opposition pulled 400 positions from the public sector that I assume were filled mostly by women. Do you 
remember those nursing positions, Mr. Member from Elphinstone? Remember the 400 nursing positions that 
your caring and compassionate government cancelled? Tested and trusted — the people who care. But Mr. 
Blakeney says he really cares for women, and he is an honourable man. 
 
You and your colleagues babble incessantly to our supposed erosion of the health care system and our so-called 
discrimination against women. The people of Saskatchewan are not so easily conned. Those are conjectured 
falsehoods. They are the product of narrow, hypocritical, and radical minds, the minds of the members opposite. 



 
December 1, 1983 

 

425 
 

 
My government, the government of all the people in Saskatchewan, women included, believes and has taken the 
steps to ensure that equal education means equal opportunities. The public sector will no longer be a heaven for 
just the boys. My party and my government recognize the ability and constructive contributions that women can 
make to this province and to society. 
 
Equal education for equal opportunities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Remember that. For it is an equation long 
overdue in this province, and I suggest it will be well received. 
 
The women’s secretariat will soon be in place. Its success is dependent on the positive contributions from my 
colleagues, from my constituents, from the people of Saskatchewan, and yes, even those thin, thin ranks of the 
opposition. 
 
Nonsense that was printed from the questionable mind of the member from Regina Centre in his most recent 
propaganda paper will hinder and not help the plight for women. Such statements from the NDP will never 
again be believed in Saskatchewan. Your little uranium flip-flop was the most costly proof you’ll ever have to 
have. 
 
The NDP cannot be trusted. You have lost your credibility. You have lost whatever credibility you ever 
achieved — $600 million worth of credibility. I charge you that your trustworthiness as a party is as shabby as 
your attitude toward the women of Saskatchewan. Your record of government clearly establishes it. I should 
like to directly quote from this little piece of trivia that I received in my mailbox. 
 
First page it says, headline . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Ned, you should listen to this: “Tory Renege on 
Election promises.” And he names, “make Saskatchewan number one in health care, free phones for senior 
citizens, and more senior citizen housing.” Now I thought we had 35 promises and these were three we hadn’t 
quite come up to date yet, although health care is questionable. But after question period today I understand for 
sure we had 20. Three haven’t been made in your eyes, so 17 out of 20 is not bad. Tell the whole truth. 
 
Secondly, “Tories Sold Out on Intercon,” and I quote: 
 

Intercon employees were the pawns of government which put profit before people. The Devine 
government knew in June of the planned plant closure. They had hoped that through selling their share 
they could wash their hands of any blame. Instead they have shown themselves as uncaring and 
unconcerned about 125 Intercon Regina employees and their families. 
 

It is my understanding that the Attorney General of Saskatchewan tabled in this House not so many days ago — 
I believe it was Thursday last, Mr. Deputy Speaker — exactly who decided Intercon would close, exactly when 
the decision was made, and exactly who the premier was at the time that concurred with the decision. Who was 
the premier in 1981? 
 
And last but not least, a double-face, a double personality, and now we have a double standard from his 
newsletter: “Tories Hurt Women.” I quote: 
 

The Devine Tories tore down the women’s division in 1982. They are now attempting to intimidate the 
women of this province into a solid acceptance of their women’s secretariat. 
 

It is my understanding that we did not tear down but merely moved and expanded into the educational field the 
women’s division so that they would not be confined to Labour. Furthermore, intimidation is a tool of your 
party; respect is the one that we use. Respect, Mr. Speaker — simple and yet an achievable word — respect for 
all people, both male and female. 
 
Our Minister of Justice has recently taken steps and initiatives to address the problem of wife  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

426 
 

battering. To do this we must also address the attitudes of those involved and affected, directly and indirectly. 
This government has taken steps to ensure that the sanctity of one’s body is not violated by physical assault, 
whether the victim be spouse or not. It is unacceptable in this society and in the eyes of the law to physically 
harm another human being, and wives are human beings. No longer, thanks to the initiatives of John 
Diefenbaker — incidentally, a Conservative — no longer are women chattels to be traded or possessed like 
cattle. First and foremost, we are people, and we want to be treated as such. 
 
The government and the Conservatives are taking positive new steps to help the women of Saskatchewan while 
you NDP wallow in your own primitive attitudes. I respectfully ask the people of Saskatchewan — the working 
men, the working women, those that have something to contribute to the women’s secretariat — make positive 
contributions to the women’s secretariat and we will have a functional body. It is with pride that I will be 
supporting the bill. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. MAXWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. For a moment I was rather afraid I wasn’t going 
to have the opportunity to join in the debate. And I wish to thank my good friend, the member from Shaunavon, 
for allowing me the opportunity. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have the privilege of addressing Bill 1, An Act to establish the Women’s Secretariat, 
presented earlier to the Assembly this afternoon by my colleague . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Ah, welcome 
back, welcome back my good friend, the member from Regina Centre. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am so pleased. I’d like two comments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I may. The first one is, I 
thank the hon. member behind me but I think I’ll manage to handle this one all by myself because I’m a big boy 
now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And secondly, I was welcoming back the hon. member from Regina Centre because 
he made a few comments which I feel I just have to address a little further on in my remarks. 
 
One thing I should point out, Mr. Deputy speaker, if the hon. member persists with his frivolous attitude I think 
it will demonstrate during this debate the complete lack of respect he is showing for the women of 
Saskatchewan, and perhaps . . . Welcome back to you, too, Mr. Speaker. I was just saying that perhaps members 
of the opposition would prefer to speak from and through the seats of their pants than from their feet. 
 
Well, as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, it’s my privilege to address Bill 1 in support of the bill, and 
also in support of my colleague, the Minister responsible for the Status of Women. It is my opinion, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is an excellent piece of legislation, an excellent piece of legislation, which is going to go a 
long way towards serving the interests of the people of Saskatchewan. And I believe the formation of a 
women’s secretariat by this government will provide legislators, policy makers, and administrators with a 
unique vehicle for addressing the special needs of women. 
 
As Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower, Mr. Speaker, I think I have become intimately aware of 
women’s issues around the province, particularly as they relate to the field of employment and training — 
issues surrounding both of these. This awareness, Mr. Speaker, is in part due to the women’s services branch 
which operates within the Department of Advanced Education and Manpower, and which I may say is alive and 
well and flourishing. 
 
The creation of the secretariat, I think, serves to erase any small, minute, lingering doubts the public might have 
had about this government’s commitment to the promotion of the interests of women. But more than this, much 
more, Mr. Speaker, the secretariat will provide government-wide co-ordination to the study of basic policy 
development and decisions by government which affect the status of women. As I said, because of the women’s 
services  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

427 
 

branch I think I have become aware of the special needs of women in our society. And I would like to take an 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, for a few moments, to talk about what the branch within my department is doing, or 
attempting to do, to service those needs. 
 
The major concern stimulating activity in the branch is access for women to non-traditional jobs and access to 
educational programs. Tied to this concern is the effort, and it is a major effect, Mr. Speaker, to overcome 
stereotyping through a public relations program that will enhance the image of women as labour market 
participants, as equals in the labour market-place. 
 
There are several ways in which this public relations program is being implemented by the women’s services 
branch. And herein, I might add, lies the principal differentiating feature between the branch and the women’s 
secretariat, the forthcoming secretariat as proposed by my colleague, the minister responsible for the status of 
women. 
 
While the secretariat will be working in –house to assist the overall government in designing, integrating policy 
with the special needs of women in mind, the women’s services branch is a line department with educational 
expertise that heightens public awareness of women as workers. 
 
The women’s services branch is providing the public with educational resources and a variety of research 
material. The branch provides information for groups who are staging workshops, and for government 
departments which are engaged in affirmative action programs, or departments requiring data relating to 
women’s issues. 
 
The branch also prepared numerous publications and distributes them, not only across the province, but across 
the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Career counselling is available to the public. And in this regard the emphasis and the counselling is designed to 
serve those women who may never have been exposed to the process of shooting for a particular career goal, 
people who need assistance in the preparation of resumes and applications, the simple things on how to fill in an 
application form, Mr. Speaker. And it’s amazing when you consider that we do have 177,000 adults in the 
province who have less than a grade 10 education. The need is there for this type of service. 
 
The women’s services branch also offers consulting services to industry when a company is preparing to 
implement an affirmative action program. 
 
One area which probably currently is fairly low-key but which will soon be very actively pursued, is that of 
research — research into specific women’s issues. Two specific matters which are to be researched shortly are: 
(1) barriers that women face in entering the trades in Saskatchewan and, (2) women in other areas who are using 
distance education systems. Where those systems presently exist, those will be investigated, those will be 
researched, and possible implementation turned back to my department. 
 
The women’s services branch, Mr. Speaker — and I wish to make this perfectly clear to everyone — the 
women’s services branch will continue to play a vital role in developing policies for employment and training, 
and will be operating from an excellent storefront location in the heart of downtown Regina, on Victoria 
Avenue. 
 
With a staff complement of eight, an annual budget of $423,000, the women’s services branch will be the focus 
for issues, relating to the training needs of women, but the establishment of the women’s secretariat will allow 
for government-wide co-ordination of policy, legislation, and programs, not just in the areas of employment and 
training but in other areas as well. In announcing the reorganization of the women’s division last spring, the 
Premier stated, and I quote, “No longer should women’s concerns and aspirations be isolated to one single 
department.” As the Minister of Education, the minister responsible for the status of women, has  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

428 
 

said, “The establishment of the women’s secretariat will be a manifestation of that goal.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate the minister responsible for the status of women for introducing this imaginative 
and exciting legislature. I wish to say, Mr. Speaker, that I am absolutely delighted to have been given the 
opportunity to speak in favour of this bill and as you have gathered from my remarks, I will certainly be 
supporting it. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a pleasure for me to rise and to engage in debate 
on this very significant piece of legislation which is now before the House for consideration. I think it’s only 
appropriate that this bill be entitled Bill 1. The first bill that this government is bringing forward in this 
particular session of the legislature is a bill that will deal with issues pertaining to women. I know, Mr. Speaker, 
that women here in Saskatchewan are very concerned that their concerns, their legitimate aspirations, be given a 
serious ear by government, and it is our intention to in fact give that serious ear. We have manifest that intention 
by bringing forward this particular bill. 
 
I want to commend my colleague, the hon. minister in charge of the status of women, for bringing forward this 
bill at this time. I think it’s important for a number of reasons, and I want to elaborate on those particular 
reasons in a few moments. 
 
I want to say, first of all, Mr. Speaker, that I believe this bill is in keeping with the kinds of initiatives that this 
government has brought forward over the past 18 months. When I think of the Department of Social Services, 
Mr. Speaker, we have placed a very clear and pressing importance on the matter of delivering services to 
seniors here in Saskatchewan. We have spoken of the concern that this government has to address the issues 
that natives have, and in the near future we will be, of course, bringing legislation forward to address the 
concerns of the disabled community herein the province of Saskatchewan. I think, Mr. Speaker, the fact that we 
are addressing in a very concrete way, through this particular legislation . . . I think that that indicates that this 
particular government is not only concerned about seniors or the disabled or the native community, but we are 
concerned about all communities of people here in Saskatchewan. Today we are indicating our concern as it 
relates to the women’s community here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it is important that we recognize that the former government did in fact, at least in 
some measure, however deficient that measure was, recognize the need to provide services for women here in 
the province of Saskatchewan, and they of course established the women’s divisions in the Department of 
Labour. And I give them credit for doing that, Mr. speaker. It’s important that governments do pay attention to 
the needs of women. 
 
The problem was, of course, that the Department of Labour was an isolated context from which to deal with 
concerns pertaining to women, and I recall my colleague beside me here stating just a few moments ago that our 
Premier indicated that never again will the concerns of women be isolated ton one particular department of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Their concerns are too broad-ranging, too wide in scope, to be limited to one 
particular department. 
 
And so I think it was only appropriate, Mr. Speaker, that we broke out of that isolated cocoon and that we took 
the women’s division, which was in the Department of Labour, and we took the functions which were being 
performed there, we expanded them, and we included them not only in the Department of Labour, but also in 
the Public Service Commission, and I’m very pleased, as well, to say in the Department of Advanced Education 
and Manpower. And I think that my colleague beside me here has given a very fine exposition of the services 
that the Department of Advanced Education and Manpower is presently providing for women. And I can only 
wonder why it took so long in the province of Saskatchewan before the educational and manpower and 
employment concerns of women were addressed seriously in the fashion that  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

429 
 

they presently are being addressed by this particular government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are talking today and a bill pertaining to the establishment of a women’s secretariat. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, it is only fitting that it be this government which brings forward this bill for consideration in 
this Legislative Assembly, because the Progressive Conservative Party in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the 
Progressive Conservative government is a government of women — unlike the former government. 
 
Consider for a minute, Mr. Speaker, the fact that this particular caucus is graced by the presence of five women. 
I think, of course, of the fine representative from the constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale, who is doing a very 
fine job on behalf of the women of Saskatchewan. And I must say, Mr. Speaker, that the ideas, the suggestions, 
the initiative, the drive, the behaviour, the example that this particular member is demonstrating as she works 
with me in the Department of Social Services is a very fine indication of the kinds of things that this particular 
government will be doing for the women of Saskatchewan. I think, Mr. Speaker, that that particular member has 
much more ahead of her in terms of advancement in future in government. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, of the fine representation from the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana, and I want to 
commend the member for the fine speech which she gave today on behalf of women. And, of course, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s only two women — two more than presently are in the caucus opposite, of course. I think of the 
fine member from Saskatoon Westmount and the concerns that she has expressed on behalf of women herein 
the province of Saskatchewan. And then, Mr. Speaker, of course, what can we say about the two women that 
presently are in the cabinet here in the province of Saskatchewan? For the first time ever, women are 
represented in the province of Saskatchewan in the cabinet and they of course occupy very significant and 
serious portfolios. Their responsibilities are certainly immense. Their responsibilities are onerous. But I think 
Mr. Speaker, they are carrying them out in a very fine fashion. 
 
And I say that, Mr. Speaker, to indicate that this government is a government and a party of women. We 
understand women’s issues. We are concerned about women’s issues. And that, of course, is exactly what we’re 
doing today. We are responding to the issues that concerns the needs of women here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what this bill to establish a women’s secretariat is all about. And I can’t understand, Mr. 
speaker, why the members opposite, when they were in government for 11 years, never took upon themselves to 
establish an agency which would in fact co-ordinate and integrate and deal with the concerns of women in a 
fashion that this particular secretariat will. 
 
I ask the members opposite: why? And I notice the member from Shaunavon is strangely silent. Why didn’t you 
establish a women’s secretariat? Well, of course, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t a much better system. To isolate the 
concerns of women in one particular department in the division of labour is not a manner adequate to deal with 
the concerns of women, and I don’t know how the member opposite can suggest that it ever would be adequate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debate on second reading of this particular bill, of course, is designated to focus in on the 
principle of the bill and I think we should do that. I want to speak to the House, Mr. Speaker, for a few minutes 
about what this bill in intended to accomplish. The secretariat’s primary role will be to integrate women’s 
concerns and aspirations into government’s basic policy development and decision making. Now, I ask the 
members of the House: is it important to integrate women’s concerns and aspirations into government’s basic 
policy development and decision making? Is it important to do that? I ask the member from Shaunavon, who 
has been criticizing this particular bill. Is it important to integrate women’s concerns and aspirations into 
government’s basic policy development and decision making? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can only respond that of course it is important. Who in their right mind would disagree and say 
it’s not important to integrate the concerns of women? The question we then have to ask ourselves, that 
logically follows: have we in fact been integrating the concerns of  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

430 
 

women into government? Has there been a mechanism in place which will accomplish that? And I don’t think 
there has been a mechanism in place which will accomplish that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I looked to the former women’s division in the Department of Labour and while it was undoubtedly 
accomplishing some very laudable objectives, was it in fact adequately integrating the concerns of women into 
the government decision-making process? And I don’t think it was, Mr. Speaker. So it seems to me natural that 
the members of the House would want to support a bill which establishes such a secretariat, which will integrate 
women’s concerns and aspirations into government’s basic policy development and decision making. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if I can expand upon this particular responsibility of the women’s secretariat to be 
established, the minister has indicated that the functions of this particular secretariat are as follows: 
 

To provide a focal point for the integration of women’s concerns into government decision making. 
 

And I have to ask, Mr. Speaker, is there at present a focal point which can adequately address all of the 
concerns of women in the Government of Saskatchewan? And I think if we survey all of the departments, all of 
the agencies, all of the commissions, all of the advisory councils which have been established over the years, I 
think we will find, Mr. Speaker, that the government of Saskatchewan has been lacking in the past. There has 
not been a free-standing agency which will act as a focal point for the integration of women’s concerns into 
government decision making. So surely it is incumbent upon us all, would you not agree? Surely it is incumbent 
upon us all to provide a focal point for decision making. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this secretariat will, as well, provide government with the capacity to respond in a co-ordinated 
and comprehensive manner to women’s concerns. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the short time that I have been involved in government, it has become apparent to me that 
one of the great lacks over the past 10, 15, 20, 30, even 40 years, I suppose, in the Government of Saskatchewan 
has been a lack of co-ordination, of policy making, of policy delivery. Co-ordination is key to the success of 
government ventures. That, Mr. Speaker, is why in the Department of Social Services we have developed a 
senior citizens’ bureau which is going to act to co-ordinate the concerns of seniors. I use that argument by way 
of analogy. If we’re going to co-ordinate senior citizens’ issues, certainly it’s incumbent upon us to co-ordinate 
women’s issues. I ask the member opposite: would you not agree? I don’t ‘think he’s listening. I question 
whether or not he is seriously concerned about his bill to establish a women’s secretariat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, co-ordination is essential. Without co-ordination, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers’ dollar is not going 
to be adequately spent. Co-ordination is essential to the effective delivery of any government service. Surely if 
we’re going to co-ordinate services to the native community, to the seniors community, then we must 
co-ordinate services to the female community in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see here that the third activity and responsibility that this particular free-standing secretariat will 
carry out is as follows: to provide a visible central contact point for non-government agencies and on 
federal-provincial matters pertaining to the status of women. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry to say that one of the 
deficiencies that I came upon when I entered my particular portfolio was a lack of a communication mechanism 
which would adequately deal with the non-government agencies herein the province of Saskatchewan. In my 
particular Department of Social Services there was no one individual, there was no one agency in my 
department, which had overall responsibility to communicate with, to liaise with, the non-governmental sector 
herein the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
December 1, 1983 

 

431 
 

 
I think it’s a very laudable measure that is being proposed by the minister, because certainly many of the 
non-governmental agencies that our government relates to deal directly with women’s issues. In fact they have 
been established for the primary purpose of providing services directly for women, and for women only in many 
instances. So surely it’s important, Mr. Speaker, that there be some focal point, some place where the 
non-governmental agencies that relate to women’s concerns can come to the Government of Saskatchewan and 
say, “Here are our concerns.” I think that the non-governmental organizations in Saskatchewan are going to be 
pleased that they will now have this particular agency that they can relate to. Formerly it was not there. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, I see that this particular free-standing agency is going to act as a catalyst on a 
government-wide basis for the analysis of policies and programs for their potential impact on women. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, I think all members of the Assembly would agree that the policies and programs of government impact 
upon women. There is no disagreement on that. I think everyone would agree. If that is the case, Mr. Speaker, 
and since we have unanimous agreement here in the House that that is the case, then surely it is important, Mr. 
Speaker, that someone within government act as a catalyst, a motivator, a stimulator, to cause government to 
reflect upon the manner with which it is addressing the concerns of women. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the former women’s division, while as I indicated earlier, did perform many 
laudable functions, I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that it had a broad enough scope of mandate to really act as an 
effective catalyst to deal with all of the concerns of women and to ensure that policies, that programs, are being 
evaluated in an ongoing manner as they should be. And I think that the free-standing secretariat which is being 
proposed today, Mr. Speaker, will go a long way towards acting as a catalyst on the government-wide basis for 
the analysis of policies and programs for their potential impact upon women. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the question we have to address in second reading of this particular bill, is as follows: is 
there a need in the province of Saskatchewan for a free-standing women’s secretariat which will in fact carry 
out the mandate that I have just articulated for the House this afternoon? Is there a need for such a free-standing 
secretariat? 
 
And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that all members, not only on this side of the House but indeed on the other 
side of the House, would in fact concur with me, that they would say, “Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is a need for 
such a free-standing secretariat.” 
 
And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that all members, not only on this side of the House but indeed on the other 
side of the House, would in fact concur with me, that they would say, “Yes, Mr. Speaker, there is a need for 
such a free-standing secretariat.” 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite, if they were honest with themselves and were sincere in 
their own self-criticism as they reflect upon their past 11 years of mismanagement, that they would agree that 
they should have established a free-standing secretariat such as this, years ago. And I think that the female 
segment of the population of Saskatchewan will indeed be delighted that this particular free-standing secretariat 
is in fact being established. 
 
I want to comment, Mr. Speaker, for a minute or two, on a few of the words which the member from Regina 
Centre had to say about this particular bill. He indicated that this particular government is simply offering 
platitudes to the women of Saskatchewan as it regards the violence against women issue in our province and in 
our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to take issue with this. The matter of violence against women is a very serious matter. It is 
one that we should not, and can not, treat lightly, as it may have been done in the past on some occasions by 
some people. Mr. Speaker, I think one of the fundamentally important things which needs to be done in our 
province, and in our country, is to raise the consciousness of the people of this province, and of the people of 
Canada, with regards to the violence against women issue. And one of the most effective ways to raise the 
consciousness of people, to educate them, to sensitize them to this particular issue, is to speak out, to speak out, 
Mr. Speaker, to indicate to the people that there is a problem, that the government recognizes  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

432 
 

that there is a problem, that the government is going to take steps to address the problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Unless we speak out, and educate, and sensitize the public, it will not be a concern, as it should be. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I have to ask the members of this Assembly, and I have to ask the province of Saskatchewan, how 
much did the former government speak out on this particular matter of violence against women? How often, 
Mr. Speaker, did the members opposite speak out against the scourge of pornography in Canada in the province 
of Saskatchewan? I ask the member from Shaunavon: how often? I ask the member from Shaunavon. I ask the 
member from Shaunavon again. How often, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, I honestly cannot recall one instance in 
which the former government spoke out in a very serious and concerned fashion on the scourge of pornography 
in our society. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What are you doing about it? 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — We are speaking out against it. You never even spoke out against it. You never even 
spoke out against it. Mr. Speaker. The first step is in fact to speak out. It’s a primary function of government, in 
its leadership capacity, to educate and to sensitize people about issues. And unless government does, that 
government should not be. It should be replaced. And I suspect that’s one of the reasons why your government 
was replaced. You chose not to speak out against it. 
 
I want the member opposite who says, “What are you doing about this issue?” to know that in the short time 
that I have been Minister of Social Services I have met with the Sexual Assault and Crisis Line people in 
Saskatoon and listened to their concerns. I have met with the transition house people in Saskatoon and listened 
to their concerns. I have met with them in Regina and listened to their concerns. I likely met with more groups 
in the first three months of my particular tenure as Minister of Social Services than certain ministers of social 
services opposite met in their entire tenure. Mr. Speaker, that is the first step that any government needs to take. 
Before you take action in terms of programs and policies, one needs to find out what the community of 
Saskatchewan says is the particular problem and what they think should be done about it. 
 
The worst thing that any government can do is to act prematurely. This government has no intention of acting 
precipitately in making mistakes. We want to ensure that what we o is in fact that which should be done. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we’re doing. And, as it relates to a women’s secretariat, Mr. Speaker, 
we have in fact listened to the women of Saskatchewan We have met with them in many forums, on many 
occasions, and we believe, this government believes, that a women’s secretariat is in fact one of the best ways 
that we can address effectively the issues of women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also, the member opposite indicated that he felt that the secretariat would not be able to table 
reports, and I notice here in the bill that in fact the secretariat will have to prepare and submit a report and lay it 
before the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to participate in this particular debate this afternoon. I think it is 
fundamentally important that all members on this side of the House, and on the other side of the House, take 
seriously this particular matter of supporting a free-standing secretariat which will integrate and co-ordinate and 
respond to the concerns of women and act as a catalyst on their behalf. For that reasons, Mr. speaker, I would 
urge all members of the Assembly to support the legislation that is before us today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — First of all, I am extremely disappointed in the poor turn-out in the corner over there. As 
usual, the members on the opposite corner are not interested in listening to a  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

433 
 

woman unless that woman agrees with their socialist agenda and they can use that women for their own political 
reasons. 
 
I would like to make a quote. Mr. Speaker, at first it may appear that it is not on the subject, but I assure you, it 
is. This is Hansard, December 8, 1975: 
 

Mr. Speaker, if Bill No. 1 passes, 1978 will be recorded as the year the socialists in this province 
nationalized the potash industry. If Bill No. 1 passes, 1975 will be recorded as the year the government 
disregarded agreements made by a former NDP government which guaranteed the potash industry fair 
taxes and no danger of expropriation. If Bill No. 1 passes, 1975 will be remembered as the year the 
Saskatchewan government kicked out of our province people a former government invited and 
encouraged to locate here. People, while believing the promise of a former NDP premier, invested 
millions in risk capital to build and develop mines, mines that we neither had the money nor the 
expertise to build on our own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 1975 will also be remembered as an election year, an election year where nationalization 
of the potash industry was not . . . 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I fail to see that the things that the hon. member is dealing with do relate to 
the subject, and I would ask you to get on the subject. 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — Mr. Speaker, if you will bear with me just for a few more quotes, it does relate to it. 
May I have the privilege of finishing the quote? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — You’ll have to be very brief, because I don’t see the relationship. 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — I will be very brief. 
 

The realization of the consequences of the sweeping powers of Bill 1 were applied to other resources 
such as land or private business, strikes fears in the hearts of every thinking citizen in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, many people are living in fear and their business operation is on a day-to-day basis. People are 
asking what group will be next in the government’s grab for more control and more government 
take-overs. People in Saskatchewan are not the only ones showing concern. 
 

And it goes on and on. The relevance to that, Mr. Speaker, was that speech was made by a woman, Mrs. 
Edwards. Did the NDP in 1975 listen to the hon. member, Mrs. Edwards? No, of course they didn’t. did the 
NDP, realizing there was an active, intelligent woman who could get elected, stand up and speak on the potash 
take-over — the most controversial debate in this House? Was she appointed to the potash mine? No, of course 
she wasn’t. Was she appointed on a board to talk about women’s concerns? No, of course she wasn’t. Did the 
NDP give Mrs. Edwards any recognition for the years that she spent as an MLA? No, of course they didn’t, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I hope you realize, Mr. Speaker, the point of this is: the NDP listen only to NDP women. The NDP are not 
at all interested in women per se. They are interested in NDP women, that is if they can’t find an NDP man to 
take their place. 
 
Now, I think the fact, Mr. Speaker, that many people on both sides of the House were wondering, was why was 
the hon. member from Westmount talking about potash when we’re talking about women’s concerns. 
Obviously, this Mrs. Edwards thought, as a woman, that she should speak up for democracy; she should speak 
up against government control; she should speak up against the hypocrisy of a government that campaigns on 
one issue and delivers something else. 



 
December 1, 1983 
 

434 
 

 
And she goes on to talk about: 
 

The ordinary people I’ve talked to, whether it is senior citizens, a young married couple, working people 
raising a family, blue collar workers, or professionals — the people I’ve talked to from all walks of life 
think buying the potash industry is a bad business deal. 
 

Now obviously, Mr. Speaker, this woman felt she was not only speaking for herself, but what she called the 
ordinary people — the people who did not get elected and who supported her. She was pleading in this House 
that these people would not live in fear that their businesses would not be taken over. 
 
Did the NDP listen to Mrs. Edwards? Of course they didn’t, because the NDP kept on going in 1975, 1976, 
1978, 1979, 1980, 1981, with the same policies of expropriation, of government control, of listening to no one 
but the doctrinaire socialists who are running their program. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this hypocrisy of dealing with women’s issues is a smoke-screen. What they are concerned 
about is socialism and not women. They’re concerned about statism and potash mines — while women in this 
province, in 1975 and earlier, were standing up in the House and fighting for democracy, were fighting for a 
free economy, were fighting for the ordinary person, were fighting that people had a right to live without fear. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — I believe it is public record, for a few short months or possibly a year or two, I flirted 
with the ideas of socialism. But there is one key reason that stopped me from pursuing that course, and it was 
the total hypocrisy on women’s issues. The way that I saw the socialists — who then became amalgamated in 
the government — used women, treated women, and silenced and muzzled women who did not fit their 
philosophy; those who exploited women for their own political gains. 
 
To repeat, did the NDP allow Conservative women to speak out on these issues? Did they put them on agendas? 
No, they did not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have something else here. It’s called the Project for St. Paul’s Hospital, Grey Nuns of Saskatchewan. Now, 
this is a book — it’s not one that we made. Grey Nuns Hospital put it out to explain their project of expansion, 
to explain their project of development. And there’s a picture in the back of the hon. member from Wolseley, 
the Minister of Health. Our Minister of Health has his picture and a little note here to explain how he supports 
and respects the integrity and work of St. Paul's Hospital. The courageous band of Grey Nuns in Saskatoon 
lived in my constituency. They have provided aid and service to my family. And I’d like to tell this House, I 
would like to tell this House a little bit, just a little bit, of the harassments that courageous band of nuns 
experienced from the past NDP government. 
 
First of all, over and over again, they wanted to bring the Grey Nuns to their knees by not funding them, by not 
giving them money to replace equipment, by not giving them space for operations, for surgeries, by not 
providing enough money for staff, so that nursing orderlies and nuns and nurses and nurses’ aides were laid off 
with back problems, possibly never working again, because they couldn’t find two people to help lift their 
heavy patient. They tried to bring the Grey Nuns to their knees by seeing that the staff morale was so low 
because they were understaffed and underpaid. And the Grey Nuns pleaded with the past government and said, 
“give us more funds. We’re providing a service. We’re providing a service for all Saskatchewan, in northern 
Saskatchewan in particular. We’re providing services to members in Athabasca and people in Cumberland.” 
 
Did they listen? No, they did not. What they did was they decided they were going to take over  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

435 
 

St. Paul’s Hospital. They were going to expropriate St. Paul’s Hospital, because they didn’t like it because the 
government didn’t own St. Paul’s Hospital. They couldn’t stand it that a courageous band of nurses — still nuns 
— still ran a hospital. A courageous band of women still ran a hospital. They couldn’t stand it that this 
courageous band of women administered in this hospital, ran this hospital, and worked as the most efficient 
businesswomen I have ever seen in this province. And the Grey Nuns survived because they have the 
philosophy of survival. But no thanks to that government. 
 
And I want it on record, while this was happening, they had an alderman who is a very prominent NDP woman. 
I really think, Mr. Speaker, that what they did to Grey Nuns’ Hospital is possibly the clearest example of this 
type of government — this type of past government that we had — and their treatment of women, these women 
who did not ask for special privileges for an exciting career, but these women who asked that they have the 
means and money from this government to run their efficient, caring hospital. 
 
You will notice, as I said before, in the Grey Nuns’ pamphlet, put out by the Grey Nuns, there’s a picture of our 
Minister of Health. They know who their friends are. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — They know that our Minister of Health does not bully nuns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to say, it’s too bad in some ways . . . It’s also too bad that we can’t have some of 
those past members who did this sort of stuff in the House today. I don’t mean of course in seats, but I would 
like it if they were sort of floating around sometimes, so that they would hear this because I hate to attack 
somebody who’s not faced, who I can’t face. But, of course, they did it all the time. 
 
The minister of health at that time, whose name was Herman Rolfes . . . And Herman Rolfes went to a meeting 
where I attended and he said, “Well, the premier knows my position and knows that I am a Catholic, and that’s 
why he made me minister of health.” I really wonder, do we really have a premier, or had a past premier, that 
used Herman Rolfes to make it look as if they were not doing exactly what they were doing; that Herman Rolfes 
was used as a smoke-screen for their devices to take away the leading St. Paul’s Hospital — St. Paul’s Catholic 
Hospital? And everyone knew when St. Paul’s goes, the autonomy of Humboldt and all the other hospitals 
would go as well. 
 
Now, we do not use smoke-screens in our government and we do not parade our religion and we don’t impose 
our philosophy on a hospital like St. Paul’s. And I assure you that St. Paul’s, I believe, is grateful. 
 
I could go on and on, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m glad you noticed. But I think that I would 
like to mention one woman who was inadvertently helpful in my election. Her name was Freda Moosehunter. 
She was part of the Aboriginal People’s Party and she was a native woman. Why, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP are 
so concerned about minority rights and so concerned about women, why was Freda Moosehunter running as a 
candidate against the NDP government? And the reasons why she was doing it, because she saw that the NDP 
government was destructive to her native people. She hated the policies and programs and the way they attacked 
native people and native families. Why is it that someone such as Freda Moosehunter who, as I say, a woman 
and a native, would campaign against the NDP? Precisely because she sees when the NDP talk about caring and 
talk about being concerned about natives and concerned about women, they want to control them. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that there is nothing more sinister than what the NDP have done in the women’s issue; that 
they have continually silenced and muzzled people — women who do not agree with them. I remember one 
time a friend of mine, a housewife such as myself, Mrs. Bastian,  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

436 
 

and I screwed up our courage and we were going to talk to the Attorney General and plead with him to help 
parents have more of the say in education. And we finally got a hearing in the Executive Council meetings. And 
we were a little bit flapped out because we had a lot of children to look after and things to do. 
 
But we finally got there and we made our presentation and concerns, and of course he was pretending to listen, 
etc., etc. And he says, “Well, you know, I don’t see anything really wrong with that,” etc., etc. “But, you know,” 
he said, “if you’re really concerned about these issues, why don’t you run for public office?” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m usually very co-operative with people, and I like to put on record that I even listened to 
the NDP’s Attorney General. 
 
And we found the same barriers in health and social services, when women were saying, “Well, there’s another 
side to this issue. There’s another approach to this. How will it affect the family? How will it affect children? 
But we’re concerned about some literature that seems to be pornographic at our schools.” Did they give us a 
listen? No, Mr. Speaker. They said it should be mandatory. And they loved the word mandatory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that I can assure one thing to the women of Saskatchewan, that no one on this side of the 
House and over there in that large corner will ever say that one or two women can speak for all of the women in 
the province. But continually we were told that. We were told that some appointed women, appointed by the 
government, could speak to all the women and the other side was not presented. 
 
I congratulate the member from Riversdale who is working hard on a day care project. While she was going 
through that project she noticed a box of past briefs that were presented to the former day care committee, and 
she noticed there was one from Gay Caswell. And she said that she had found this brief and she was kind of 
surprised, and I said, “Oh, yes, I presented that brief and some of my friends presented some on certain issues, 
but of course we weren’t listened to. Of course our concerns didn’t fit their philosophy, so we got . . . Our brief 
was put in an apple box in their office.” 
 
When we have a day care hearing we listen to everyone, and I think that as I see how we are approaching all 
subjects, that we will not circumvent the certain democratic process. We will not have a handful of people 
speaking for a group, but we will allow a public forum where issues can be discussed. And I might add that 
obviously from Mrs. Edwards’ comments there’s no issue that is not a woman’s issue. 
 
And I support this bill, and I support the people, such as the Minister of Education, who have brought it up. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to become involved in this debate. I 
have listened with a great deal of interest to a number of members of the government talk about anything and 
everything except the legislation that we have before us, and I think, more importantly, why in fact we are now 
dealing with a piece of legislation which in effect, I suppose, is a bit of a cleansing of the soul of the 
government for the dastardly deed done earlier of doing away with the women’s division in the Department of 
Labour. 
 
My colleagues here in the opposition, I think, will be all voting for the bill. We will be looking at amendments 
and trying to include more rights for women in the Saskatchewan by amending this piece of legislation, which 
is very non-committal in a number of areas. 
 
But I think the important thing, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that a little over a year ago this  



 
December 1, 1983 

 

437 
 

government was involved in the process of doing away with what at that time was a very effective and a very 
good operation in terms of supporting women’s issues in the province of Saskatchewan and in the Government 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just to read into the record a number of the groups who were absolutely opposed to the government doing away 
with the women’s division in the Department of Labour, and I know my colleague from Regina Centre has gone 
through this, but I think after what has been said, it’s important to know that this government we have today is 
not in the vanguard of defending women’s rights, but in fact is reacting to public pressure which has been 
building over the last six months. 
 
At the time that the women’s division was done away with, 60 groups in the province expressed outrage at the 
fact that this government would move backwards rather than forwards on women’s issues, even though in fact 
they had five women elected to their caucus. How in the world those five women ever allowed that division of 
the Department of Labour to be done away with, seems inconceivable. But these groups included: the Action 
Child Care of Saskatoon, the Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of Women, and a number of other 
groups, including the Saskatchewan Law Union and the Saskatoon Council of Women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the applause that is coming from members about this great deed they have done, when 
in fact it is merely cleaning up their act and trying to defend a mistake that was made earlier on, is not going 
unnoticed to the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to just quote from remarks of the Action Committee on the Status of Women and their reaction to 
this bill. In part, the article says, and this is dated today, in the Leader-Post: 
 

The Saskatchewan Action Committee on the Status of Women has a lot of reservations about the 
women’s department that the government hopes to have in operation by the next year. 
 
Palma Anderson, the action committee president, said the government’s major problem will be 
integrating the secretariat work with the work of other government departments. 
 
Anderson said the government’s refusal to raise the minimum wage, its consideration of allowing profit 
day cares, and its investigation into ways of taking abortion out of medicare coverage is doing nothing to 
show that different government departments will be supportive of the secretariat. 
 
Given the fact that various ministers are acting in ways that are diametrically opposed to women’s 
groups, “how is the secretariat going to work a miracle?” Anderson said. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, these are not the words of NDP opposition members or NDP groups within the province of 
Saskatchewan. These are the words of the Action Committee on the Status of Women, which I believe very 
fairly and adequately represents the views of a large number of women in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I say to the government, who is looking at applauding itself, that there are things they could do for women in 
the province of Saskatchewan. There are things they could do very quickly, without a great deal of study and 
without a great deal of consultation, because they have the facts before them. 
 
One of them is in the area of day care. It came with a great deal of surprise to a number of single women and 
unemployed women last year, when the minister of social services at that time cut the subsidy to women who 
were looking for work, from three months to one month. That meant  



 
December 1, 1983 
 

438 
 

that if they were thrown out of a job — and I might add, 750 women approximately were thrown out of work by 
this very government — these women when they were looking for new jobs in fact could only get subsidy for 
day care for one month, while under the previous government they got it for three months. In fact there has been 
no increase in the subsidy that is paid to families who have children in day care centres, and a large number of 
these are working women who have no alternative but to use the day care centres which are increasing their 
rates due to very high utility costs, which again must fall back, at least in part, on the government of the day. 
 
The member for Rosemont, and I’m sorry that he’s not at his desk, has made a great deal about wife battery, and 
spouse battery, and says all the things that he’s going to do to solve the problem. But I think it’s interesting that 
the transition houses at La Ronge, La Loche, and Yorkton have been cancelled or the funding withheld by that 
very minister who comes to this House and sanctimoniously says how concerned he is about the plight of 
women from broken families. 
 
I think another example that this government could be moving on very quickly was mentioned by the Status of 
Women in this article. That is the minimum wage. Of the 60,000 people who are on minimum wage, a good 
number of them are single-parent families — many of them being women — who are bearing the brunt of the 
decision made by the Minister of Labour along with his colleagues at cabinet — two of them being women, the 
member for Swift Current and the member for Maple Creek. I say that if you’re serious about the plight of 
women in Saskatchewan, promoting women in Saskatchewan, go back to the cabinet table and do away with 
this goofy idea of freezing the minimum wage in Saskatchewan for two years. 
 
I think another area where the women of Saskatchewan are not being allowed the freedom to take part in our 
society, and the benefits that are provided in it, are the many aged people, and a large percentage of them are in 
fact women. Here again we can go to nursing home rates, we can go to the cancellation of the shelter allowance 
program, the cancellation of the home repair program, the increases in other areas like utility rates, where this 
group of women is again being taken advantage of. 
 
I know my member from Regina Centre mentioned the negative impact on women and the family of alcohol 
advertising, and I just want to point that out as another area that this government is moving in the wrong 
direction when it comes to dealing with women issues in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s one other area where I think it indicates very clearly that this government is on the wrong track, and 
that is in terms of the number of children in care of the Minister of Social Services. Since taking office, the 
number of children who have been taken out of the home has increased from 2,100 to 2,500, or an increase of 
20 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this in part, or in large part, due to the fact that unemployment in this province has increased, and 
increased drastically. Many studies that have been done would indicate that family breakdown, wife abuse, 
child abuse, increases proportionately with the unemployment. And I say to this government that if you are 
serious about the problems facing families and women in this province, then look at the record, find the 
mistakes you have been making, and correct them. Setting up a department with flowery accolades to 
yourselves, is not going to solve the problem. 
 
And I would like to very clearly put on record that this government is aware of the problems, but is unwilling to 
put the money into the programs that would deal with women’s issues. I say that the future will tell whether this 
department serves any useful purpose, but we are willing to give the government that opportunity. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 1, 1983 

 

439 
 

 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s getting late and perhaps just a few brief closing remarks 
on the debate today. 
 
Firstly, let me acknowledge the understanding and the commitment that has been shown by the MLAs that have 
chosen to take part in this debate on this bill today. I can only hope that with some time that the members in the 
opposition will show even a very small degree of that same understanding. In time — and I would suggest to 
this Assembly that it’s going to take you some time, if the remarks that I heard coming from two of your 
members today are any kind of an indication of the depth of understanding that you have. 
 
I want to refer to something said by the member from Regina Centre. He talks a lot. One of the myths around on 
women and the attitudes that is directed towards them — and he heard me earlier — was that they talk too much 
and they talk fast. And yet he stands there when he is on record a year ago in Public Accounts when it came to 
the women’s issues and affirmative action programs, etc., as saying, and I quote, “I think there is a biological 
difference there too.” 
 
That was in regards to women, Mr. Speaker, and men in certain professions. He said, “They could talk faster 
than men.” He had no indication of any kind of recognition of the female’s ability when it comes to being an 
auctioneer. Simply a myth, that they can talk much faster than men. That is the kind of attitude that continues to 
prevail, particularly from the NDP. 
 
The member from Shaunavon, the hon. member from Shaunavon. He says this initiative is “because we did 
away with it.” You know, it’s the same old thing. It was the medicare. They’re going to do away with it. I 
suggest that you take a trip to Victoria and Broad. There’s a door there for the women’s branch. We didn’t do 
away with it. We transferred it. Go down. I would also suggest that you would benefit from some of the 
material and counselling that comes in that branch too. 
 
Two issues to show the difference in philosophy and perhaps why there is a very sincere need for an initiative 
such as this. And it has to do with the minimum wage and the issue of violence to women. 
 
The NDP says, “Don’t freeze the minimum wage. Increase the minimum wage because the largest percentage 
on minimum wage are women.” And they continue to talk about hat. That’s great. You keep upping it and you 
keep upping it. And what do we get? We still have women on minimum wage. It never changes. Not once, Mr. 
Speaker, have I heard any kind of encouragement that women can do better in jobs other than minimum wage 
jobs. There has been absolutely no encouragement and no motivation to slot women in jobs other than minimum 
wage jobs. No recognition at all. 
 
The violence of women. I would suggest to the hon. member from Shaunavon that, yes, there is some studies 
around that indicate what he has said. There are also other studies around to indicate that it is indeed through all 
of society, including the middle class and the upper class. It is not necessarily an alcohol problem. In some 
cases it is, but in other cases it is not. And I suggest that he perhaps do some more research on that. 
 
The transition houses, Mr. Speaker. We can keep building transition houses. As I said to the member from Quill 
Lake, about a week ago, that’s great. We just keep building and somebody just keeps beating. That doesn’t 
solve the problem. The problem is doing away with the beating so you don’t have to do the building. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that indeed there is some optimism for the future, as long as the attitude 
and the mentality that prevails from the opposition changes with a very high degree of understanding. Thank 
you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
December 1, 1983 
 

440 
 

 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 40 
 

Muller Maxwell Schmidt 
Birkbeck Young Meagher 
Andrew Domotor Zazelenchuk 
Lane Folk Martens 
Taylor Petersen Weiman 
Hardy Bacon Morin 
McLaren Parker Blakeney 
Garner Smith (Moose Jaw South) Thompson 
Smith (Swift Current) Hopfner Lingenfelter 
Baker Myers Koskie 
Duncan Caswell Lusney 
Sandberg Gerich Shillington 
Klein Boutin Yew 
 
 
 
 

NAYS — Nil 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


