






















































Hansard: February 22, 1983


(1968) 1969 
 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 22, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
PRIORITY OF DEBATE (continued) 

 
MR. SCHMIDT: — I apologize to Mr. Speaker for being so short, but I have no control over that 
matter. If you can’t see me you’ll hear me, I assure you. 
 
Today we’re discussing what’s wrong with the Pepin plan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We’re not? I 
thought we were. I see it as the Ottawa Liberals’ final plan to rape, loot and pillage Saskatchewan. I 
think maybe the opposition would agree with that. 
 
There’s nothing wrong with the Pepin plan if you live in Ontario or Quebec, or it you happen to own a 
railroad . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . With respect to railroads, the members opposite think that the 
CPR is a great friend of ours. Well I can say to the members opposite and to the CPR and to all voters 
that the only treatment the CPR will get from us is fair treatment, as any other citizen of this country. 
That doesn’t mean that farmers should get unfair treatment because of the CPR or even the CNR. And 
one of the problems we have with the railroads (and they seem to be a lot friendlier with the Trudeau 
Liberals) is that their accounting practices are questionable. And they are smart, there’s no doubt about 
it. 
 
I think their system probably operates like a story I heard about Shell Canada in Calgary. The version 
was that if Shell Canada ever paid any income tax all the accounting department would be dismissed. I 
think the same thing applies at CPR. I’ve looked at some of their material on the rail line abandonment 
and their accounting practices are creative to say the best. Also with respect to their corporate 
organization, they show us how much money CPR rail loses each year, but they’re wise enough not to 
have any losses in Marathon Realty, or in any one of their other corporations. They’re smart enough to 
fool the Ottawa Liberals, but they’re not smart enough to fool us. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Now there’s nothing wrong with the Pepin plan unless you’re a farmer. And 
farmers simply cannot afford to pay more. The plan has something for all Canadians except for 
Saskatchewan. There are jobs in rail construction in B.C.; there are jobs building hopper cars in Ontario 
and Nova Scotia. I’ve sure the Leader of the Opposition will have happier relatives with jobs; and 
there’s worse. There’s undercutting for our feed grain prices with subsidies to Quebec and Ontario. 
 
They wish to take away any natural advantage we have with respect to livestock by evening things up 
for their friends in the East. And all of this is to be paid for by Saskatchewan farmers. Farmers always 
pay and, as has been pointed out by our Premier, it’s the intention of Ottawa to have them continue to 
pay on everything from tariffs, diesel fuel and, further, on freight rates. Not only that, but farmers are to 
be inflicted with 6 per cent annual inflation, and that’s their reward for efficiency. 
 
But we’ve gone on and on today saying what’s wrong with the plan. I’m going to suggest what should 
be done. First of all, the rail system must be improved. Everyone seems to agree on that. Secondly, the 
question is: who should pay? And I take the position, on behalf of my constituents, that the taxpayers of 
Canada should pay, because it’s the 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1970 

taxpayers of Canada as a whole who have had a free ride on farmers for 117 years. The only problem is 
that the bulk of the taxpayers who live in eastern Canada don’t understand the subsidy farmers have 
given them all these years. 
 
The third point that has to be changed, and what I propose, is that freight rates be a percentage of farm 
prices. Farmers are reasonable. Farmers of my constituency don’t want to pay more but they realize that 
they would pay more if they could get more for their products. I say they’re reasonable. But to ask them 
to pay more and get nothing in return is totally unreasonable. 
 
Fourthly, the rates should be distance related. I think that needs no further explanation. Fifthly, the 
money, in my opinion, should go to the railroads, simply to have them guarantee some performance. 
There are other reasons. One of the main reasons is that if eastern Canada perceives this sum as a 
payment to the farmers of Saskatchewan it’s not far away from the day when they’ll decide that they 
shouldn’t pay farmers that money. With respect to railroads, they seem to get their way and even if 
we’re not in power in two years the railroads will get their money one way or another if they provide the 
service. 
 
Now I want to tell you that something else has to be done. For us to decide what a good idea is is not 
sufficient. The Pepin proposal is a declaration of war on Saskatchewan. This afternoon I heard our 
Premier put our province in battle preparation. I’m challenging the members opposite, all of the farm 
groups in this province and all of the citizens in this province to join this fight regardless of their 
political affiliations. And I can tell you that the fight has just begun. We will do our part. We will throw 
in the blue army, and the blue army is ready to march to defend Saskatchewan. I invite the members 
opposite to join with us and bring the remnants of their red army and we will jointly fight in Ottawa. 
And I propose a truce — at least for this issue. 
 
Today we have had disagreements on this subject, but we generally agree that we have to fight for 
Saskatchewan. And to make it totally non-political, I invite Ralph Goodale to join us for moral support, 
if nothing else. I suggest that we, as leaders of this province, whether we are in power, almost out of 
power, or never will be in power, that we all join together and join this fight. 
 
I have advised my government on what I think should be the plan of attack, and I indicate to the 
members opposite that they will soon be asked to throw out their troops in with the large legion on this 
side . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, maybe that’s what we need, but I remind you that it is we who 
are binge raped, looted and pillaged, not Ottawa. The hordes are descending upon us. The vandals have 
struck here, and it’s our duty to defend the empire of our farmers, such as it is. It’s taken them 70 years 
to build what they have, and we have to defend it. And I ask you to join us, and I ask you to support the 
motion. 
 
Gentlemen and ladies, citizens of Saskatchewan, I agree with Mr. Engel when he said (and I apologize 
for not using your constituency, but it’s so far from mine I need a map to follow it. 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, thank you.) I agree with you . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I agree with you 
that this is war, and I am prepared to go at my own expense with you to Ottawa, even if only you and I 
go, and I’m prepared to have at least two members of the opposing armies join forces and go to Ottawa, 
and if you will advise me we will go down there, and I’ll lobby our members, and you lobby your 
members . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I know it will take me a little longer, but he’s going to 
have a harder time convincing his, because his members think the price of wheat is too 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1971 

high. 
 
You ask Mrs. Broadbent if she thinks the price of wheat is too high. That’s what I want to know. It will 
take you twice as long to convince your members as I will to convince ours. 
 
In any event, war has been declared, and I think that we should rise to the occasion and meet the 
challenge and defend this province. 
 
I know that my colleagues on this side will rise to the occasion and meet the challenge. I’m not so sure 
about the learned members on the opposite side, but I think when the crunch comes they will stand with 
the farmers and they might stand in the back row and they might be half-hearted, but I’m sure they will 
stand. But I invite you to take part. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to have the opportunity to get into this debate. I 
listened to the members opposite, particularly the last member, the member for Melville, and I hear him 
talking about the blue armies and the red armies, and how we’re going to march somewhere, and I have 
some difficulty in really trying to understand what he is getting at. I thought that the issue today was 
how the change in the crowrate, the Pepin plan, was going to affect the farmers of Saskatchewan. I don’t 
think it’s an army that we need to go and voice our opposition. What we need is a government on that 
side of the House that’s going to take a position. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — . . . that’s going to take a position, which they haven’t done in the nine months 
they’ve been in power. They’ve been sitting on that fence; they sat on that fence until as recently as 
maybe a week or two ago, when they still didn’t have a position. They didn’t know just what side they 
should take — whether they should take the side of the railways or whether they should take the side of 
the farmers. And they sat there and they waited; it seemed that eventually some of the people of the 
province finally pushed them off that fence, and they made the decision that they are going to support 
the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
They are finally going to do that. At least they are going to do that verbally — they’ve done that in the 
House; they’ve done that in the media. But so far we haven’t seen any action from that government. We 
haven’t seen any plan they are proposing that says what kind of action they are going to take and how 
they are going to help the farmers of Saskatchewan make sure that the Pepin plan does not go in, that 
they are not forced to pay more than they are presently paying for the transportation of their grain. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, the members on that side of the House are not saying. They are only saying out there 
that we’ve always said that the farmer cannot afford to pay a penny more. Well, the farmers know that a 
long time ago, Mr. Speaker. The members on this side of the House knew that a long time ago. They 
knew that the farmer cannot afford to pay a penny more, and the members on this side of the House 
decided that they would go out there and they would take a position. They would take action to help the 
farmers, voice an opposition to what was happening in Ottawa. But are we getting that from this 
government? No. They say the farmers cannot afford to pay a penny more and that is all. It appears that 
that is the only kind of action that members opposite, this Government of Saskatchewan, are going to 
take in support of the farmers: nothing more than window 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1972 

dressing to make the farmers somehow think they’re on their side. But they aren’t really going to go and 
oppose the railways — no, they won’t do that. They’ll just say, “We’re with the farmers and we’ll drop 
it at that, and if the farmer loses, well, it’s tough.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we need more coming from this government; we need more coming from this 
House. We have to take a position and with that position we have to take some action. We have to meet 
with our colleagues in Ottawa. We on this side of the House have convinced our colleagues in Ottawa 
that the side to be on is the side of the farmer. But what is happening on the Tory side of the House in 
Ottawa? We don’t hear all the members there saying they are going to oppose the Pepin plan. They are 
not saying that they’re going to support the farmers of Canada, specifically farmers of western Canada. 
No, you get a few of them that get up and oppose what Pepin is proposing, but for every one of those 
that get up in opposition, you’ve got 50 that sit back and don’t say anything. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, much of that is happening here today. You get a couple of members getting up and 
saying that they are in support of the farmer, that they are going to oppose any change to the crow. But 
how many of them are really that sincere about doing that? How many of them are really that sincere, 
Mr. Speaker? I think that is the big question and that is the question that the farmers of Saskatchewan 
are going to one day make a decision on. They will know what side this government is on. They will 
know that by the kind of action that this government takes, by the kind of action that it takes in the 
weeks and months ahead, by the kind of opposition it puts forward against this plan. That is how they 
will decide whether the government is on their side or whether they are just trying to make them believe 
that they are on their side, like many of the other things they have been doing. 
 
What do we hear from Tories in Ottawa? Well, I’ve said what we hear there. Very little. We have heard 
nothing from the Conservative Party in this House, or in this province, until just a day or two ago when 
they finally decided that they should support the farmers. We hear very little coming out of the 
Conservative Government of Alberta. We have no support from the Tories in Manitoba and yet 
somehow the Tories in Saskatchewan here are saying that they are in support of the farmer and they are 
going to oppose the Pepin plan, and they are going to stand behind the farmer so the farmer doesn’t have 
to pay a penny more. Well, Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, that is not enough. 
 
Just saying it in the House here is not enough. What the people of Saskatchewan want is action from this 
government, action which has been forthcoming for a long time but has not come yet. I think the time 
has come when that action should be taken by this government. They should get out there and fight on 
behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, because changing the crowrate will not only affect the farmers. It 
will affect them, but in turn it’s going to affect business people. It’s going to affect the whole economy 
of this province. And that, Mr. Speaker, is something that you don’t hear this government saying. 
 
Today, the Premier, for the first time, made some reference to what the cost might be to Saskatchewan if 
this was done, if the crow was changed. For about the first time he is really taking a position and 
realizing that changing the crow is going to have a drastic effect, a dramatic effect, on all of 
Saskatchewan. And that must be because if he was out in the P.A. by-election or if he was out anywhere 
in the province during the break, he realized that not only the farmers are out there complaining, but the 
business people are starting to realize how it is going to affect them. And that, Mr. Speaker, is why the 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1973 

Premier finally decided that he should get up and say something, that he should finally get up and say 
what side he is going to be on, and who he is going to support . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . the 
members opposite from their seats — and I don’t know why they don’t get up and say so — they say 
that somehow I’m not in touch. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to say that I was in touch with my 
constituents, and I was in touch with the people of Saskatchewan, a long time ago. I knew the problems 
they were facing. I knew the problems they were going to be facing a year ago. I know the problems 
they are facing now, and I’m going to know the problems they will be facing a year from now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I stay in touch with my constituents. I know the kind of effect that changing the crow is 
going to have on them. The farmers in my area know the kind of effect it’s going to have on them and so 
do the business people of that area. They have said so to me and I am sure the change in opinion of the 
government opposite is because many of the business people have finally been telling them what they 
think and how it’s affecting them. That, Mr. Speaker, is why the government has finally changed their 
position. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
The member has asked me if I support the motion. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that any 
motion that would possibly help the farmers in retaining the crowrate is a motion that I would support. 
But it has to be a motion that is going to be explicit in its recommendations and it’s going to be a motion 
that is going to make very clear what position the people of Saskatchewan are taking, not only the 
farmers, all the people of Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan and all the members in this 
House. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rest of my caucus, the member says, are they supporting it? Yes, I am sure the 
members of my caucus will support the motion and the amendment placed to it, because with the 
amendment that motion becomes one that is going to be a motion that can be taken to Ottawa, and a 
motion that the Prime Minister of Canada will have to say is one that is somehow going to give a very 
clear indication of what the farmers of Saskatchewan want, what the people of Saskatchewan want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment to your motion will do exactly that. I think it would be in the interest of the 
members opposite and of all the farmers of Saskatchewan if this government would support the 
amendment along with their motion and let’s get down to doing the job that the people of this province 
expect us to do. Let’s get down to doing the job that they sent us here to do. Let’s support the farmers, 
let’s support the businessmen and let’s support all of those people, the volunteers, that are let out there 
working — trying to keep the crowrate intact. 
 
That is what we should be doing, Mr. Speaker. We should be getting out there and we should be helping 
them. Just merely saying that we are in support of whatever they are suggesting will not be enough. 
What we have to do is get behind the various groups that are out there. All of the groups that are saying 
that we should now be out there speaking on their behalf and speaking along with them to retain the 
crow are not only NDP supporters. That has been said in the past, that it’s been a political gimmick of 
the NDP to try and make the crow an issue. No, we didn’t try to make the crow an issue for political 
reasons. We were making the crow an issue because it was an issue of the farmers, an issue of the 
business people of Saskatchewan, an issue to all of Saskatchewan. That’s why we were trying to make 
that an issue. Today there are people out there that are once again trying to get together and see that this 
is once again brought to the attention of everyone. To make it an issue, farmers, business people, 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1974 

even chambers of commerce that support the opposition, are out there saying that we should not have 
any changes to the crow. Now that I think the members opposite should really consider strongly and 
seriously because all the chambers of commerce will very likely be members that voted for them. And if 
they have any real interest in what happens to the crow, then they should be getting out there and 
proposing some type of plan as to how they intend to battle Ottawa on this proposed change. 
 
There is nothing in the resolution proposed to this House that suggest that they are going to take any 
kind of action. Nothing whatsoever, Mr. Speaker, and that is the one thing that is wrong with it. The 
debate today is good, but debating on a motion that has nothing in it really benefits no one. There has to 
be a plan in there that says what we are going to do and what action we are going to take. And that, Mr. 
Speaker, I think is a job that has to be done in this House, that is a position that has to be taken by this 
House, and I think it’s time that the government opposite made clear to the people of Saskatchewan just 
what kind of action they intend to take . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the members are tired of hearing about the crow. They want to hear as little as 
possible about the crow, because the more you talk about it the more uncomfortable they get. They get 
very uncomfortable with it, because they have some difficulty in getting all their troops rallied behind it 
and getting all of their members to support it. That’s why they feel uncomfortable with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they say if I will sit down and let it come to a vote that they will see how the support 
comes out. I am certain that the members that are here, the few of them that are in this House today, will 
very likely support it. I see a good number of farmers sitting in there, and I don’t think that any farmer in 
his right mind today, even on that side of the House, would oppose any move to retain the crowrate. So I 
am quite certain, Mr. Speaker, that we wouldn’t have any opposition from the members that are there 
today, they would support the motion. I’m sure, because they know the effect that it is going to have on 
farmers, that they will also support the amendment, because that is a part of the motion that is going to 
make it a motion that we can all go out in the country with and say that we are working on behalf of the 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite were a little critical when somebody brought up the fact that the 
CPR makes some donations to the PCs, and they say that that has nothing to do with the Conservatives 
of Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, if you look at the past record of the members opposite, the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and Tories across Canada, it’s quite clear that the $25,000 and the 
$35,000 that goes to the PC Party has some impact on the kind of action which they take, because if it 
didn’t they would have spoken up a long time ago. They would have spoken up against the railways. 
They would have spoken up in support of the farmer. They would have spoken up for some solution to 
the problems which were facing agriculture. 
 
But no, they didn’t say anything. They hoped it would somehow die, the railways would get their way, 
and they really wouldn’t have to take a position. But the time has come when they have to take a 
position. The time has come when they have to take that position. But they have only taken half a 
position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be the seconder of the amendment because if the members opposite 
listen to the amendment and if they read that amendment, I think they would realize that what they 
should be doing is not taking half a position on the 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1975 

plight of the farmers today, but they should also be passing this amendment and taking a total position in 
support of the farmers of Saskatchewan. That is what I intend to do, and I hope that all of the members 
on that side of the House also will do. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to add a few words to this debate. I was 
interested in a number of the comments made by previous speakers. I heard the member for Weyburn 
attempting to distil the policy of the New Democratic Party not from any statements which I made, and I 
venture to think I have made a hundred or so public statements on the crowrate, but rather from 
statements of what Mr. Mazankowski said that I said, or what Mr. Pepin said that I said. And it would 
have been a little more convincing had he attempted to state the words that I used and distil something 
from them rather than from the enemies of the crowrate, in the case of Mr. Pepin, and perhaps an 
uncertain friend of the crowrate, in the case of Mr. Mazankowski, and we are about to find out just how 
sturdy a friend of the crowrate he is. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — An excellent fellow. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I have no doubt that he is an excellent man. I have some doubt at this 
time, and I put it in those words, whether he’s a stalwart defender of the crowrate, and I am looking 
forward to him proving me wrong. Nobody would be happier than I if Mr. Mazankowski proved himself 
to be a stalwart defender of the crowrate and an opponent of the Pepin plan. 
 
I want to compliment the member for Melville for a number of his comments. Certainly he indicated that 
we were in for a battle. He suggested it had just begun. I would take some small issue with him on that. I 
think we’ve been in this battle for at least a year from the first time that it was clearly indicated that the 
crow was going to be axed by Mr. Pepin, and when he indicated that Mr. Gilson would be appointed, I 
think the die was cast then. Because what we should be doing is not opposing the Pepin plan as such, 
although we certainly do that, but also defending the crowrate as such. And it was clear that that was 
under attack about a year ago. But that’s a quibble. 
 
We are indeed in a battle and I accept his challenge to join with him and join with members opposite in 
battling to keep the crowrate and to oppose the Pepin plan. I welcome this common front by the whole 
House. And I want to spend a little time on what I think we should do in the light of what I think is a 
common desire on the part of all members of this House, at least to defeat the Pepin plan. We may have 
some differences as to what should be there and I don’t want to argue about that at the moment. Our 
objective is to defeat the Pepin plan. 
 
And I doubt the member for Kinistino feels that he is harking back to the many statements of the 
member for Souris-Cannington, the Minister of Agriculture, saying that their caucus is split down the 
middle. I don’t want to repeat that. I don’t want to raise the fact that there are probably divisions among 
us. All I want to do is that we have . . . We can all agree on one thing, and that’s that we oppose the 
Pepin plan. Let’s build on that unity and see what we should do as a legislature. And I think the issue is 
not whether we, as an opposition, and you, as a government, oppose the Pepin plan. We can all decide 
that very quickly. The issue is what we do about it on the basis of that agreement. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — We can pass a resolution and certainly this House has seen no 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1976 

absence of resolutions on the crowrate and the support of the crowrate. And I won’t burden the House 
with reading several in the past, but indeed we’ve had a good number where members on all sides of this 
House have spoken in support of the crowrate. So it’s not resolutions we lack. But it’s follow-up on 
resolutions which we have not yet achieved. And I think we should show a consensus not merely by 
passing a resolution but by doing a number of other things as well. And I think we’re by no means alone 
here in this House. 
 
A great number of farm organizations and key farm organizations in this province agree with us in 
opposition to the Pepin plan. And the Minister of Agriculture outlined the views of a good number of 
organizations. Some of them may oppose the Pepin plan for one reason and some another. But there’s no 
doubt that the vast majority of farm organizations oppose the Pepin plan and will join with us in 
mounting a defence of the crow or an attack on the Pepin plan. And I think that there’s no doubt that the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
wheat pool and the National Farmers’ Union together represent a very large block of farmers. Their 
position is unequivocal in opposition to the Pepin plan. And there are other organizations whose views I 
don’t know as well but who are similarly, in my judgment, opposed to the Pepin plan. 
 
So we have a situation where I suspect both sides of the House oppose the Pepin plan, a large number of 
key farm organizations oppose the Pepin plan, and the question is: now what do we do about it? How do 
we mount a campaign? How do we join battle, as the member for Melville would say? Well, I think 
there are two fronts. One of them is in parliament, and one of them is outside parliament . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s right, the member for Meadow Lake has put it well — eastern front and western 
front. But the outside parliament one is not solely confined to western Canada. 
 
We have really a two-pronged strategy. In parliament we would like to delay this thing so that western 
farmers might have another kick at the can, and if there is an election intervening, it won’t be the can 
they’re kicking, but something else they’re kicking. And therefore . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 
member for Rosthern is enjoying that little witticism. 
 
I think we all know what we’re talking about. If there is another opportunity to voice an opinion at the 
polls, I think that there may well be a clear voice from western Canada in opposition to the Pepin plan. 
 
But we need also to mount something outside parliament, because the present government at Ottawa is 
not impervious to public pressure. They sometimes seem it, but they are not impervious to public 
pressure. Anyone who has been a student at dealing with the Trudeau government (and we have tried to 
follow that study in the course of our work when we were in government), has found that that 
government takes a stand and a completely rigid stand, apparently impervious to all public opinion. But 
when they feel that the pressure is too great, they can make a 90 or 180 degree turn with great ease. And 
I have seen the Prime Minister do that on the constitution several times. Absolutely nothing could be 
done on Monday, but by Wednesday it was a 180 degree turn, because he had felt that his negotiating 
ground was gone. 
 
What we must do on this Pepin plan is see whether we can mount that sort of a campaign. Now how are 
we going to do this? Our amendment attempts to put out some ideas. I think we must show that there is a 
consensus in western Canada, or certainly in Saskatchewan, against the Pepin plan. The Premier in his 
remarks today suggested the 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1977 

same thing, that steps might be taken to show that there is in fact a consensus. 
 
We are suggesting that a plebiscite of producers, a plebiscite of holders of permit books, on their views 
with respect to the retention of the crowrate, would show incontrovertibly and overwhelmingly that 
there is no consensus to change the crowrate. So we think a plebiscite is a good idea for the government 
to think of. We would like to think that this was a prairie-wide plebiscite. We would like to think that the 
Government of Manitoba and the Government of Alberta could be induced to join in a prairie-wide 
plebiscite on the idea of retaining the crowrate. Possibly other governments might insist on some 
preference — do you like the Pepin plan, or the Argue plan? I think that would clutter it up, but 
whatever would be necessary in order to get a prairie-wide agreement would be useful. 
 
But if that can’t be, if we can’t relatively quickly put forward or get an agreement between the three 
prairie governments to have a plebiscite prairie-wide, then the Government of Saskatchewan might 
mount a plebiscite. We don’t say that’s an answer. We say it is helpful in building a clear idea in eastern 
Canada that there is no consensus to change the crow. 
 
But what else might be done? Well, when we were faced with a somewhat similar problem of trying to 
explain to eastern Canadians why western Canada should be able to keep some of the increased value of 
petroleum and natural gas resources, I know both Premier Lougheed and I went on extensive speaking 
tours in eastern Canada to explain the point of view. That might be something that could be done. 
 
I recall speaking in Halifax and Montreal and in Ottawa a couple of times and Toronto a couple of times 
and then in Kingston and several other places attempting to put the argument. And one, you would be 
amazed how far back people in eastern Canada were about the actual conditions in the oil patch as they 
then were, and what our claim was to keep some of that resource money. And I suspect that if you went 
to Kingston or Ottawa and attempted to explain the Crow’s Nest Pass rate, you would start a long way 
back. There would be a good deal of educating to be done. But I think it’s worth a try. 
 
I don’t suggest that it only be done by way of speaking tours by the Premier or other people who are 
similarly placed. We are suggesting in our resolution that consideration might be given to getting a small 
group of people representing the government — opposition, if you felt it advisable but we’d leave that 
entirely to you — and some representatives of farm groups who would go down and hold press 
conferences and press briefings so that opinion-makers in eastern Canada might be aware of what we’re 
talking about. Because I assure you they are not now aware of what we’re talking about. All they hear is 
that this is a rate that’s been around since 1898, and what are those western people talking about 
suggesting that they shouldn’t pay any more than they did in 1898? “There’s nothing that we buy that 
we have the same price that was paid in 1898,” says the person from Toronto. 
 
Well, that is a relatively simplified view of things, and we have a much better case than that. And we 
can put that case by having a group go to eastern Canada — not once, but several times, into Vancouver 
by the look of it now, and put our case. 
 
Now I won’t try to outline all our case, but you know much of it: the contribution — and reference has 
been made by some other members to this — of grain and the export of grain to our national economy, 
the nature and origin of the Crow’s Nest Pass Agreement, and the fact that it was really part of a 
development of railways in western 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1978 

Canada by which the railway companies got very, very liberal grants of land and minerals. And they got 
those over a series of years. But the Crow’s Nest Pass Agreement certainly was directly related to some 
grants of lands and minerals which have yielded the Canadian Pacific Railway very, very handsome 
returns. So, that case. 
 
And nobody, I think, needs to hear yet another litany of how much money the railway companies have 
made. But I will just give a couple of figures which startled me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
these I think will startle you. These are figures from Nesbitt Thomson, which is a bond company — a 
Nesbitt research paper talking about the years 1975 to 1980 and what companies made money in 
Canada. And everyone says, well, those were the great days of the resource companies. Nobody made 
more money than the resource companies in those five years. And you’d be wrong because 
transportation outperformed resources in earnings growth. Transportation earnings grew from $54 
million in 1975 to $220 million in 1980, a compound annual growth rate of 32 per cent. And the largest 
increase within the transportation group was achieved by CP Rail. The net earnings rose from $14 
million up to $61.4 million, an increase of more than 50 per cent. That’s obviously a good deal more 
than 50 per cent. 
 
Now, that’s what happened to the CPR. So enough of all those stories about how tough things are with 
the CPR and how much money they’re losing. In fact, the transportation sector outperformed the 
resource sector, and the CP Rail outperformed almost every other firm in the transportation sector. So 
that is a case to be made. I won’t belabor the House further, but I think we know that. And that case can 
be made to those people who were saying that the railway companies are losing a great deal of money. 
 
Another point that was made — I think by the Minister of Agriculture and others and certainly by the 
Premier — is that we need to outline for eastern urban people, particularly, the effect on western farmers 
of dismantling the crow but the effect on eastern farmers of dismantling the crow and the effect on 
eastern industry of dismantling the crow, and the point made by several others that the adverse impact 
upon eastern farmers cannot fairly be compensated for by further grants to eastern farmers designed to 
protect them from the additional costs which are being shifted to western farmers. Now that point was 
very strongly made. 
 
I don’t agree with the idea that farmers should necessarily pay a compensatory rate. I don’t agree that 
that is a fair or a logical position to take, having regard to the Canadian economy at this time. But if 
western farmers are to pay a significantly increased amount to get their grain to market, and if this 
would adversely affect some consumers of that grain, namely the consumers of feed grain in eastern 
Canada, then to have them sheltered against it but not us sheltered against it is really a very unfair aspect 
of the Pepin plan. And that point should be made. And I think it should be made by delegations or 
groups going to eastern Canada in the way I suggest. 
 
Now let’s lay to rest another argument which is so frequently heard, and Mr. Pepin makes it ad nauseam. 
It’s certainly ad nauseam so far as I’m concerned. And that is that we cannot have an improved 
transportation system unless we pay greatly increased amounts, unless we kill the crow and restructure 
the whole grain handling system in western Canada. Well, we have been hearing that now for 25 years 
anyway in western Canada. In the ’60s, many of you will recall, it was said that we couldn’t keep the 
branch lines unless the crow went. The branch lines were in bad shape; they needed to be repaired and 
this required a change in the crow. Well, the crow is still here — 20 years later — and the branch lines 
by and large are fixed. Not all, but a great improvement has 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1979 

been made in them by the infusion of government funds. 
 
And in the ’70s the next story was that we needed a great deal more rolling stock. We had to have 
hopper cars, and we couldn’t get more hopper cars unless we changed the crow. And government rallied 
and provided hopper cars, and we kept the crow. 
 
I know that the hopper cars were provided by farmers dipping into their pockets through the Canadian 
Wheat Board and providing a couple of thousand hopper cars, by taxpayers in this province dipping into 
their resources and providing a thousand hopper cars, and by the taxpayers in Alberta doing the same 
thing. A criticism can be made of that, but it was a practical way to keep the crow. It succeeded in 
keeping the crow. I think that however unreasonable it is in theoretical terms for the railway companies 
to ask farmers to pay for their own rolling stock, we had to do it since no one was forcing the railway 
companies to provide it, and this provided it, and we kept the crow. 
 
Now we’re hearing yet again that this time it’s the mainlines: we cannot get improvements in the 
mainlines unless we change the crow. Well, that’s the poorest argument of all. At least hopper cars carry 
grain — and hopper cars carry only grain, substantially. The branch lines carry grain and substantially 
that’s all they carry; 80 per cent or 90 per cent of the traffic on the branch lines is grain. With respect to 
the mainlines, it’s only 20 per cent, and probably declining . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. 
So, the argument that we cannot get a pass through the mountains because the shippers of 17 per cent or 
18 per cent of the goods are not paying enough is not a very convincing argument. 
 
It may be that something would have to be done by way of an ad hoc arrangement of governments 
putting some money into that tunnel for the CPR. I certainly would not wish it, but if it had to be done to 
keep the crow, then perhaps it could be done. It certainly would not be my first, second, third or fourth 
choice, but if you’re right down at the bottom of the barrel and have to do something to keep the crow, 
then that might be done. 
 
We have talked in these terms before. We have said that we certainly wouldn’t hand over provincial 
government money to the CPR; that’s going a little too far. But if we had to do, and Alberta and the 
federal government had to do, what we did with hopper cars — put up the money and keep an asset — 
then we might do that with respect to the CPR mainline, and we’d expect some equity back. That’s not a 
good arrangement but it’s better than losing the crow. 
 
In any case, there are many, many things we could do to advise Canadians outside the House of 
Commons of the importance of keeping the crowrate and seeing whether we could mount some case that 
the federal government would listen to. No government that is as far behind in the polls as that one is, is 
impervious to all public concern. Even though they’re not expecting to win any seats in western Canada 
— and their expectation is very well-founded I may say — they still cannot be impervious to all public 
opinion in western Canada. So, there are lots of thing we could do outside the House of Commons and 
we have tried in our amendment to list some of them. 
 
Turning now to what we could do in the House of Commons, I think there are some things that could be 
done. I think we could, first, try to see that all the western MPs are on-side, with the possible exception 
of the two Liberals from Winnipeg. I think that that might be possible. 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1980 

You will have seen Mr. Broadbent’s statement on behalf of the New Democratic Party MPs — western 
and eastern — that they would oppose the Pepin plan. And that’s 30 or so, and that’s a good start, and I 
think we must accept that as being a fair concession, particularly for MPs from Ontario and British 
Columbia who may feel some pressure from their constituents because of the prevailing public views 
there in British Columbia and Ontario which we have not yet straightened out. And I think that we will 
need to do the same with respect to the Progressive Conservative MPs, many of whom will oppose the 
Pepin plan out of hand, but many of them will have to be talked to because it will be presented as a 
freeing of the economy and making it more competitive and the rest. And we know that that is hardly an 
effective argument when you’re dealing with a monopoly, but none of the less I hear that argument and I 
know that that has attraction for MPs who share that economic view (and I’m not now here criticizing 
it), and who do not know the facts with respect to the crowrate. 
 
So, we would urge members opposite — and we say this in no belligerent tone — to see what could be 
done with respect to marshalling all of the Progressive Conservative MPs. It is our suggestion that 
Premier Devine, who has very good relations with Joe Clark, we are led to believe, could meet with Mr. 
Clark and Mr. Nielsen and see whether or not a common front could not be welded there in opposition to 
the Pepin plan. 
 
We do not now have to have a common front as to what’s going to be put in its place. That is 
tomorrow’s problem. Today’s problem is to untrack the Pepin plan, and we would invite members 
opposite to use all their influence with the Progressive Conservative MPs to see whether that can’t be 
done. We would also invite them, in the same vein, to speak to their colleagues in Alberta and Manitoba 
to see whether or not support cannot be gained from the Progressive Conservative parties in those two 
provinces and the Progressive Conservative leaders in opposition to the Pepin plan. 
 
Turning back again to the House of Commons, we would invite members opposite (and we will give any 
help that we could, in influencing the New Democratic Party caucus) to mount a united and determined 
opposition to any legislation introduced to change the crowrate. Now it requires legislation. You can’t 
change a statutory rate without changing a statute. And I say a united opposition, and that I think we 
could get, if you people are successful with the great bulk of your Progressive Conservative MPs and the 
determined opposition. 
 
When it comes to a determined opposition, I am a great admirer of Mr. Nielsen. I know nobody who can 
mount a more determined opposition than Mr. Nielsen, and he’s just second to nobody in mounting 
strategies which will keep things from going through parliament when he wants them not to go through 
parliament. And I think if you have any chips to call in, I invite you to call them in now, because this is a 
very, very important issue for Saskatchewan farmers. I think we saw a very determined opposition 
mounted to the Canagrex legislation, and I’m not now dealing with the merits or otherwise of that 
legislation. I just say that no one can deny that a determined opposition was mounted. And we would 
certainly expect that there would be . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, indeed we weren’t. And just 
imagine how much more could be done if all opposition parties were opposing the introduction of the 
kill-the-crow legislation and that that opposition was pursued with the same diligence that it was in the 
Canagrex case so far as the Conservatives are concerned, and pursued with equal diligence by the NDP. 
So I think that that is the sort of thing that we should try to mount. We have attempted to outline this in 
our amendment. 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1981 

We talk about a plebiscite, a media campaign, and we don’t pretend that that’s our idea. The member for 
Weyburn, Mr. Hepworth, suggested that some time ago, I believe it was in June. In June 28 Hansard he 
talks about money that would have been better spent convincing the rest of Canada, especially central 
Canada, about our position with respect to the crow. There is merit in mounting whatever we may need 
by way of a media campaign. We have in mind there the press conferences and the like, but also a paid 
media campaign. 
 
There is now a crow retention group active in Saskatchewan who are going about with petitions and 
getting very, very large meetings. I was at one in Prince Albert where they had close to 600, and I know 
there was a large one in Shellbrook, and this is, so far as I can see, a non-partisan group. The meeting 
that I say was chaired by a former Western Canada Concept candidate and accordingly cannot be 
thought to be a plant for the New Democratic Party. I think you’ll give me that. There were people of all 
political persuasions at that meeting. 
 
We speak of a special delegation to central and eastern Canada and I’ve already dealt with that. We 
speak of getting support from the Conservatives and the NDP in parliament and the Alberta and 
Manitoba governments, and we speak of such other things as may be necessary. Now if you feel that this 
plan is not a good plan, obviously we would welcome any other suggestions, but basically we think that 
our suggestions are sound. They’re sound in order to engender more public support for opposition to 
Pepin, sound in impressing upon the government in Ottawa that there is no consensus to change the 
crow, and sound in laying out a strategy for opposing the crow legislation in parliament. For those 
reasons, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion which starts us along the way, I will be supporting 
the amendment which I think lays out a plan of attack. 
 
I join with the member for Melville in saying that we are, in fact, in a battle. We have laid out our 
proposals for a battle plan. We think that they are reasonable proposals. We invite members opposite to 
support the amendment and we will certainly be supporting the motion because we support your 
endeavors to kill the Pepin plan. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I sense that the Leader of the Opposition has 
endorsed the nine points that we have made and the motion to deal with the Pepin plan. And I just want 
to touch briefly on the amendment, Mr. Speaker, before I encourage all members to vote against the 
amendment. But just before I get specifically to the amendment, I want to deal with a comment or two 
that was made by the member for Pelly who unfortunately is not in his seat at this time. But he talked 
about only now are we stating the cost and the impact that the Pepin plan would have to the province of 
Saskatchewan? And why wasn’t this done months ago? Why wasn’t this done way back when? Well, 
admittedly, Mr. Speaker, our research people aren’t of the calibre of John Burton. We did not have a 
great deal of idea what the Pepin plan would contain until it was announced and made public. So once 
the ghost was out of the closet, so to speak, then we got at our research and we decided that the impact 
of the Pepin plan would be indeed detrimental, not only to Saskatchewan but I think to the Canadian 
economy. And thus the motion before us today. 
 
Now to deal specifically with the amendment offered by the opposition, Mr. Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly further urges the Government of Saskatchewan to join forces with the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, the National Farmers’ Union, the 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1982 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities and the federation of agriculture . . . 
 

And then it’s silent. And I am rather offended by that particular portion of the amendment, not for what 
it says but for the groups that are not included in it. And the reason I say that, Mr. Speaker, is what we’re 
trying to leave Saskatchewan with is a consensus, not more division. And so, Mr. Speaker, we would, as 
we have been since the Saskatoon conference . . . We have been talking with all farm groups and all 
farm leaders. I’ve maybe missed one or two — I don’t know. But we certainly talked to the vast 
majority of them and came up with the nine points that we put before you today, to organize a plebiscite 
for the Saskatchewan grain producer with the participation of other producers, to allow them to choose 
among the Pepin plan, the Argue plan, the existing crowrate. 
 
Well, by the Leader of the Opposition’s own admission, as he was standing up just a moment ago, he 
said, “Well, that may kind of clutter it up.” And I tend to agree with him. It may kind of clutter it up. I 
don’t rule out that a plebiscite may be necessary. I don’t think it is, because I think the vast majority of 
people out there today would want us to defeat the Pepin proposal. And I think if we have the resolve to 
do that, we don’t need the plebiscite. I don’t rule it out. And the Leader of the Opposition said, “Well, 
even better would be a prairie-wide plebiscite.” Well, I don’t think we would have any problem with 
Manitoba. I don’t know where we would go with Alberta because I haven’t raised that particular 
question with them. But I don’t want it to be enshrined in this resolution because it denies us the 
flexibility to work on that if we choose to go that way. 
 
To organize a Canada-wide media campaign to inform Canadians of the implications of the Pepin plan. 
Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that the former premier, the Leader of the Opposition, while he was in his seat 
today listening to the Premier would have heard that that’s one of the things he would propose. And in 
fact this very afternoon he left for Ottawa and is, today and tomorrow, meeting with our federal 
counterparts, meeting with the media, meeting with anybody else he can meet with, to explain our 
position. And it won’t end there. 
 
I’m sorry that the agriculture critic, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, missed that speech today 
because I’m sure, had he been listening to it, he wouldn’t have brought this amendment forward. 
 
To encourage the signing of a petition to show the members of parliament and other Canadians the 
concerns Saskatchewan people have about the Pepin plan. Well, it’s not that long ago that we saw a 
petition tabled in the House of Commons that was a roll that deep. It had to do with the metric system. 
And you know the impact that had. I won’t discourage it. If anybody wants to take a petition down there, 
let them. I won’t discourage it. I would encourage, rather, a letter-writing campaign to members of 
parliament and ministers of transport. In my view that would have far more impact on the federal 
government than a petition, because we all recognize the impact that probably the largest petition in the 
history of the world had on them. It’s just so much paper to them, whereas a letter demands some 
attention. 
 
To organize special delegations to central and eastern Canada to explain the position on the crowrate and 
negative effects, etc., etc., etc. Not a bad idea, but we’ve already got one down there. They left this 
afternoon. We will have more. I may invite you to come to Quebec City with me. I don’t know. I 
haven’t made that decision yet. I’m not sure 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1983 

I could put up with you that long. 
 
To seek the support in writing. Well, take other such steps. Well, I’ve touched on it generally. And for 
those reasons, Mr. Speaker, and since most of them were touched on by the Premier when he spoke and 
some of them by myself when I spoke, and since I sensed from the opposition that they do in fact 
recognize the principles of a statutory rate for grain as a must, and they recognize that cost protection for 
farmers is a must, and they recognize that grain is sold on a competitive international market, and all of 
the other points that are on this, I think that the amendment offered by the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg does more harm than it offers good. That attempt . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
We’re doing it anyway in some instances. In some instances you’d be . . . I’m sorry I work you up. In 
some instances, Mr. Speaker, this amendment would, in fact, deny us the flexibility necessary to get the 
co-operation of other groups. For that and all of the points previously stated, Mr. Speaker, I would urge 
all members to vote against the amendment and vote for the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I am pleased that the debate is before the session on 
the opening day. I agree with one statement, at least, made by the Minister of Agriculture, where he said 
today that the Pepin plan will be a lethal blow to the farmers of Saskatchewan. As others have said 
today, it is not only a lethal blow to the farmers; it is going to be a lethal blow to many of the small 
towns and villages in Saskatchewan. I think this breaking of the crow, of the Pepin plan, would have the 
most devastating effect on Saskatchewan of any event in the history of this nation. 
 
I want to say that it is interesting, and I think it’s important, we come clear as to what is the Tory 
position. Today, we have motion with nine points. I want to say that as one reads the statements made by 
some of the leading Tories on the federal scene — the former minister of transportation, Mr. 
Mazankowski; if one wants to look at the position taken by Jack Murta — we clearly know that Tories 
are taking different positions throughout this country. 
 
I want to say that if we really want to stop this Pepin plan, the Tory party unequivocally has an 
opportunity and can achieve it. I say that because they present provincial governments in eight provinces 
in Canada. I want to say that they represent the official opposition in Ottawa, and I want to say that the 
polls indicate that there is a strong possibility that they could form the next federal government. 
 
I want to say that if this Pepin plan could be stopped, it’s within the confines and the power of Tories 
across this country. But, I’ll tell you what we have here, in my view, is perhaps a mild public relations 
presentation to present to the people of Saskatchewan a feeble attempt by this Devine government that 
they are fighting for the crow. 
 
But I want to say that if they join together and get their colleagues to support the defeat of the Pepin 
plan, no federal government could possibly move on it. I want to say that we have a Premier in Alberta, 
and that his government and several members of the Alberta legislature are indeed supporting the Pepin 
plan. 
 
I want to say that if you go to Manitoba, where the Premier of Manitoba submitted a resolution in the 
House asking for a stop to the Pepin plan, the former premier, Sterling Lyon, refused to support that 
position. 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1984 

So let us not be confused as to what is happening. A group here in this province would not take up any 
action when the former minister of agriculture was in fact using some of the treasury to inform the 
public at the outset of the initiation by the federal government; they refused to partake and to participate. 
I want to say that one of the outstanding members and a long-time member of the Tory party, Mr. 
Justice Hall, did participate in the meetings that we held throughout this province. I want to say that he 
saw the need for meetings with people, and he participated with the former minister of agriculture. But 
we were criticized that it was a political game that we were playing. Then, in saying that, they’re saying 
that Mr. Justice Hall was a party to a political game. 
 
I want to say that they had an opportunity to join with us in several resolutions we put before this House 
to solidly indicate that both political parties in this province represented in this House were against the 
Pepin plan. In every attempt that we’ve made to debate a motion in this House they watered it down and 
refused to take a position. 
 
I want to say that the Minister of Agriculture made another statement. He said the provincial 
government action has just begun. Well I agree with him because he hasn’t done anything up to now. So 
he’s right again — just begun. And I am convinced that “just begun” cannot lead us to a very significant 
accomplishment by the Devine government. 
 
I want to say that the Minister of Finance, who spoke briefly before adjournment this evening, indicated 
that really what we have to do here is treat this as a non-political issue. He says it’s a non-political issue. 
When we were government fighting for the retention of the crow, he had the audacity, he and his party, 
to indicate when we were doing it, it was political. But now that they’re doing it, it’s non-political. 
 
I want to say that he and also some of the speakers indicated that what the federal government has done 
is to go out to the various farm groups and to divide and rule. Now, I would say that in order to prevent 
the divide and rule concept which has been put forward what we should have been doing right at the 
outset, as soon as it was raised that there was a threat to the dismantling of the crow, that that was the 
time that action had to be taken. Because you have to mobilize. You wait until Pepin has done all of his 
lobbying and as you have indicate yourselves, the process of divide and rule. And now you’re saying 
that you’re going to come in at this late date. 
 
I want to say that while I certainly treat this issue as a very significant issue to all of Saskatchewan — it 
will be a lethal bill, I say, to the farm community and to the business community of Saskatchewan — the 
impact of this can be illustrated fairly easily as many of my constituents demonstrated. You take a point, 
like in my constituency, of Englefeld where they purchase about 850,000 bushels of grain in that 
community, increase the cost to the farmer of $1 a bushel . . . (inaudible) . . . eventually increase to, and 
you take $850,000 out of that small community’s purchasing power. 
 
If you just go down the road seven miles, you get to another point — Watson. Combine the total grain 
that is there and increase it by $1 a bushel, and you will find that it is from $1.6 million to $1.8 million 
out of those two communities. This is the devastating impact that this Pepin proposal will have. So while 
I welcome the opportunity to participate and to examine the seriousness which this proposal will have, I 
am also very sceptical as to the total commitment of the government opposite. I want to say that they 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1985 

talk about their co-operation with the federal government and that was illustrated today by the Minister 
of Agriculture. They co-operated in job creations and they co-operated in other ways. 
 
Here they have eight Tory governments across Canada. I ask them and the federal opposition party to 
take the opportunity of joining together that support. And I will tell you that that is one of the essential 
means of helping to prevent the implementation of this program. But I want to say that that is not going 
to happen. One needs only to look at the events in the political arena. Recently the leader of the federal 
Tory party, who was a Westerner, who I suspect would be under grave pressure to support the western 
position, has been effectively dismantled from the leadership of that party. And I suspect that if they 
choose another leader, he will represent the eastern interests. Because if you look at the proposal here, 
those who are going to benefit most are in eastern Canada. 
 
And, I want to say while the Premier has indicated four or five points which he indicated as a line of 
attack. He indicated, first of all, that he is going to stick to the nine points as set out in the resolution, 
and I hope that he will tell all of his members to stick to it because my interpretation of some of the 
comments made in the debate would indicate that they not all are totally behind sticking to the nine 
points set out in the resolution. 
 
Also, he has indicated that he’s prepared to go to bat for agriculture — use the treasury if necessary. He 
spelled out no details as to how this might be achieved. Obviously if he’s going to bat, he must have a 
plan, but apparently, even though they raised that as an emergency debate, we received no details, 
because I suppose, better not to set it out and then be caught in a position — better to make a position 
which can be changed at any occasion. Talking to other jurisdictions, the Premier indicated he would be 
doing that. 
 
As I say, 10 months have passed and apparently now they have only thought of talking to other 
jurisdictions. Because certainly, the Minister of Agriculture had an opportunity this afternoon to 
demonstrate in what way he had been working and what concrete actions he had taken in order to defend 
the crow for the western farmers. Also, he indicated that he intended to commence a lobby. And I want 
to say that, fair enough — I don’t disagree with the proposals put forward, but I want to say that on the 
actions of this government today, I find it difficult to believe that they really have their heart in it. 
 
Certainly, we in our party have consistently, both provincially and federally, taken the position of the 
retention of the crow. Our position has been clear; our position has been consistent. In other words, we 
feel that any party cannot legitimately on an issue of this nature, have one provincial Tory government 
taking one position, and to the west, have another Tory government taking a different position. Really 
what is happening is that Tories are across the nation taking an opportunistic position in respect to this 
major issue which will affect western Canada as no other issue has done. 
 
In closing then, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I am pleased to participate in this debate. I want to say 
that, as the Leader of the Opposition has indicated clearly, we have set forward some specific points for 
an approach, an action plan, and unfortunately the Minister of Agriculture again is not going to be 
pinned down with any specifics. He wants to be able to change his course. In other words, in my view, 
Mr. Speaker, he hasn’t quite made up his mind yet. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I want to say on behalf of the farmers, the business 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1986 

community, the people of Saskatchewan, that we as New Democrats are prepared to lend every 
assistance in order to forestall and in fact prevent the implementation of the Pepin report. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 7 
 

Blakeney Lingenfelter Lusney 
Thompson  Koskie Shillington 
Engel    
 

NAYS — 32 
 

Muller Boutin Parker 
Birkbeck  Hampton Smith (Moose Jaw South) 
Berntson  Weiman Martens 
Sandberg  Bacon Rybchuk 
McLeod  Tusa Young 
McLaren  Hodgins Domotor 
Garner  Sutor  Maxwell 
Klein  Sveinson Dirks 
Katzman  Sauder  Myers 
Currie  Petersen  Zazelenchuk 
Smith (Swift Current) Glauser   
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a few words to say with respect to the crow 
debate and the Pepin proposals. I hope not to redefine “few” as was done earlier by the Leader of the 
Opposition. He said he had a few words to say as well, and it took rather a lengthy time. 
 
My comments, Mr. Speaker, whether they were of a lengthy nature or a very short nature, could not say 
any more than has already been said by the Premier and by the Minister of Agriculture. Our position, 
Mr. Speaker, has been well set out in those comments. With all respect to members of the House, any 
discussion and speaking on the subject of the Pepin proposals, the crowrate, freight rates generally, is 
not really going to be any better placed nor any better accepted by the people of this province than was 
set out by the Premier today. 
 
I would urge, Mr. Speaker, that all those that are so concerned, and they should be, take the time to get a 
copy of Hansard, and read what the Premier had to say. It seems interesting, Mr. Speaker, that after 11 
years in office, the official opposition today in some way finds it fair to say that we have not taken a 
position, or that we are not establishing a position, or that we have not done anything to stop the Pepin 
proposals. They had 11 years in office and the crowrate was discussed every year of those 11 years in 
one way or another. I know of nothing positive that ever came of any actions of the previous 
administration. 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1987 

It’s very unfortunate too, Mr. Speaker, that when we move into the debate on this issue, that we have 
their official agriculture critic, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, stand in the House and talk 
about the supposed lack of funds that the people have to buy stocks in CPR. What the relevance of 
stocks in CPR is to the crow debate is difficult, Mr. Speaker, it’s difficult to understand how that had 
any relevance in today’s debate. I don’t know about the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, but I can 
speak for myself, I do lack the funds to invest in CPR stocks. But my point, Mr. Speaker, is this: that is 
not the issue in rural Saskatchewan among farmers as to who has stocks in CPR. Now if you do, fine; 
that’s wonderful; but I don’t. I don’t know of any farmers that do. There may be a few of them, but it’s 
not the issue. I say that to the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg because he is the agriculture critic. 
 
He talks as well of how the CPR is the main culprit, and this has been going on for as long as I’ve been a 
member in this House, where you people talk of the CPR, but you have no condemnation for the CNR. 
They, too, haul grain; they, too, make the same claims as the CPR. It makes no difference, does it? You 
don’t learn, you obviously don’t learn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he demands action, an action plan from the provincial PC government. As I said earlier, 
the question in that comment is: what was your action plan in 11 years in office? You had no plan . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, we know where it got you, we know where it got you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member wants to know what our federal counterparts in Ottawa believe. Well I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, that we certainly know what his counterpart in Ottawa believes and how he had the 
audacity, the political ignorance, whatever terminology you would like to tag to it, to indicate to 
Canadians that yes, he was responsible for putting the Liberals back in power and that he did it in the 
best interest of Canadians. Now how the Leader of the NDP in Ottawa could come to admit that publicly 
is beyond me. Now if the agriculture critic for the opposition wants to deal with an issue, there is one to 
deal with. You can concern yourself that we should talk to our official counterparts in Ottawa, but I can 
assure you, member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, you want to talk to your official counterpart in Ottawa. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue: freight rates, agriculture in Saskatchewan, and how it’s 
best to be handled, not only on the short term but in particular on the long term. That, Mr. Speaker, was 
well identified in the Premier’s remarks today. We like to look at these matters in a broad perspective 
and not in the narrow perspective that the members of the opposition find it so easy to view matters 
through. 
 
The other frivolous argument that that agriculture critic made, Mr. Speaker, was the political 
contributions. Does it really matter to the farmers of Saskatchewan on this issue whether the CPR and 
the CNR made donations to any one of the three political parties or any political party in this country? Is 
that really the issue? I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that it is not the issue. 
 
So, those are the very few comments that I have to reply to to the agriculture critic. That was the sum 
total of his contribution today on this vital issue — the sum total. Now, Mr. Speaker, he has gone. The 
other member knew not well enough to stay. He left earlier. The member for Quill Lakes — yes, you 
stay because you weren’t here all day; you have 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1988 

to learn and pick up because you weren’t in on the debate. 
 
The member for Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker, suggests our position on the crow debates in the House has 
been watered down. May I remind the member that the last resolution on the crow debate in this House, 
introduced by their minister of agriculture, the Hon. (at that time) Gordon MacMurchy, was refused to 
allow to come to a vote — not by us in opposition but by you in government. You wouldn’t let your own 
minister of agriculture’s resolution come to a vote. 
 
I just raise that so you can brace yourselves because I believe the member for Rosthern may have some 
elaboration on that subject. 
 
Now the member for Quill Lakes, Mr. Speaker, asks for Tory governments to support the opposition in 
Ottawa to stop the Pepin proposal. Again, one has to go back to that basic argument of who put them in 
office. Who put them in there? It was the NDP that sided with the Liberals to put them back in power 
and put the Clark government out. Now you want the Tories all to band together in opposition to fight 
the very people they put in office. 
 
It’s because of that kind of action, Mr. Speaker, by NDPs throughout this country, that has this very 
Pepin proposal before the farmers of Saskatchewan. It’s the very reason that we have this debate in the 
House today. It’s not a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, of the Tories — not at all. 
 
So, very quickly, Mr. Speaker, let us look at the positive aspects as we debate the issue. We as a 
government, and we when we were in opposition, identified clearly that the farmers of Saskatchewan 
must not have to pay a cent more for the movement of grain. We said that. Now, how many more times 
one would have to say that to convince these people in opposition is hard to say. It may be a long time. 
We are looking at substantial increases, possibly in the neighbourhood of 500 per cent increase in rail 
rates. True, that cannot be a matter that would be very easily upheld by farmers in this province, with 
input costs rising all the time. Certainly it would have its reflection on small communities in particular. 
We understand that, and for that reason stand in support of farmers in saying that we do not see how 
they can, at this time, at ever time, absorb increases that are being proposed by the Pepin proposal. The 
Minister of Agriculture has said that. I don’t know how many times he’s said that. I’ve heard him say it 
in the House. I’ve heard him say it on the radio. I’ve watched him on the television saying it, and I’ve 
read it in the newspaper, and he’s identified it. 
 
Well, what do you choose to do? You choose to take the whole day with dribble and debate, talking 
about matters that we’ve already touched on I don’t know how many times over how many years. You 
talk about plebiscites. We have elections. We had one on April 26. People delivered their verdict at that 
time. We had one yesterday. Now, I don’t know what more one would want to do. Our proposals were 
well identified during the campaigns, both campaigns. The farmers obviously accept those proposals. 
They seem to understand, and yet because of you people debates like this are necessary, rather than 
having some unanimous consent in the House, which is all that we ask for today on the opening day of 
the House. That’s all we ask for — your unanimous consent. 
 
The Premier spoke today and I believe, Mr. Speaker, that in that speech he identified one of the greatest 
concerns that western Canadians have. He spoke of trust. Can we trust federal Liberals? Highly unlikely. 
It’s highly unlikely we can trust federal Liberals or the federal NDP or the provincial NDP, because 
they’re one and the same. They talked of how they would not give us wage and price controls but they 
gave us wage and price 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1989 

controls. The hon. member for Weyburn identified how we were suggesting at one time, federally, 18.6 
cents a gallon increase in gasoline. Oh, no, they’d never do that, but they did. They gave us 68.5 
approximately. Those are the people that you support — federal Liberals. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that for my part and for my view and my opinion on this subject, western 
Canadians have been asked to pay for enough. We have respected two official languages in this country, 
Mr. Speaker. Through that respect we have prepared ourself and we do pay for the cost of two languages 
in this country. We, Mr. Speaker, in western Canada, have against our objections (and I remember that 
well, Mr. Speaker, against our objections) opposed metric in this country. I remember very well, Mr. 
Speaker, as I sat over there as a part of seven members standing in my place and sincerely opposing 
metric at that time, while you people were government over here, and we had the Liberals sitting on our 
right, and what did you tell us . . . and what did the Liberals tell us? Not just us, they told me personally, 
“You’re politically naïve — what do you know?” Well, I know one thing — that it was a tremendous 
cost to Canadians. And you talk about having to have metric to export products. Well, I’ll tell you the 
Japanese don’t do bad in exporting cars into Canada. Never had any problem there, did they? Where was 
your position on that? No way . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, they have an excellent vehicle there 
for you, Ned. I won’t discuss with you what it is — well, not here. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the national energy program is another federal program that we have had to absorb 
as a cost to western Canadians. And as the Premier identified today as well, the tariffs, eastern tariffs. 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, the federal government does not want to support Saskatchewan. And clearly in my 
mind, neither does the NDP want to support Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I would like to indicate as well 
some indications that the members opposite might learn from the speech of the member for Weyburn, 
when he, as well, went through many of the clippings going back over a year, identifying what the then 
premier, now Leader of the Opposition, had to say with respect to the crow. And those are well 
identified now and documented in the Hansard of this legislature. So for any person in this province 
who is unclear as to what the position is of the Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan, 
I suggest that any of those who are capable of reading might bring themselves up-to-date. And maybe 
the member for Regina Centre might want to do just that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to just say, and say it very quickly, that the members on this side of 
the House, the Progressive Conservative Government, and I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that I wouldn’t 
have to say this many more times, are clearly behind the farmers on this side. We are clearly behind 
Saskatchewan as it relates to agriculture in this province. 
 
Now what, Mr. Speaker, is expected of us? I don’t know whether we are supposed to lay ourselves down 
before the first CPR train coming down the track and commit some kind of suicide, or what it is we are 
supposed to do to more vehemently oppose the Pepin proposals. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker. But I really 
do feel that we have done all that we can to set our opposition out to the Pepin plan. And, Mr. Speaker 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ve been restraining myself from getting into my usual junkets with the 
opposition. And that’s about what it amounts to now. But if they would like, while you people went out 
to decide whether or not you are going to support your own blooming amendment, I took the 
opportunity to go to the washroom. While I was in the washroom, Mr. Speaker, I had none other than 
the member for Shaunavon in the washroom when I was in there. It struck my mind, Mr. Speaker, that I 
should say something to him, but as I don’t know . . . I’d never go that low, not in there. I’ll save that 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1990 

for the House. So, if you want one, Ned, I’ll tell you. In the members’ washrooms you have a situation 
where we’re effective in reducing your numbers by 50 per cent, there’ll be personalized, got this now, 
personalized urinals for each of you because there’s only four in the members’ washrooms. 
 
Now, as you well know, I could go on all night doing that, but that isn’t what this debate is all about. 
This isn’t a joking matter. It’s a very serious matter and I’ve set it down, Mr. Speaker. The comments, as 
I’ve said, couldn’t be better said than the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture said it today. That’s in 
the Hansard. We’ve had some other good speeches today, and I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that at 
least we’re prepared to allow our own motion to come to a vote. I would like to just challenge the 
members of the opposition to try and stop us from having this motion come to a vote. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, because I want to come to a vote, I’m going to take my place and just say that I 
obviously support the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I might get in the debate a little earlier in the day and 
spent some lengthy time preparing a text that I was going to use on this important issue. 
 
Basically what the federal Liberals have tried to do is rape the wealth of Saskatchewan by an insidious 
method. They are attempting to change crow. 
 
The member for Moosomin referred to a debate that took place in this House, Monday, March 22, 1982. 
The mover of that motion was the Hon. MacMurchy. (He’s now the mayor of Semans.) And the motion 
had to do with the crowrate. It was interesting. The moment the Conservative opposition stood to their 
feet and made sure that the former government, now the members of the opposition, knew where we 
stood, they didn’t want to have a vote. They didn’t want it on the official record of Hansard and this 
Legislative Assembly that the Conservatives were in favor of the benefits that the crow gave the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. They didn’t want that to be in an official document of the House, and they didn’t let us 
vote on it. No, they stood the motion. They adjourned the motion. In fact, they had the member that used 
to sit in this chair stand up and adjourn the motion — Mr. Mostoway — and of course, he’s not here 
anymore either. It’s just a crying shame that the both of them aren’t here anymore. 
 
You know, the way you fellows are going, I think you’ve got a death wish. You must have. The Minister 
of Agriculture has been saying since we became government that the farmer can’t pay any more. But I 
think you’ve got plugs in your ears, because it never got in. He kept saying “sitting on the fence.” How 
more blasted straight can he be? He said “no more.” You guys just don’t understand that lingo and you 
go with your false rumors and vicious you-know-whats. You never want to tell the truth. 
 
You know, I also remember just prior to the election there was a little pamphlet flying around. It was 
called “Eating Crow.” Had something to do with the former government who are now eating crow. They 
are not the government because they played games and the people didn’t trust you. Our minister and our 
leader have said point blank where we stand. And we’ve said in all the other things that the federal 
Liberals will try to defuse the issue. The point is, number one, the farmer doesn’t pay another red cent. 
You try to turn it all over the place. The fact is, the Premier has spoken today, the Minister of 
Agriculture has spoken, and let’s see if you fellows have got the intestinal fortitude to 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1991 

stand on your feet and support this motion as we were prepared to support your motion to protect the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, time is limited. I will be supporting the motion. 
 
MR. TUSA: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this evening to join in the debate with my colleagues on the crow 
issue. An issue, Mr. Speaker, which, if allowed to go unchallenged by our government, will certainly 
negatively affect the direction of agriculture in our province as a whole for generations to come. 
 
The Pepin plan, Mr. Speaker, is one which is a direct assault on the livelihood of Saskatchewan’s 
farmers. It is a massive grab into their pockets and is in fact tantamount to outright theft. Under this 
proposal freight rates to farmers will increase by 400 to 500 per cent within the next 10 years. 
Obviously, it is not a plan which will benefit Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
It is important to take note, Mr. Speaker, of the many negative aspects of this proposal. 
 
Firstly, farmers are being asked to pay the rate increases up front. Then sometime later, perhaps as long 
as a year later, they will have a portion returned. That in reality is an interest-free loan to the federal 
government. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we should note the rapid escalation of freight rate costs over the years. In 1983, 
the crowrate amounts to approximately 4.89 per tonne. In 1986, it will be 8.86 per tonne, and by 1991, 
this will have leaped to $27.45 a tonne, about 5.5 times crow. It should be noted that Saskatchewan will 
be paying significantly more than Manitoba or Alberta, because according to the Pepin formula, the 
crow difference rapidly increases as the multiple of crow increases. 
 
Another negative feature, Mr. Speaker, is that farmers are being asked to pay the full freight costs over 
31 million tonnes of grain shipped. This will add enormously to the total cost back to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a further aspect of this proposed legislation is one which rubs salt in the wounds of western 
Canadians. Originally, the railroads got everything they wanted and more, and now they are getting 
everything they want and more again. According to the Pepin plan, the railroads will be guaranteed 100 
per cent of their costs plus 20 per cent. Which farmer would complain if he were to have those returns 
on his operation — 100 per cent of costs plus an additional 20 per cent? No farmers would complain, 
Mr. Speaker, none at all. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they tell us there will a further review in 1985-86 with a possibility of further 
changes. What changes will come out of that and subsequent reviews are unknown. The federal 
government is asking the farmer to give up his only known cost for an unknown rate structure which is 
then subject to further revision and more uncertainty in future years. Mr. Speaker, it is clear to see that 
the Pepin plan does not propose to do any favors for Saskatchewan’s farmers. But may I remind the hon. 
members opposite that this plan which they so loudly condemn is on the table today and hangs like a 
guillotine above the heads of Saskatchewan farmers due to the actions of none other than the NDP. This 
plan, which strikes at the very livelihood of Saskatchewan farmers, has been made possible by none 
other than the co-operation of 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1992 

the NDP with the Ottawa Liberals. 
 
I should like to remind the hon. members opposite, and the people of Saskatchewan, of that fateful day 
in 1980 when five NDP members of parliament from Saskatchewan, who held the balance of power, 
voted with the Trudeau Liberals against the Conservative government, and in doing so gave the Trudeau 
Liberals another opportunity to wreak havoc on our people. Mr. Speaker, while the hon. members 
opposite may have chosen to forget that night in Canada’s history, let me say that the people in Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake did not. The people in Prince Albert-Duck Lake remembered yesterday, and loudly 
gave their answer to that discredited and withering party. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that our government and our party has consistently 
opposed any crow change which places any additional financial burden on our farmers. Our government 
has pointed out to the federal government that in the past export year Canadian farmers shipped out 
more than 2.7 million metric tonnes of grains to overseas markets and earned this nation $6 billion and 
badly need export dollars. In fact, our grain shipments are one of the few bright spots in an otherwise 
ailing economy. 
 
The federal government should be promoting the expansion of this market, not making it more difficult 
for our farmers to compete on a world grain market. Unless we compete our customers will go 
elsewhere. If the Saskatchewan farmer is forced to pay higher freight charges he will have to build those 
charges into his selling price, and in so doing, we will lose our competitive edge and our markets. Every 
dollar Ottawa invests in our grain transportation system is an investment in the economic future of 
Canada for all Canadians. It is not a subsidy that keeps an unviable operation running; it will return its 
investment many, many times over. The federal government’s obligation is to promote our grain sales 
overseas, not hinder them. 
 
In short then, it is our government’s position that the crowrate should remain unchanged and that the 
federal government should be responsible for paying any crow shortfall. Our government recommends 
that the federal government assure western grain producers that the future burden of rail costs will be 
borne by Ottawa on behalf of all Canadians, and our western grain producers will not be subjected to 
any disincentives regarding additional grain production. Mr. Speaker, because the Pepin plan does not 
meet this criteria, it is incumbent upon me to support the motion which has been introduced in this 
House by the Minister of Agriculture today. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DOMOTOR: — Mr. Speaker, I enter this debate in anticipation that the federal government will 
eventually listen to reason and forget about its short-sighted policy and look at long-range planning that 
will affect both the western and eastern provinces for the good of all Canadians, rather than just for 
eastern concerns. 
 
The crowrate, which is a major concession to the Prairies, is one of the few benefits that we receive. 
This commitment was made by the railways for value received in the Crow’s Nest agreement many 
years ago. Marine transportation and air transportation have been subsidized. The negative impact of 
abolishing the crowrate would mean a drop in personal income in the West. It would also need to 
translate into less money to buy goods manufactured in central Canada. Those that supply goods to the 
West, in the final analysis, would suffer losses. 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1993 

While the farmers, through the export of their grain sales, help the country, in general, by the balance of 
payments to the treasury, the federal government wants to place an excessive increase in their 
transporting of that grain. A further increase cannot be permitted at this time when the prices of grain are 
dropping or are in a weak position. Without the significant control of the rate, the price could go up to a 
point that it would mean, in today’s costs and net return, the family farm would have difficulty 
surviving. 
 
The grain prices depend on competitive world markets. No guarantees are present, Mr. Speaker, to 
maintain freight costs. After the federal review, after 1985-86, they could simply withdraw any subsidy 
and the farmer would immediately be looking at approximately $1 per bushel. I prefer to use bushels, 
Mr. Speaker, and as you are well aware, the metric system was one day proclaimed by the wise men in 
Ottawa. Now we not only have to eat metric but possibly eat crow, as well. There is no guarantee, Mr. 
Speaker, that the price of wheat would be $4.50 a bushel, or $6, or $7. 
 
Let’s look at the OPEC cartel. The price demanded for oil reached outlandish proportions. The result led 
to unprecedented inflation and unprecedented interest rates. The result led to businesses failing — jobs 
being abolished as businesses went bankrupt. Was there any control there? Will there be any control in 
inflationary increases in the freight rate? Not likely. If wheat were $6 a bushel and the freight rate were 
$1 a bushel, then the farmer would receive approximately $5 per bushel. However, with the fluctuation 
of grain prices and overproduction in any country, a dumping on the world markets of grain by the other 
exporter, or a withdrawal of buyers from the market, can bring the price down to $4 a bushel or $3 a 
bushel. The result of this would mean that, in effect, the farmer would only obtain $3 or $2 a bushel 
after the freight rate is deducted. In reality, in the early 1900s, the price of wheat had hit the high of $2 
or $3 a bushel then. Their costs, you must realize, then, of course, in fuel, fertilizer, and repair bills were 
much less than today. It becomes a very tight margin with increased costs today, Mr. Speaker, and will 
only result in less income to farmers, in general. Mr. Speaker, we must address this problem and 
emphasize to the federal government that the farmer cannot accept, nor can pay inflated costs that he 
does not know will end. 
 
As I mentioned before, we have subsidies for large corporations in the way of tax write-offs, or 
whatever. Then surely, Mr. Speaker, we can give some of this back to the farmer. It is high time the 
federal government understood that there are provinces past the Ontario and Quebec borders. The way it 
is set up now, the only people to gain would be the railways and not anyone else. We pay freight out of 
Saskatchewan. We pay freight for everything we get back into Saskatchewan. 
 
We must also look at some of the advantages that central Canada has enjoyed. It has protective tariffs to 
protect industries in the East, and one item that protected farmers in the West, the crowrate, is being 
loosened up to the point that this benefit will eventually be taken away. We don’t know what inflation 
may do in the future as the costs of railway operations go sky-high. And the only loser will be the farmer 
in western Canada. Oil subsidies have been used to give the eastern consumers a minimal cost. The 
difference between the export price of oil from the West to the United States and the Canadian price that 
the producing provinces get has been used to subsidize the cost of imported fuel. Why hasn’t the Pepin 
proposal taken this into account, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Another point that the federal government fails to understand is that the farmer spends 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1994 

a considerable amount of money on taxes and wages. The fertilizer, machinery repairs and fuel already 
mentioned extend into the billions of dollars. The total sales of prairie agricultural is in the billions of 
dollars. The result is that the agriculture supplies a considerable contribution to the economy of this 
country. If that income is reduced, and the farmer can no longer operate and compete in world markets, 
then, Mr. Speaker, in the final analysis, the big loser will be the people in Canada and the extra 
unemployed that will be caused when farmers are no longer able to purchase equipment. The 
manufacturing companies will be losers also in this system. 
 
In 1925, the then Conservative leader, Arthur Meighen, in a parliamentary debate stated: 
 

The maritime provinces are separated from the mass of our population by a very considerable stretch 
of territory, along which little or no business is done. The western provinces are likewise separated 
form the same central provinces of Canada. These are two wide chasms fixed by nature, against which 
Canada has had to struggle through the whole course of her history. 
 
I think it is an inevitable conclusion that the burden of transport chiefly comes upon those further 
removed from the centres of population. It would, in my judgment, be good national policy for the 
whole dominion to bear a share of that transport cost. There is no reason why the whole dominion, not 
just the shippers along the lines of our roads, should not carry whatever percentage seems fair of the 
cost of bridging these two great chasms between the extremities of our land. 

 
The principle advocated then by Meighen is consistent with the retention of the crowrate, and this 
principle advocated dates back to the time when Sir John A. Macdonald assisted the CPR in that the 
general thrust of the debate is that the imposition of the new federal policy will wreck Saskatchewan’s 
economy. In fact, not only Saskatchewan stands to lose if this policy is imposed unchanged but the 
federal treasury will suffer the consequences of an economic slump in the West and eastern 
Canadian-based manufacturing industries will see the drastic reduction in demand for their products. 
 
There is a general air of disbelief that Ottawa could be so short-sighted in proposing policies that will 
severely damage one of the brightest areas of economic activity in this nation. On the one hand, Prime 
Minister Trudeau has been urging the various regions of Canada to build on their individual areas of 
strength, while on the other hand the federal transport minister, Jean-Luc Pepin, is about to undermine 
Saskatchewan’s economic backbone. 
 
All MLAs feel that our agriculture potential is limited, but we are a long way, Mr. Speaker, from 
reaching that limit. Saskatchewan farmers, businessmen, and workers can help us reach that potential 
and contribute to the national good, but what we can’t do is reach the potential if artificial hindrances are 
put in the way. Removal of the stabilizing and safeguarding aspects of a statutory rate will throw our 
agriculture economy into turmoil. 
 
The federal Liberal government appears blind as to what the dismantling of the statutory rate will do to 
our agricultural base. It seems to ignore the fact that grain prices have fallen drastically to around $3 a 
bushel from a recent high of $5, and that 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1995 

farmers need all the incentives they can get if they are to battle back to health in the world grain 
markets. Instead of incentives, our farmers are being penalized for their efforts. Our farmers are willing 
to grasp the challenge and to put new lifeblood into the economy, but they can’t battle a government that 
has rejected them and doesn’t seem to care whether they grow grain and sell it at an inflow of 6 billion 
export dollars a year or not. The federal government doesn’t appear to recognize that when our farming 
community is healthy it builds new strengths all across Canada. Farm equipment, farm fertilizer, 
irrigation systems, and secondary processing operations all build up manufacturing enterprises in eastern 
Canada as well as western Canada. When farm incomes die, as they will under these proposals, jobs will 
disappear not only in the West but on the big manufacturing production lines in the East. When the jobs 
go, Ottawa will lose vast amounts of tax revenue and see its costs soar for unemployment insurance 
benefits and welfare payments. 
 
Not only that, but once we lose our export markets our customers will not likely return to us. Our 
competitors will move in quickly and fill the gap. There is no made-in-Canada price for grain or any 
other commodity. Either we compete or we lose our markets to those who can sell for less. A new huge 
transportation bill for western Canadian farmers will mean farmers will have to try and recoup their 
costs by price hikes. When Canadian prices rise, we will price ourselves out of the market. It’s a vicious 
circle. That vicious circle doesn’t start and end in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It will spread coast to 
coast and rebound coast to coast as well. 
 
There will be no security in Saskatchewan, Ontario or Quebec once the sledge hammer is given to our 
farming industry. Ottawa appears to have taken only a haphazard, short-sighted view to solving the 
problem of giving the railways more money for freight costs. It hasn’t rationalized the long-term effects 
of the policy. In a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, the political aspects of the policy say one thing in Quebec and 
another in western Canada. This has upset our MLAs. They are simply bewildered by the economic 
miscalculations of the policy. Political favoritism and one-upmanship they can understand. What our 
MLAs can’t understand is this outright move to kill the goose that lays the golden egg for Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in anticipation of support from all members in this House I want to express my thanks for 
their participation in the debate and their support for this resolution. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 36 
 

Muller Weiman Domotor 
Berntson  Tusa Maxwell 
Thatcher  Hodgins Dirks 
McLeod  Sutor Myers 
McLaren Sveinson Zazelenchuk 
Garner  Sauder Blakeney 
Klein Petersen  Thompson 
Katzman  Glauser  Engel 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1996 

 
Currie  Parker  Lingenfelter 
Smith (Swift Current) Martens Koskie 
Boutin  Rybchuk Lusney 
Hampton  Young  Shillington 
 

Nays — 0 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — With leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I would move: 
 

That the motions relative to the Pepin plan debate in this House on February 22, 1983, along with 
the debate on those motions, be transmitted to the federal ministers of transport, economic 
development and agriculture, the officer of the Leader of the Opposition and the office of the leader 
of the New Democratic Party. 

 
I so move, seconded by the Minister of Education, the member for Regina Wascana. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I would ask leave of the House to 
move two condolence motions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition, the member for Regina Elphinstone: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he made to his community, his constituency 
and to this province. 
 
John Duncan MacFarlane, who died on December 8, 1982 at the age of 90, was a member of this 
legislature for the constituency of Melfort from 1934 to 1938. Born in Scotland in 1892, he came to 
Saskatchewan in 1910 and worked on farms in the south of the province before enrolling in 1912 in 
the first agriculture class at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
After serving with the Canadian Army Engineers and the Royal Air Corps during the First World 
War, he returned to Saskatchewan and settled near Aylsham. He was very active in agriculture and 
community affairs, and was for 21 years a director of United Grain Growers Ltd. He was an active 
member of the Masonic Order and the Shriners and served as president of the Aylsham branch of the 
Canadian Legion. 
 
In 1963, he sold his farm at Aylsham, and moved to Nipawin. In 1979 he had the honor of being 
inducted into the Saskatchewan Agriculture Hall of Fame. 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1997 

Mr. Speaker, although I did not know the man personally, I understand by his record and by 
indications of his many friends that he did in fact serve his community, his family and his province 
well. I offer the condolences on behalf of our side of the House, and would ask that the Leader of the 
Opposition in seconding this motion would speak likewise for his. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. MacFarlane served in this House from 1934 to 1938 
and accordingly none of us who are here now will have served with him. It is clear from the record of 
his accomplishments that he was a remarkable man. There weren’t too many people in 1912 who were 
going to an agriculture class at the University of Saskatchewan. He had what appears to be a 
distinguished war record, serving with the Canadian Army Engineers and the Royal Air Corps, yet 
another instance of a rather pioneering nature because not too many people were joining the Royal Air 
Corps in World War I. 
 
He then became active in agricultural and community affairs as the Minister of Agriculture, the Deputy 
Premier mentioned. He served as the director of the United Grain Growers for many years, and his 
contribution to agriculture was fittingly recognized by being inducted into the Saskatchewan Agriculture 
Hall of Fame, just shortly before his death, in 1979. I would, on behalf of the official opposition, join 
with the Deputy Premier in extending our condolences to the family, and our appreciation to Mr. 
MacFarlane for his substantial contributions to the government and the agricultural life of this province 
and for his service during World War I. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SAUDER: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to also tender my condolences to the 
family of Mr. MacFarlane under the circumstances, a man that I didn’t know all that well personally, 
although I did know him somewhat, a person that set an example for some of the younger people of the 
community as was brought out by the two former speakers on this. He was a professional in whatever he 
did. In his agricultural endeavors he did an excellent job. And some of his outlook on life, I think, was 
transmitted to me. The reason that I have a personal interest in this is because, in the years that he spent 
as a member in this Assembly, my father was a hired man, if you will, that worked on the farm for him. 
So it’s indeed with a certain amount of sorrow that I heard of his passing, and I also would like to extend 
my condolences to the family through this Assembly. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of an officer of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan, Major Donald Scott Calder, who died on January 30, 1983 at the age 
of 90; he was the Sergeant at Arms of the Legislative Assembly from 1966 to 1971. Born in 
Medicine Hat on August 31, 1893, he lived in Manitoba and British Columbia before serving as a 
teacher and vice-principal in Saskatchewan. A veteran of two world wars, he served with the 
Strathcona Horse during World War I, and with the Regina Rifle Regiment in World War II. He later 
became the official historian 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1998 

for the Regina Rifle Regiment, now the Royal Regina Rifles. He was an active sportsman and a 
lover of music, serving as a member of the Regina Male Voice Choir and of the Regina Operatic 
Society. 
 
The Legislature avails itself of this opportunity to record its tribute of respect to a former officer of 
the Assembly. 

 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I would like to add my words to those of the Deputy Premier in paying a 
tribute to Major Scott Calder. I served in the Legislature during the entire period when he was Sergeant 
at Arms, and he was a colorful Sergeant at Arms. He had a military bearing, coming from his service 
during World War I and World War II, and I think he added that dimension to our Legislature. 
 
I have known him for a good number of years in circles in Regina. He was prominent in military circles, 
was to be seen on November 11 going about the various levees, will have been seen on many occasions 
at the Royal Canadian Legion and the Institute, which now has a new name — the United Services 
Institute is the name that I recall it as, which is effectively the officers’ mess and I have seen him there 
on many occasions. He took a great interest in matters military, was proud of his service and rightfully 
proud of his service. And as was indicated, he recorded the service of people who served in the army, 
navy and air force in Saskatchewan with a good deal of interest and was the official historian for the 
now Royal Regina Rifles. 
 
He was, as indicated, an active sportsman. His contribution to the military life of our province was I 
think amply demonstrated at his funeral when all of the pallbearers were military people and when the 
senior officers of the various commands here in Saskatchewan were there in great numbers. There was a 
guard of honor, generally an indication of the respect in which he was held by his colleagues in the 
forces. 
 
I wish to join with the Deputy Premier in extending my condolences to Mrs. Scott Calder and to other 
members of the family and to record our appreciation for his service to this legislature. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Return No. 18 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY moved, seconded by Mr. Lingenfelter, that an order of the Assembly do issue 
for return no. 18 showing: 
 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Energy during the period May 8, 1982 to 
November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name of each individual for whom 
airfare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Since I’m caught here tonight without my support staff to tell me which 
of these we can answer in the present form and which ones we can’t answer in the present form — we 
don’t intend to unduly delay these — I’m going to ask leave to adjourn debate on all of these at this 
time. You will be getting information as soon as I’m assured that we can answer them in this form. I ask 
you to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
1999 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Return No. 19 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY moved that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 19 showing: 
 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Finance during the period May 8, 1982 to 
November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name of each individual for whom 
airfare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn debate and while I’m on my feet, if 
it’s procedurally possible to deal with these simultaneously, that is in accord with the wishes of this side 
of the House. We were suggesting, Mr. Speaker, that they all be simultaneously moved and all be 
simultaneously adjourned. 
 
As I understand the problem, those that are on the order paper in the name of a member who is not here 
cannot be moved on his behalf. So with the exception of the resolutions in the name of Mr. Yew, we, 
with leave of the Assembly, agree to simultaneously move them and adjourn debate on all motions for 
returns (debatable). Okay? Thank you, sir. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, the procedure proposed by the House Leader that each of 
those resolutions standing in the name of any one of Messrs. Blakeney, Lingenfelter, Engel, Thompson, 
Shillington, Lusney or Koskie be taken as moved, that we will sign the original motion so as to have the 
records complete and the House will regard them as moved, and regard them as being adjourned and 
standing in the name of the Deputy Premier, Mr. Berntson. 
 
Debates adjourned. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 
Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the By-election in the Constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly I would move first reading of 
Bill No. 62. 
 
Motion agreed to and by leave of the Assembly the bill ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the By-election in the Constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — It is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that this is merely a duplicate with 
the names and constituencies changed to two previous similar situations, one being in Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake, and the other one being in Estevan in the 1980 by-election. The purpose of this bill is 
to simply facilitate the seating of the apparent victor in the Prince Albert-Duck Lake by-election 
yesterday. In discussion 



 
February 22, 1983 

 
2000 

with the Leader of the Opposition earlier today, although admittedly he hadn’t yet seen the bill, he 
seemed to be in accord, so I would urge all members to support Bill No. 62. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and by leave of the Assembly referred to a committee of the 
whole later this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the By-election in the Constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, we have the assurance of the House Leader that this bill is 
in the same form as the ones that we have previously passed. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — That’s my understanding and if it is not I will take whatever action is 
necessary to make sure that it is. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act respecting the By-election in the Constituency of Prince Albert-Duck Lake 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill be now read a third time, and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:58 p.m. 
 


