






















































Hansard: May 04, 1983


1769 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 4, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Speaker: — It’s my privilege today to introduce some guests from three different areas of Canada. 
I’d like to introduce a young lady, Missy Parnell, Clerk Assistant of the Yukon Legislative Assembly, 
who was here at our Table about two years ago and is back for a visit today with the Yukon delegation. 
I’d ask the members to stand as they’re introduced so that the people will know who you are and where 
you are. 
 
William Brewster is the member for Kluane constituency in the Yukon. Piers McDonald, the member 
for Mayo constituency in the Yukon. And Peter Fraser, member for Mackenzie Great Bear constituency 
in the Northwest Territories. Now these members are going to be with us until the end of the week, and 
will be seeing the way our legislature and our committees operate. 
 
As well today, I have brought in reinforcements to help me along; yesterday the House was a bit unruly. 
Today I have the Hon. John Turner, Speaker of the Ontario legislature and his good wife, June. And my 
wife Anita is here to support me a bit as well. 
 
Would you welcome all of them to our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure at this time to introduce to you, and through you to 
the members of this Assembly, a group of visitors from the Douglas Park School in Regina, who are 
presently sitting in the west gallery. They are a group of 55 students from grades 7 and 8, along with 
their teachers, Wayne Wilson and Ken Farago. I hope that you young people will find the proceedings 
enlightening, and that you will have found that the information that you gather here will have had some 
relevance to the holding of your mock parliament at your school this year. Just for the information of the 
members, the information that I have received is that these young people interviewed a total of 54 of the 
MLAs this year. I would ask that the members on both sides of the House join me in extending a cordial 
welcome to these young people, and for your information, I shall be meeting with you later in the 
rotunda for pictures, and in room 218 for refreshments. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure I introduce to you, and to this 
Assembly, some 20 grade 12 students from the Bert Fox School in Fort Qu’Appelle. They are 
accompanied by, and they’ve told me many times that this was the case, the two best-looking teachers in 
the public school system in Saskatchewan, the principal, Mr. Pat McNally, and Mr. Dick Rathgerber. 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that the  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1770 

students have a very interesting and informative afternoon. I look forward with a great deal of pleasure 
to meeting with them after question period. I hope all hon. members will join with me in welcoming 
them in this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I trust, with leave of the House, I’ll be allowed the liberty 
of adding my welcome to yours, to our distinguished visitors from the Yukon territories. Some of them – 
at least two of them – I met this summer when I was in the Northwest Territories with the Canadian 
Parliamentary Association. I remember spending more than one very enjoyable afternoon with Mr. Pete 
Fraser, and I look forward to renewing those acquaintances and to meeting the other people this 
afternoon. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Early Retirement for Dismissed SGI Employees 
 

Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the minister in charge of SGI. On February 28th, you announced 
the dismissal of 120 people of Saskatchewan Government Insurance as part of what you described as 
streamlining – to trim the fat, I think, is the way you put it. On April 1st you announced that SGI is 
offering long-time employees an early retirement package, just a month after you fire 120 people, many 
of whom, I suspect, would have qualified for the early retirement program. My question is, Mr. Minister, 
were any of the 120 who were dismissed in February offered the early retirement package that you 
announced in April? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of that question and check it out for the 
member. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, when you are taking notice of the question, would you also 
inform yourself and report back to the House on whether or not all levels of employees were eligible for 
early retirement or whether just the senior levels of employees who were fired might have been eligible 
for early retirement? I am asking for a complete report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the hon. member that most, most of the people 
that were laid off in February were one- and two-year length of service employees, so I wouldn’t think 
there would be very many but, however, as I indicated in reply to his first question, I will take notice and 
provide the exact information as to whether or not those that were terminated prior to the April 1 
decision were in fact offered. I don’t know, but I’ll get the information for the member. 
 

Uranium City 
 

Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan, and it’s regarding the situation in Uranium City today. My question, Mr. Minister, has to 
do with the government’s claim that it will make Uranium City a regional service centre for the 
Athabasca basin for at least the next two years. The problem with that plan is that time is fast running 
out for Uranium City and the people there still don’t have any details as to how your government 
proposes to keep Uranium  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1771 

City alive after June the 30th. 
 
When Eldorado Resources stops paying out the $80,000 a month in lieu of taxes to the municipality, will 
he make a clear statement for the people of Uranium City today as to what the Government of 
Saskatchewan will provide after June 30th in terms of funding for the municipality, funding for the 
schools and also for the hospitals? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, the short answer, Mr. Speaker, to the question about a clear statement 
today: the answer is no. But to elaborate on it, and as I believe I did for the hon. member just in recent 
days, and as well to the people in Uranium City . . . As the hon. member will know, Mr. Speaker, there 
was a study commissioned and undertaken by Underwood McLellan to do a study on the future of 
Uranium City. The interim report came in on schedule. 
 
As we have said, we would ask for an interim report to make the initial decision that, yes, Uranium City 
would remain a regional service centre for the immediate future. I believe you used the term ‘two years.’ 
I don’t think in any communication from the government or from my department, the two-year term was 
ever mentioned. We say the immediate and foreseeable future, and really that’s very difficult to define. 
And it has a lot to do with the infrastructure that’s in place, with the capital construction of buildings, 
and very many other things as it relates to health, or the hospital, and school, and various other functions 
that must be carried on in that Athabasca basin. 
 
The final report of the study by Underwood McLellan is expected in this month of May. We’re hoping 
to have it before the end of this month, and we’re hoping to come to it with some very direct sort of 
answers to the various questions that you ask, and that people in Uranium City are asking. And 
meanwhile our department officials are keeping in good contact with the people of Uranium City with 
regard to that. But we are hoping for the report by the end of May and we’ll have some decisions on that 
basis right afterwards. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, are you indicating to the House today 
that you did not promise the citizens of Uranium City, and the district around Uranium City, that you 
would not make it a service centre? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, I said that after the interim report was in – we asked for an interim report 
part way through the very detailed type of report that must come down – and when we receive the 
interim report, and I just can’t remember the date there, but we said that we would make that decision 
prior to the ice road going out, and we did. And we made that decision, and the announcement that 
Uranium City would be a regional service centre for the Athabasca basin for the foreseeable future. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. I’m sure 
that the minister is aware that the problem with the report coming in towards the end of May, or about 
possibly into June, most of the civil servants and teachers will be leaving Uranium City, or will be 
making plans to move to other positions within the province, or wherever they can acquire positions. 
And the uncertainty that citizens of Uranium City and the staff of that municipality are facing . . . So that 
people can plan their lives more than a month or two in advance . . . Many of the teachers and the 
municipal employees have already found other jobs, or have plans to move this summer. How do you 
propose to find new people to move to  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1772 

Uranium City over the summer if these people all leave? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, some of those situations that the hon. member cites, Mr. Speaker, are 
rather hypothetical. What I would say is that we recognize very clearly that it’s a unique situation in 
Uranium City, and as we’ve talked about prior to this, and on many occasions in the last year. It’s a very 
unique situation. We are very much on top of it, as much as any government could be, and much more 
than what you people were when the initial announcement was made. We’re on top of the situation. We 
have, I believe, and the record will show that, we have handled it rather well until this point, and are 
continuing to do that. 
 
Having said that, I understand the unique situation that people who are now living in Uranium City in 
responsible positions, elected to council or whatever, are in difficult positions in terms of the uncertainty 
that they face on behalf of the remaining residents. We know that. We are addressing ourselves to that. 
And as soon as the report comes down, they have my commitment, the commitment of our department, 
the commitment of our government, that the decisions will be made forthwith once the report comes 
down and gives us some direction. There would be no sense to commissioning a report to go into the 
detail that’s necessary if we’re going to be making announcements prior to the report coming down. And 
that’s about all I could say at this time. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. Is the 
minister not aware that at a meeting last week, the municipal council unanimously passed a resolution to 
dissolve effective June 30th, and asked you to appoint a government administrator immediately? Will 
you indicate to the House when you will be doing so? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yes, I’m aware of that resolution. I’m aware that our 
department officials are in discussion with the council in that area. If it turns out that that must be the 
course of action that must be taken in this very unique situation, I can assure the House and the hon. 
member that we will take the action that’s necessary. But I would say, and I would ask the people in 
Uranium City and the member who represents that community, it’s in his constituency, I would ask you 
to bear with us while this report comes down and I will give you the commitment once again: the 
decisions will be coming in very short order after the report is tabled. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that the minister will agree that the turmoil 
that Uranium City is in and the hardships that the people that are left there are facing . . . And in order to 
maintain Uranium City as a service centre, most certainly one of the most essential parts of keeping it 
alive is going to be the airport in Uranium City. And my supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is: 
do you have any plans to take over that airport once . . . And the federal government has indicated that 
they will be shutting that airport down. Has the provincial government, do they have their plans in place 
to take over that airport and keep it operational? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the airport is . . . Certainly the transportation in that whole 
basin is an important thing. The airport’s one of them. Barge services are another aspect. The possibility 
of winter roads, another aspect. Land transportation, whatever you . . . All of this is addressed and is 
being addressed by the study that I mentioned earlier, as well as municipal services and hospital services 
and school services and all of that. And that’s what I say. There are some, there are many very important 
decisions to be made on the thing and I will give my commitment to you once  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1773 

again as it relates to the specifics of the airport, that those decisions will be announced as soon as the 
report comes down, as quickly as we can have a chance to look at it and come to some reasonable 
decisions on it. 
 
But we do give you this much, Mr. Speaker, and we know that there is a need for transportation services 
in the Athabasca basin. Whatever form they will take and whose jurisdiction they will fall under and so 
on are all subjects of some negotiation, certainly, with the federal government as it relates to 
transportation. But they are also decisions that will be based on the needs that will be identified, 
hopefully, in the report. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker, and I direct my final supplementary to the 
Minister of Highways. Can you indicate to the House at this time whether or not you have been 
negotiating with the citizens of Uranium City to open up the winter road for next year, and if so, what 
are your decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, the decision on the winter road will be made after the report has 
come in. And I have had an ongoing line of communication with the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan 
regarding all transportation-related activities, whether it be Uranium City or for the whole Athabasca 
region. 
 

STC Rate Increases 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the minister responsible for the 
Saskatchewan Transportation Company, and that has to do with the fact that passenger fares and parcel 
express rates have gone up by some 9.5 per cent. Could the minister explain to this House, and to the 
people of Saskatchewan, why these increases are beyond the government’s own inflation-minus-one 
guide-lines? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, two points to that question: number one, STC lost in excess of $2 
million for 1982, and the reason for that loss . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . We have maybe three or 
four points, Mr. Speaker, and if the members opposite would be polite enough to allow me to answer the 
question, I’m quite prepared to share this information with them. 
 
Number one, we have their super fast class bus that lost in excess of 6 . . . No, a little over $500,000. 
There was no rate increase for STC since August of 1981. And I think that’s quite obvious, because they 
were simply playing politics with a rate increase. They didn’t want to increase the rates of STC before 
the provincial election of April the 26th. Also, Mr. Speaker, there was 450,000 additional political miles 
added to the system before April of 1982. Those are some of the reasons, Mr. Speaker, why a very 
modest increase of 9.5 per cent was added to STC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — New question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you indicated that because of 
the losses that STC had, you had to increase it by some 9.5 per cent. Mr. Minister, you have, in 1982, 
sold buses, cut lines, taken buses out of service to different communities, for the purpose of being more 
efficient and saving money for the company. If you have been so efficient, without saying that it was 
purely the mismanagement of your government that created the losses within STC, if you are so 
efficient, why did you have to have the 9.5 per cent increase rather than using your own guide-lines of 
inflation minus one? 



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1774 

Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, we talk about mismanagement. It was the mismanagement of the 
NDP opposite that has caused us the problems with STC today. I will reassure the member opposite it 
wasn’t the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan who was the Government of Saskatchewan 
that bought six quarter-million-dollar white elephant buses for this executive bus service in the province 
of Saskatchewan that lost over half a million dollars. We did not inject 450,000 miles into the system 
before April 26th – the NDP were government – at a direct and indirect cost of 2.70. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
why the bus company is having problems. We are going to take corrective measures to change that. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. New question to the minister. Mr. Minister, I can only remind 
you that when the NDP were in power, the transportation company hadn’t been losing money at that 
time. It is only since you took power that they have lost the money, and you are saying that because of 
increased costs and all, you had to increase their rates. Well, Mr. Minister, the people on minimum wage 
also had increased costs. You didn’t increase their salaries any. There are a lot of people who have been 
cut down to a level of inflation minus one when it came to increase in wages. Why, Mr. Minister, are 
you saying that these people can afford to accept the increase in costs and take a lower settlement in 
salaries, and STC, which is a crown corporation that could afford to have just a modest increase, if 
necessary, hasn’t done so? Why did STC not do that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will try and refresh the member opposite’s memory once 
more. There has been no rate increase to STC since August of 1981. Now, we are in the year 1983. Nine 
and one-half per cent, I believe, is a very modest, a very acceptable increase. It will be in that 
approximately area of about $2 additional to travel between Saskatoon and Regina. The people that I’ve 
talked to in the province of Saskatchewan are very satisfied with the bus service that is there. It’s one of 
the lowest forms, and lowest cost of transportation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — A question to the Minister of Sask Transportation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Give the member an opportunity to ask his question. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, there have been, as you indicated, no increases since the fall of ’81, and I 
have indicated to you before that there have also been no increases to people on minimum wage since 
some time spring of ’82. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those people have not had an increase for the past year. They will not have an 
increase for another year; two years of no increases. Why do you not operate the buses in the same 
manner as you are telling the people to somehow operate their own lives and their own homes? Are you 
going to increase the amount of fares being charged to the senior citizens at this time – people who are 
using the bus service who are forced to use it? Are you going to also say that they are going to have to 
pay that 9 per cent increase, or are you going to give them a reduction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s too bad my colleague, the Minister of Labour, couldn’t 
handle this question right here today, but I think it’s fairly obvious that we have the lowest 
unemployment rate in Canada. We have the highest minimum wage in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problems with STC we have inherited, whether it’s the fast class bus  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1775 

system, the political miles that were added to the system by the former NDP government in hopes of 
trying to be re-elected. They didn’t fool the people of Saskatchewan; they still aren’t fooling them today. 
The people of Saskatchewan can accept a very modest increase like this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to ask the Minister of Highways whether in fact it’s true that those who use 
the STC, a large proportion of those that use STC are indeed senior citizens, lower-income people, can’t 
afford a car, many of them, single parents – those people are using STC to a large extent. And what I am 
asking you: are you not in fact here striking out again, as you have in many of your other policies, 
against the citizens who can least afford to be struck? This is Tory mismanagement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, then I guess the most obvious answer to this question is then: why 
did the former administration buy the quarter-million-dollar buses for the fast class service, the 
executive bus service, if they’re saying on one hand that it is only the elderly and the poor that ride it? 
That’s just a prime example, Mr. Speaker, of why STC is having problems today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — And further, Mr. Speaker, that’s another reason why on the April the 26th the 
people of Saskatchewan could no longer be fooled by the NDP mismanagers. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues have suggested, Mr. Minister, 
that the losses are part of recurring patterns: a pattern of hitting the poorest the hardest, a pattern of 
crown corporations who have been successful for years in serious trouble. There is another pattern, Mr. 
Minister, and that is the rate freezes, which you people promised during the election and imposed, have 
brought disaster in this province. 
 
I remind the minister that the anniversary date for increasing rates was August ’82, some time after you 
took office. My question to the minister is: will you not admit that the rate freezes, which you imposed 
in this crown corporation and in others, were ill-advised, ill-conceived, and a shoddy attempt to deceive 
the public about the realities of life in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — No, Mr. Speaker, I do not agree with the member opposite. I have the greatest 
deal of confidence in the management at STC. It was their recommendation that we go with this very 
modest 9.5 per cent increase in rate fares, but they are not recommending that we go out and buy six 
more one-quarter-million dollar buses that are not adaptable to western Canadian needs. It was most 
likely a sweetheart deal for the previous administration. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question to the Minister of Highways. Mr. Minister, 
are you not aware that the small business people and the farmers of Saskatchewan depend to a great 
degree, a large degree, on the express service provided by Sask Transportation during spring and during 
fall? They depend to a very large degree on that express service. Will you not, Mr. Minister, at a time 
when the income levels of both the small business and the farmers are down, reconsider the increases 
and allow these people to be able to stay within at least the inflation guide- 



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1776 

line increases, an increase which they would not have to bear simply because you have mismanaged the 
lines, you are cutting services, and you are making them pay for something that you were not able to 
control yourselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know of how many farmers or business men out in 
rural Saskatchewan that would ride on the Prairie Shuttle and have a meal and have coffee and listen to 
the stereo. I mean, they want service provided in rural Saskatchewan. They want their parts for their 
combines or their tractors. The business men want their regular express delivered. That is going to be 
done by STC. We have already gone to a standardization on the C.O.D. rate. Instead of it being from $4 
to $25, we have put a standard on there of $8, which is going to help all of the people in Saskatchewan. 
It’s not going to help their fast class bus service, because, Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry to say, it died. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — A question to the Minister of Highways. Mr. Speaker, I think that the farmers of 
Saskatchewan are very little concerned about the executive bus service. Their concern is what it’s going 
to cost them to get freight service, express service, to the communities that they live in at a time when 
they need certain parts in a hurry. That is what those farmers are concerned about, Mr. Minister. Will 
you not reconsider your increase and bring down the cost to these farmers and to the rural people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, no, we will not, because I will accept, and the board has accepted, 
management’s decision for this very modest rate increase. And, no, I will not take the advice of the NDP 
opposition to cut service to rural Saskatchewan, cut express to rural Saskatchewan. STC is in the 
business of providing transportation and express services to all the province of Saskatchewan at the most 
fair and reasonable cost, and the rates of STC are very comparable to the rest of the trucking industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 42 – An Act to amend The Time Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Time Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 – An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Municipal Employees’ 
Superannuation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44 – An Act to repeal The Tax Sharing (Pipelines) Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to repeal The Tax Sharing (Pipelines) 
Act. 



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1777 

Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 – An Act to amend The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Municipal Tax Sharing 
(Potash) Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 31 – An Act to establish the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat 
 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I’d like to ask a couple of questions with 
respect to this bill, and what I’m trying to find out is essentially what the secretariat is expected to do, 
and I don’t mean in detail what the secretariat is expected to do, but I note it’s called a secretariat, as 
opposed to a department, which presumably means that it will not run a wide range of program services 
and will not attempt to offer all of the programs which are offered by the Government of Saskatchewan 
to people of Indian and native origin. And I note in looking at the budget, which is helpful, that there is a 
proposal that the secretariat would handle grants to Indian and native organizations, and also there is a 
proposal that it administer some programs with 21 people. I won’t get into the details of that because I 
can raise those on estimates, but I think the question, therefore, I ask is: is it thought that this agency, 
this secretariat, will be primarily a co-ordinating agency maintaining liaison with native organizations, 
and assisting them in dealing with other agencies of government, or is it primarily a program agency, 
and a granting agency, which will have programs of its own? 
 
I will try to be a little more specific. If there is to be a program offering, say, special technical education 
for people of Indian and native origin, is it likely that it would be operated out of this secretariat? If 
there’s, SUNTEP, for example, Saskatchewan Urban Native Teachers Education Program, will that be 
offered by the Department of Education, or Advanced Education, or will it be offered by the secretariat? 
And if there is, and we have heard reference to that, an economic development program for native 
people, would that be offered by the secretariat or one of the economic departments? I think from that 
you will understand what question I am asking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Okay. In response with regards to the way the department will be run, I think 
those questions are more appropriately put to the minister when the estimates are being called, which 
will be fairly soon. It’s primarily the concept that we’re talking about here in the thrust of the 
reorganization, is for the Indian and native secretariat to be primarily a co-ordinating body of 
government, to try to co-ordinate the policy delivery, co-ordinate the approach that we would be taking 
to the native people of this province, as opposed to having it shot-gunned across government 
departments. 
 
What we have tried to do is to bring that into one focus, and this is the mechanism that we would see of 
bringing that into one particular focus. It does have power to make  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1778 

grants. It has power to develop policy. It has . . . to develop social and economic development, and 
clearly the policy development will come through there. The nature of that policy, and the emphasis on 
one versus the other type of policy, I think, is again more appropriately put to the minister responsible. 
This will simply allow us to co-ordinate that attack, and move in that direction. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I wonder if the minister can advise the Legislative Assembly how this Indian and native 
secretariat branch will function with respect to, say, another organization coming into existence. We 
have at present two parent native organizations, and it is my position, and the position of many, many 
other native groups and communities that those two native organizations are recognized. Namely, I’m 
speaking about the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians and the Association of Metis and Non-Status – 
AMNSIS – of Saskatchewan. How do you see your agency working with a different group that comes 
into the scene all of a sudden? Like, we’ve had the National Metis Alliance; they reported just a few 
days ago. How do you see the secretariat branch working with a new group? Would you recognize that 
group or would you not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, as I explained to the Leader of the Opposition, those type of questions are 
more appropriately put to the minister responsible when the estimates come up. This particular change is 
simply a reorganization or a structural change in government. How they approach that is going to be the 
policy that would develop out of this, and that’s certainly not for me to say, only to, I suppose, indicate 
that I don’t believe that this change of legislation would have impact one way or the other with regard to 
the point that you raised. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In other words, then, you don’t see this new branch undermining 
the two existing native organizations. Or do you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — What I am simply saying is that this particular change in legislation will have 
absolutely no impact on that, one way or the other. As to what policies are developed, and I certainly 
don’t want to speak for the minister responsible, you will be able to ask that specific question when 
estimates come up. Under his department he will have his officials there in order to respond as to what 
he would see his department doing. And I’m sure that he would anticipate that type of question and I’m 
sure that you can discuss it or debate it at that time. I think that’s the most appropriate forum by which to 
do those particular questions in, rather than here. 
 
Mr. Yew: — With respect to your government’s initiative to create a new Indian and native secretariat 
branch in your government, have you contacted the FSI and AMNSIS with respect to your initiative to 
gain some insight into say, to have the two native organizations in question have some input into your 
initiative? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I am, with regards to whether or not it has been discussed prior to it being 
announced, I would not be able to respond to that. I can respond in saying that the minister and his 
officials certainly have been dialoguing with those two organizations. With regards to how they are 
going to, again, approach the questions identified or otherwise, and again, I’m not trying to beg off 
answering the question – it’s just a more appropriate question to ask directly to the minister when his 
estimates are coming up. His estimates will not proceed until we deal with this so that we are then 
legally entitled to deal with that in the legislature. And that’s really what I’m saying now. 
 
But what we’re doing with this bill is to try to co-ordinate it, and I think that you would  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1779 

agree with me that if you . . . Rather than one area being in Agriculture, and another area in Social 
Services maybe, and another area in government services, and another area in industry and commerce, 
another area in Highways . . . Wherever it’s going to be, it makes far more sense to try to do it and try to 
collectively use your resources allocated in the most meaningful way, so it is properly co-ordinated and 
therefore more dollars, in effect, out to the appropriate people. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well, certainly the new branch . . . The bill that we’re discussing at the moment will have 
some legal implications, Mr. Minister. In terms of the constitutional talks that were held in March in 
Ottawa, do you see this bill having any implication either for or against recent agreements at the Ottawa 
talks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, my information it will have absolutely no impact on that at all, as to the 
structural changes of creating a secretariat. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just one question. Mr. Minister, and it’s number 10, 
financial assistance. 
 

The minister may, for any purpose provide financial assistance . . . (and I’ll just go right to the 
bottom of the paragraph) . . . within or outside Saskatchewan. 
 

I wonder if you could just explain why it would be within Saskatchewan and also outside Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Okay. I think first of all it’s a standard form of legislation; in other words, each 
legislation allowing a department to grant money has that sort of standard clause to it: within and outside 
of Saskatchewan. I think the purpose of it is to allow the flexibility, that if you get into perhaps a grey 
area where one might argue, well, this is not wholly within the province of Saskatchewan for some 
reason – there might be a dimension of it that is beyond our borders and yet still primarily focused here 
– you’d still be able to grant that and do it in a legal way without the wrath of the auditor coming down 
on you and saying that you didn’t technically have the legal power to do it. So it’s a standardized clause 
to give that flexibility that you’re not caught in something that really it was not designed to do. 
 
Clearly, from a government point of view, funding will be . . . you know, is aimed primarily at people 
within the province of Saskatchewan. We have no bent, if you like, to start funding organizations and 
making grants to people outside of the province of Saskatchewan, whether it’s within this department or 
any other department of government, although that does happen at some times, as you are familiar, 
perhaps not with this department, with other ones, but primarily the focus is going to be in 
Saskatchewan. This is simply a drafting position, and a standardized drafting position. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In terms of the administration and policy decision making of this new branch, Mr. 
Minister, how closely can the existing native organizations monitor and evaluate the functions of this 
new branch? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m sorry, but I didn’t really quite catch the drift of the question. Are you saying 
how . . . When you talk about organizations, are you talking about AMNSIS and FSI as to how they 
monitor it? Again, I simply say to you, that’s a type of question as to what the department . . . and how 
their dealings are with that particular  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1780 

organization. This bill will have nothing to do with regard to how they deal with it. 
 
I think that again that question should be addressed to the Attorney-General when the estimates come 
down for this particular secretariat, and you can get at that point into some questions back and forth. 
Clearly, this legislation does not prevent dialogue, nor should it prevent dialogue, and we will allow 
dialogue whether we had this particular legislation or not. And that would tend to be the position I think 
the Attorney-General would be taking. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I look at section 6(1) and I see that you have allotted an opportunity for an 
advisory committee. Do you foresee having this advisory committee established with your 
administration and the existing two native organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, again, I don’t wish to beg off the question. What I am saying is the 
legislation clearly allows for an advisory committee, and I think that’s the debate we have here. We’ve 
certainly allowed for an advisory committee. It’s a standard clause used in all the legislation, the 
reorganization legislation. As to what the structure of that committee, when it will be implemented, 
when it would be used and what form it would take, is a question for the estimates again, as to those 
type of questions. This will certainly allow that to happen. I take it that you support that concept of an 
advisory committee. There is nothing in this legislation that will prevent it from being AMNSIS and 
FSI. Nor would there be anything in this legislation to allow it to go beyond that, if that was the decision 
of the department or the secretariat. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I suppose the initiative proposed here by your administration is not all that bad, but I am a 
little concerned because the existing parent native organizations are concerned with respect to other 
organizations trying to come into existence. The legislation that you have here in front of us leaves it 
quite open for your administration to try to undermine existing organizations, existing parent 
organizations, and this is my main concern. This is my main contention with regard to this bill. 
Otherwise I see your initiative as being quite position, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — All right, I think the concept, if I can again indicate what we’re talking about, is 
we’re trying at this point in time to set up structures with regard to the policies that will be developed 
once this structure is in place. Certainly we’ll be open, I suppose, to debate – whether the government is 
doing the right thing or whether it’s doing the wrong thing. And that debate goes on, and that’s part of 
the political process. It’s important that we have that political process. 
 
What I am saying that this bill does is simply structure in a way that is flexible enough that it can take 
place. The main thrust of this bill is simply to co-ordinate and try to have that co-ordination in one place 
– organized. And it’s simply drafted around . . . It’s pretty much all standardized drafting here. There’s 
no special drafting for this particular secretariat as opposed to another department of government – 
whether it be Advanced Education, Highways, or Agriculture, you’d find the same clause in there. It’s 
just the manner of drafting is that you tend to draft legislation at least flexible. We are doing nothing 
different here than we did before. It’s a standardized form of drafting. I think you’ve indicated that you, 
in principle, support the concept of trying to co-ordinate that. 
 
Members opposite voted in favour of it in second reading. I can simply give you the assurance that there 
is no ulterior motives in the various sections of this particular bill, and any dispute that you might have 
as to the way government is handling that problem 



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1781 

is clearly a question for estimates for the Attorney-General. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I have two more questions, Mr. Minister. You have on section 10 here something that I 
really can’t understand. Under section 10 you have financial assistance, and I suppose that is to any 
person, like the bill states. Financial assistance can be given ‘to any person, agency, organization, 
association, institution or other body within or outside Saskatchewan.’ And I’m a little bit concerned 
about why would you have outside Saskatchewan on there? What was the objective of that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As I explained to the hon. member from Athabasca on the same question, that is 
a standardized granting clause on all legislation. We’re primarily interested in making grants to the 
people within Saskatchewan. I take it that the reason for it in this bill, as well as in other bills, is that you 
might end up making a grant, let’s say, to an organization that if you crossed the t’s and dotted the i’s 
were not technically and legally within the boundaries, or exclusively within the boundaries of 
Saskatchewan. You would end up then with perhaps a problem making that grant and drawing the ire of 
the auditor. It is illegal, in effect, what you did. 
 
Because I’m not fully cognizant of all the various organizations and where they come from, and whether 
they’re within Saskatchewan, or if there’s, you know, edges of them outside of Saskatchewan, but I 
throw this just as an example. And perhaps it’s not completely accurate, but by way of trying to explain 
it to you . . . The government made grants last summer to the world conference being held in Regina, 
let’s say for example. Now I suppose you can get into the legal argument: was that a Saskatchewan . . . 
within Saskatchewan, was that organization that the grant was made . . . Was that a Saskatchewan 
organization, or is it not? 
 
To avoid that type of an argument and still have the flexibility of funding, you have to draft the 
legislation this way. That is the purpose as to why it is being drafted. Again, as to who the grants were 
made to, again that’s a legitimate question. Should it be granted to A, B or C? Clearly the intention with 
this is a standardized form of drafting, and we have no intention, quite frankly, as a government, of 
doing a lot of funding outside the province. Any funding that we can keep within the province makes 
eminent sense to us, as I’m sure it would to you, were you government. 
 
Mr. Yew: — One final question, Mr. Minister: have you received any formal support to the creation of 
this new agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m sorry, I cannot answer that question of support. I can say that, as a general 
response, we haven’t had a lot of negative response with regard to the total reorganization of 
government, in the sense of the reorganization bills that we have put forward. It hasn’t been such that it 
was a tremendous resistance to the things that we are doing. There could be a disagreement between 
opposition and government as to why we’re doing it; obviously that has been debated in here. But as to 
the structural change, we have had no serious opposition to this or to any other one. 
 
Mr. Yew: — One final question, then. But you have not received any formal endorsement of any sort 
from the existing native organizations – have you or have you not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As I say, I simply can’t say. I don’t know. I suppose what I can say is both 
members, yourself and the member for Athabasca, have indicated that generally you are in support of 
the principle and the concept. I accept that, and I’m  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1782 

encouraged by that statement. I simply take it from that. Whether we have in fact received endorsement 
for it or letters on it, I don’t know. I can only try to assure you that it hasn’t created a lot of serious and 
strong opposition or criticism. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I suppose, Mr. Minister, what I’m trying to establish here is that at least the existing native 
organizations will be consulted and will be involved with your new agency to the fullest extent possible, 
because those are the two recognized bodies, native bodies, of Saskatchewan, and I guess this is what 
I’m trying to base my questions on. If I can get assurance from you that the existing native organizations 
will be consulted, will be involved, and will have input into your new agency, I have no argument with 
the bill at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Okay, I think the point, again, I would simply wish to make is that those are 
questions more appropriately put to the estimates of the minister responsible for the secretariat as to how 
he plans to proceed. You can’t simply pass a bill in the legislature that would say: ‘In the future here is 
the commitment that we have to make as to who we are going to consult with as to how the organization 
works.’ I think if you develop any kind of an organization, if you’re going to be a government that tends 
to want to hear what the people have to say, hear from the various action groups or lobby groups, then, 
as a general rule, I would simply say yes, that we would listen to them. 
 
I’m simply putting a mechanism or a structure in place here, that will then be manned by X number of 
people and I suppose, over a period of time, they will develop policies and probably change those 
policies, as times require all policies to be changed. So from that point of view, that’s really the ongoing 
basis of what government is about. 
 
So I’m simply saying, the bill is here. It’s designed to try to co-ordinate what we’re doing. Any specific 
questions as to how that department will function today, or a year from now, is clearly questions for 
estimates – grievance before supply – and that’s the purpose of the estimate process. I simply don’t want 
to beg off the question, but I also don’t want to try to explain what another minister is doing in his 
department and his intentions are in his department. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just one final supplementary, Mr. Minister. What kind of an impact do you see Bill 31 
having on the native community in terms of the social, cultural and economic conditions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, we believe that it will allow us to better address those particular questions 
and that’s quite frankly why we’re doing it this way. So from that point of view it is our hope, it is 
clearly our intention, that this new focus, co-ordinated effort will have a positive effect, and that’s 
clearly why we’re trying to do it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I just want to make a brief comment. The area that I want to comment is in respect 
to the question addressed by my colleague from Cumberland, and that is the degree of consultation that 
you have had with the particular groups which will in fact be affected by the establishment of a 
secretariat. And I’m rather surprised at the nature of the answer of the Minister of Finance. And I say 
that because I know in the past in the areas of, for instance, liquor legislation, before we introduced it 
into the House, we did in fact set up a legislative committee. 



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1783 

I can recall we were bringing in amendments to The Mechanics’ Lien Act, when we were government 
about a year ago. And one of the various objections that was raised by now the Minister of Justice is 
whether or not we have consulted with the construction industry in order to determine the consequences 
of the legislation. 
 
Here we have, it seems to me, a specific group that we are working with – the AMNSIS (Association of 
Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) people and the Indian people. And I am basically very 
shocked that the Minister of Finance is begging off from the direct answer in respect to what 
consultation is going on, because following the second reading, and a number of the leaders were here 
present, they in fact, it is reported in the press, were not in agreement, and were not in agreement with 
the concept as initiated, and had some doubts, or indicated that their consultation process was lacking in 
so far as the development. 
 
And so what I am saying here is I think that the member from Cumberland raises a very, very legitimate 
concern. And how can you have, Mr. Minister, a concept which you are trying to purport to the people 
of Saskatchewan that this is a government that does consultation, and at the same time you come in here, 
not even the minister in charge of the legislation, and give us this that we have to transfer over to the 
estimates after the bill is enacted? I would have thought that you would have come in here with a 
documentation of the discussions that you have had with the various groups, and whether or not in fact 
you have a consensus. So I guess in conclusion what I’m saying: what in fact has been the consultative 
process with the two major groups which my colleague from Cumberland has alluded to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, you made reference to the mechanics . . . (inaudible) . . . and The 
Mechanics’ Lien Act . . . obviously was a policy change as to the way The Mechanics’ Lien Act would 
function – a policy change in the sense that you were going to do something, something different that 
would impact with regards to that. I raise that for this point: what you’re talking about, and I think what 
the various native groups were talking about, is what policy will this particular department pursue? What 
policy will this department pursue? This will not mean that a consultative process would be any different 
than it would be prior to this legislation coming into fact. That’s all I’m simply saying. 
 
The government tried when it first came into office, tried to develop a system of co-ordinating that under 
one minister where it was under a variety of ministers. That was obviously talked about, that 
co-ordinating approach. Well, you would still be able to do your consultation whether it was a 
secretariat, whether it was a department, or whether it had stayed before. The consultative approach is 
how you ought to run government. And that’s simply the way I’m trying to answer the question to you. 
This is a structure with regard to how we’re going to deliver that service in government, and how it’s 
going to be structured, not what the policy is going to be. And that’s all I’m simply saying. When that 
policy change is implemented, you clearly have the right to ask questions. I’m simply saying what an 
estimates function and question would be. 
 
Mr. Yew: — With respect to the advisory committee then that section . . . With respect to the advisory 
committee, have you established any communications and agreements, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, certainly you couldn’t establish any agreement, because until the 
legislation is law, it would not be a valid and legal agreement of any kind. So all 



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1784 

I’m saying is: what this legislation allows, and does nothing more than that, is allows for an advisory 
committee, and it lets that advisory committee be whatever it is, and I assume that at the point in time 
when that advisory committee is appointed, it will be set out the components of that advisory committee. 
At that point in time, I simply say, you disagree with it, and what changes you think should be made to 
it, or what you think was wrong with it, or what you think was right with it. This simply allows us to 
have them, and I’m sure you agree with me that an advisory committee, and that this makes sense to 
have this in the legislation. That’s all this does; that’s all this bill does. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
Clauses 2 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
Clause 13 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 – An Act to establish the Indian and Native Affairs Secretariat 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I move the amendments now be read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I move the bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

EXECUTIVE COUNCIL 
 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 10 
 

Item 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, it’s a pleasure for me to introduce, on my right, Mr. Derek Bedson, 
deputy minister to the Premier and secretary to the cabinet. Beside me is Mr. Michael Leddy, adviser 
and assistant principal secretary to the Premier. And behind me, or behind Mr. Leddy is Mr. Brian 
Leibel, acting director of administration for Executive Council. And directly behind me is Mr. Gren 
Smith-Windsor, assistant cabinet secretary and Clerk of the Executive Council. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, I want to start off with some questions which 
are broad questions of government policy. And I want to start by asking you what your general policy is 
with respect to the development of northern Saskatchewan. You, Mr. Premier, will be aware that the 
previous government, and I suspect previous governments in different distributions, relied upon 
traditional industries – that is, fishing and hunting and trapping; relied upon mining, largely carried on 
on a joint venture basis with private mining companies; relied upon private exploration for minerals; 
relied upon woods operations, some of them commercial and  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1785 

attached in a general way to the Prince Albert pulp mill, and some of them only quasi-commercial and 
designed primarily to provide employment, and secondarily to provide posts or lumber or whatever the 
product might be. 
 
Then there were government projects – the construction, principally in the 1970s, of roads and housing 
and airfields and sewer and water systems. Those were the engines which gave rise to a good deal of 
development in northern Saskatchewan, and a good deal of employment. Efforts were made to protect 
the environment by insisting upon environmental studies before major projects were proceeded with. 
And it will be recalled that the proposal to build a power dam on the Churchill River was preceded by an 
environmental study, and it was decided not to go ahead with that project. Similarly, the decision to go 
ahead with a mine at Cluff Lake was preceded by an extensive inquiry into uranium development in 
northern Saskatchewan, headed by a Mr. Justice Bayda, as he then was, now Chief Justice Bayda. And 
similarly projects that might have involved dams on the Fond du Lac River were subject to an 
environmental inquiry, and that project did not go forward. Generally, then, a varied pattern of economic 
development, combined with a great increase in the amount of educational opportunity which was 
available in the North, together with efforts to protect the environment, efforts of the kind that I have 
indicated to you. 
 
In that context, I wonder if the Premier would outline what the general directions of his government are 
with respect to development in northern Saskatchewan and the provision of employment in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I suppose the main element of our development strategy for 
northern Saskatchewan is to make sure that the northern half of the province of Saskatchewan becomes 
part of mainstream Saskatchewan, both in terms of employment opportunities as well as in terms of the 
provision of goods and services for the public sector, particularly. Clearly that is a difference in the 
industrial strategy for northern Saskatchewan compared to the previous administration. But I won’t 
dwell on that. 
 
Given that change in policy to incorporate the life-style and the opportunities of northern Saskatchewan 
into mainstream Saskatchewan, and indeed into mainstream Canada, and in North America, our strategy 
includes the development of many of the things that are taking place across northern Canada and 
neighbouring provinces, right from coast to coast. They include education. They include health services. 
They include, clearly, the development of mines, many things with respect to resource development 
linked to the activity that’s there today: copper, zinc, uranium, previous metals like gold, that have both 
public and private enterprise involved. It also includes tourism, agriculture. We’re working on projects 
now that have some increased potential with respect to wild rice, game farming and so forth, timber, 
fish, clearly water projects – as things that hold a great deal of potential. 
 
The kinds of activities that we’ve identified for Saskatchewan are now being included in northern 
Saskatchewan, and in our estimation were included before. So I guess I would say that the whole 
question of our industrial strategy, that includes food, includes energy, includes mining, tourism, and 
technology and communications, would apply equally in northern Saskatchewan as they do in what has 
traditionally been known as southern Saskatchewan, or the main part of the province. 
 
In general, it’s to change the opportunities for people in traditionally or classical, or I  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1786 

guess under the former administration, northern Saskatchewan, to make it a very vital part of 
mainstream Saskatchewan, and indeed mainstream North America. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I wish the Premier would be a little more 
explicit. I think mainstream Saskatchewan depends upon agriculture, manufacturing for the prairie basin 
market, and the development of oil and potash. And once you disposed of those items, you have 
disposed of a very, very large number of the income-generating aspects of the economic life of 
mainstream Saskatchewan. Which of those do you think has major potential in northern Saskatchewan? 
Is it agriculture, manufacturing for the prairie basin market, the development of oil, or the development 
of potash? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would just say that, again, economic development in the 
province of Saskatchewan involves our entire industrial strategy. It involves agriculture and renewable 
resources, and it involves the non-renewable resources like mining. I don’t know if there’s any potash in 
parts of northern Saskatchewan where there’s uranium or gold or copper, but again at Allan, 
Saskatchewan, or at Belle Plaine, there may not be any uranium either, so where you find those metals 
you mine them. 
 
We are exploring an industrial strategy for the entire province that includes agriculture, which is both in 
all corners of the province. And I mentioned two that are indicative or peculiar to northern 
Saskatchewan, and that is wild rice, which is a growing world market and one that we’re exploring . . . 
The same with game farming, the same with fishing, the same with timber – those are renewable. Those 
renewable activities take place in southern Saskatchewan, if you will, and in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
We want those same opportunities to be developed all across the province, not having a separate 
jurisdiction that may force people interested in mining or interested in agriculture or interested in 
something else, having to deal with a local northern co-ordinator that may not know anything about any 
of them. So we want to connect Agriculture straight through the entire province. We want to connect 
Economic Development and Trade straight through the entire province, from one border to the other. It’s 
to make sure that the strategy throughout Saskatchewan is consistent from one corner to the other. 
That’s the basic policy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I understand what you’re saying. I want to ask 
a few questions with respect to whether or not you think it’s entirely applicable. 
 
If a potash mine is opened at Lanigan or at Colonsay, there’s no great difficulty in getting people from 
the Lanigan area or the Colonsay area to work at the potash mine, and there’s no great difficulty in 
persuading the operators of the mine to hire people from the Lanigan or the Colonsay area. And the 
record illustrates that and one doesn’t need to prove it because history has proved it. Not so with respect 
to a uranium mine at Wollaston Lake. It is not self-evident as it very nearly is if you open a potash mine 
at Colonsay. It is not self-evident that if you open a uranium mine at Wollaston Lake or near it that there 
is going to be any significant amount of employment enjoyed by people in that area. And what I would 
like to ask you is: what is the policy of your government with respect to ensuring that economic 
development in northern Saskatchewan provides employment for long-time residents of northern 
Saskatchewan as opposed to employment for people from southern Saskatchewan or elsewhere in 
Canada who may move in to accept the employment? 



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1787 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, pardon me, our policy is to provide equal 
opportunity for every Saskatchewan resident – equal opportunity. And for those that may be less equal 
because of perhaps less training and so forth, we have made a major commitment for training and 
particularly training in technical skills. That’s why we have announced a major expansion in technical 
training facilities in the province of Saskatchewan and indeed in one of our more northern cities, Prince 
Albert – not northern but it’s about the middle of the province, not even in the middle – that has the 
capacity to train 632 students annually. Now that’s one of the biggest in this part of the country and 
certainly will be one of the newest and probably the most contemporary, one of the most contemporary, 
in North America. The capital cost of this has increased, I believe, from about $15 million to about $25 
million and employs lots of people. 
 
Basically what I want to point out, I’m dwelling on it for the hon. member, is that we want to provide 
Saskatchewan people with as many of the skills as possible to take advantage of the resource 
development. One of the best ways in the long run – and I believe the hon. member used the word long 
run or sustained; if he didn’t, I will – sustained employment opportunities for Saskatchewan people is to 
have them well educated. I would point out the projects. Even today, the hon. member is certainly aware 
of this, I believe the figures are about, Key Lake, I think we’re employing about 1,000 people right now, 
1,000 men and women. And I’ll get the figures, but off the top I think almost half of those people are 
local people and/or native people in that area, or within 100 miles or so many miles of that area, which is 
indicative of the activity. There is a joint public-private venture where we are trying to provide 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people. 
 
But again, I will admit that previous administrations didn’t get the job done. To train everybody, and to 
bring everybody up to the level of comparable training – it’s a long process, and it’s not easy. But it’s 
part of our complete industrial strategy for across the province of Saskatchewan – public expenditures, 
private expenditures, labour and education, and education here means technical training. Now, we have 
sacrificed probably some expenditures at the university level because of this. 
 
But it is a major commitment, and it’s an expansion over any commitment made by perhaps others, in 
terms of the capacity for us to produce that quality of an individual to take advantage of these resource 
skills, all over the province including the North. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Minister, are you caring to predict that two years from now, when there are 
presumably students at the technical institute at Prince Albert, that a significant number of them will be 
native Northerners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — When we provide educational facilities in the province of Saskatchewan, we can 
only encourage people to use them. We encourage people from all walks of life to use them. It’s 
impossible for me to predict the breakdown of the graduates two years from now when we’re turning out 
600 new graduates, or 500, or whatever the case may be – what per cent they are. I can’t do that. I can 
only encourage people to attend, and clearly you can bring a horse to water but you can’t make it drink. 
We can provide the educational facilities and we would encourage people to use them, to take advantage 
of the development of their skills and of our resources. But it would be a little difficult for me to predict 
the demographic breakdown of the graduates two years from now. 



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1788 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I think this comes to the nub of the matter. 
Many, many people in northern Saskatchewan are of a very different cultural background than the 
people in southern Saskatchewan. They have not shown any disposition in large numbers to come to 
southern training institutions. And this is true not only in Saskatchewan, but elsewhere. 
 
I take it you are saying that you are going to provide the technical training facilities in southern 
Saskatchewan, southern being defined as that area inhabited by people of non-native extraction 
primarily, including Prince Albert, and if natives do not come out of the North to take the training, then 
that’s their problem. I suggest to you that it’s our problem as well, and I think that it is not necessary that 
technical training be obtained only at a technical institute. Technical training can be obtained on the job, 
as it has been by the close to 50 per cent of the people who are of native origin who are building Key 
Lake. 
 
I want to remind the minister, the Premier, that that number is there because of a specific requirement in 
the contracts that the developers of Key Lake were required to sign, that 50 per cent or thereabouts – it 
varied a bit, depending on different phases – but roughly 50 per cent of their employees would be of 
native origin. And it has, on the Premier’s own admission, been a success in that sense of the word, as I 
think any realistic analysis of the results of Cluff Lake would say it was a success. What I want therefore 
to ask is: is your government pursuing the same policy of requiring people who develop uranium mines 
to employ a given stated percentage of people of northern origin, a given stated percentage set out in the 
contracts by which they get their surface leases or other rights to develop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, two responses, very briefly. I’m advised by our educational 
people that we are providing training centres, not only in technical education, not only in Prince Albert, 
but in fact in northern communities. One is La Ronge, for example, and I don’t know the extent of the 
expansion there, but it’s my understanding that there are some educational provisions being provided 
and certainly . . . I mean, it’s part of our industrial strategy to provide education throughout 
Saskatchewan. Now, I mention the P.A. one because it is brand new and it is sort of in the middle, so 
people from both corners, or all four corners, can get there. But it’s not limited to Prince Albert, and I 
want to make sure that that’s clear to the public – that there are other places. I believe there’s the 
expansion of the same sort of facilities in Meadow Lake. There may be expansion of other facilities 
farther north. 
 
With respect to ensuring that there is, or are, I suppose you might call them affirmative action 
procedures and guide-lines, etc., for the participants up there, what we are striking to find and striking to 
build is a balance. I suppose our view of a balance may be a little different than the previous 
government’s view of a balance, but a balance that encourages public and private enterprise to work 
together, provide as many opportunities as possible and include local people. 
 
Now the guide-lines designated by the previous administration may not be copied exactly by this 
administration, but there will be guide-lines. Certainly the guide-lines and the incentives provided to 
encourage more people to come in and develop and work and create and explore and mine, etc., may be 
different than under the previous administration, that is to provide more jobs for more people which, as 
the hon. member says, the objective is on-the-job training. So the key is to create economic activity to 
provide the jobs, and that’s the balance that we’re trying to strike in our industrial strategies, to include a 
healthy balance of private and public in areas so people can feel  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1789 

comfortable with the development and they can have on-the-job training as well as, I suppose, the more 
academic training in technical schools, whether it is La Ronge, or Meadow Lake, or Prince Albert, or 
maybe some other places that I just don’t have at hand. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I want to pursue this a little bit because I think 
we obviously do not agree on what is balance. I would have thought that where a major economic 
development is going to take place in a remote area which offers very few other prospects for 
employment, and where the population is increasing very rapidly because of the relatively late 
introduction of high-grade medical services, as happened in northern Saskatchewan after World War II, 
that a balance would be at least 50 per cent of the employment being provided by the people indigenous 
to the area, and not more than 50 per cent of the employment being provided by people who come in 
from outside the area and had no other relationship with the area, and no historic relationship with the 
area. And certainly I would have thought that that was the minimum level of employment which 
economic activity ought to offer to the people indigenous to the area. 
 
The story of development in remote areas occupied by native people in Canada makes it very, very clear 
that there is no necessary relationship between economic development in an isolated area and 
employment of the people who are indigenous to that area unless you make it happen. 
 
There are mines all across northern Canada – which are in areas previously occupied by native people – 
whose work-force is, as to approximately 100 per cent, people who have come into the area, and whose 
work-force is, as approximately zero, people who are indigenous to the area. And you can find that all 
across northern Canada. 
 
And the question is whether or not we’re going to develop our North by that model. I’m simply saying: 
come in, develop the mine, hire the people who you think you would like to hire, do not discriminate 
against anybody, but otherwise hire the people you want. The result will be as it has been everywhere 
else; that they will hire the people who they are comfortable with, and the people the are comfortable 
with are people with whom they had worked elsewhere, non-native people who are not ordinarily 
indigenous to the area. 
 
It takes a very, very conscious effort to break that cycle. And I believe that the Government of 
Saskatchewan, regardless of who occupies the treasury benches, should pursue that endeavour. And I 
know of no way that one is likely to achieve any better results than combining technical education, 
which the minister has quite properly emphasized, the Premier has properly emphasized, and specific 
guide-lines requiring native employment which the Premier has de-emphasized. 
 
I remind the Premier that so far as I am aware the contract which he has recently signed for the 
development of the second phase of the Gulf mines property, if I may call it that, the Rabbit Lake 
property, does not provide for specific guide-lines as the one at Key Lake did. Key Lake has been really 
quite an outstanding success, as has Cluff Lake, and one can compare that with, let us say, Eldorado, 
where the work-force would never be more than 5 or 10 per cent native, because it started at a different 
base, and compare that with Key or Cluff, where the work-force has frequently been of the order of 50 
per cent and sometimes more. 



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1790 

I’m asking the Premier whether he believes that the Cluff Lake-Key broadly model, stated, is the way 
we should go, or the Eldorado model, broadly stated, is the way we should go, which produced 
remarkably little employment for native people even though it was in the very heart of country 
traditionally occupied by native people. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — To add, Mr. Chairman, to the previous information, we do have satellite training 
centres in the North – part of the Outreach program. And these are continuing to be expanded. So I agree 
with the hon. member, Education is extremely important, and we’re going to focus on that. And I want 
to add to that. I think they’re in La Ronge, Meadow Lake, and possibly Buffalo Narrows. 
 
But one of the things that the native population said to me, and I believe I’m sure that they’ve said to the 
hon. member opposite, is that the forced assimilation and many examples of the affirmative action have 
not been satisfactory. And the people that were sitting in the rooms of the legislature recently said, ‘It’s 
not good enough.’ When I was in Ottawa at the constitutional conference many of the chiefs and many 
of the leaders said, ‘I don’t want forced assimilation. I want to be able to have the choice, and I want to 
be able to be educated enough to have the choice to decide where I want to go, not just because 
somebody else decides you will work there because it’s the law.’ And I respect that. That’s why I’ve 
said we want to strike a balance. I want to strike a balance all across Saskatchewan that says that there is 
the opportunity, and to have that opportunity and to exercise it, it takes time. 
 
Now I don’t want to dwell on the record of the previous administration. We dwell on the record of the 
. . . I don’t want to. We go on in terms of the problems that have existed year after year after year, and 
many cases didn’t get better. And I’ll just leave it at that. There is much more we can do. All I’m 
suggesting is that the native communities are saying to me, and many of their leaders are saying to me, 
‘I don’t want this forced assimilation,’ and in many cases this affirmative action hasn’t been successful 
because they are just being hired because it is the law. And it didn’t do anything to the dignity of the 
individual. It didn’t end up in a successful relationship either way. If they can have the education and the 
training, and feel comfortable with it, the whole world opens up to them because they’ve developed their 
talents. 
 
I respect that. I’m going back and saying, your arguments in some circumstances, in some arrangements, 
have validity. I’m not saying that our balance will be the same as what you think is the balance. I believe 
that we’ll have more of a balance, or our balance will emphasize education and training, as opposed to 
saying this is the law and you must hire these people regardless of their qualifications, because 
education and the development of personal skills, human resource development, is extremely important 
to everybody. It isn’t isolated to natives. It isn’t isolated to any ethnic origin. It isn’t isolated to any 
individual. That’s the key to develop anywhere. So our balance is an industrial strategy based on, again, 
education, industry, government, and labour. That combination. And I want to see that balance in 
northern Saskatchewan, as I do in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I certainly hope there’s a technical training 
facility at Meadow Lake, if there isn’t it’s been closed down the last couple of years. And I certainly 
hope there’s one at Buffalo Narrows, because if there isn’t it’s been closed down in the last couple of 
years. And I hope there is one in La Ronge, and if there is one it is one which has been expanded in the 
last year or two because the La Ronge facility was not a particularly adequate technical facility a year 
ago. And I am glad to hear, if you’re saying so, that there is now a much larger  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1791 

technical training effort going on at La Ronge, other than that which was offered by the community 
college prior to that. 
 
I am again saying to the Premier that if he is relying upon education being offered in Meadow Lake or 
Prince Albert for people at Southend, Reindeer, or people at Cree Lake, or people at Patuanak, I think 
he’s relying on a very weak reed because I do not think that they will seek the training. I think that 
efforts have to be made to take training to these villages and towns which have been isolated in the past. 
And as I say, all training doesn’t have to be in a technical institute. A lot of it can be on the job. Many of 
the people who are now working, and working quite successfully in mining operations in northern 
Saskatchewan, got their first job with the Government of Saskatchewan, operating road construction 
equipment, and learning to operate it successfully, and constructing roads and getting training at the 
same time, and are now working at Cluff Lake or Key Lake as the case may be. 
 
Nobody suggests that this is a perfect model, but I will be exceedingly interested in seeing whether or 
not any other model of getting them to come down to Prince Albert is going to be more successful. And 
that’s the real test. The people of northern Saskatchewan are our fellow citizens. They are going to share 
in the bounty of the industrial production of this province, and the mining production and the 
agricultural production. And they want to share in the production end as well as the consumption end. 
They are not now taking their full share in the production end and they know it and we know it – and 
they want to. 
 
And so far, we’re not doing that well. The rate of unemployment in northern Saskatchewan is 
depressingly high, and has increased in the last year, and I don’t think anyone will deny that. I am 
raising real questions as to whether the strategy outlined by the Premier is going to be successful, and 
urge him to consider whether or not he ought not to continue to have employment requirements when a 
major mine is being developed. I take it from the language he has used that he is talking only now in 
generalities, and there will be no requirement that a given number of people of northern origin be hired. 
And if that be so, then I think that’s a mistake. And I want to urge that point of view on the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I take the hon. member’s recommendations, and we consider 
all the possibilities. We operate the mines, Key Lake and that joint venture, and we know whether they 
are failures and the successes. We look at them. We look at what we can do in terms of education, in 
terms of Outreach – the whole balance of elements. It’s a matrix of things that you do at the same time, 
and I’ll take his advice under consideration, and we’ll give it our best shot. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Premier, don’t you feel that uranium development, mining and forestry that happens in 
your front yard . . . Don’t you feel that Northerners ought to have a say, that Northerners ought to be 
given preference over such developments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m not sure that I understand the consequences of your question. Those that live 
beside a mine are obviously closer to the mine and it has a bigger impact on them. That’s true. That’s 
true on Colonsay, as well as it is true in Uranium City. So I’m not quite sure where you’re leading us. 
 
Mr. Yew: — No, Mr. Premier, my question was this: like the Leader of the Opposition, my colleague 
from Elphinstone was suggesting, there ought to be a special clause for Northerners – when a 
development is happening in your own backyard it should be  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1792 

natural that whatever development is happening, like in northern Saskatchewan, uranium development, 
forestry or whatever, people in northern Saskatchewan ought to be given special preference. Don’t you 
agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I believe that they, your colleague and the Leader of the Opposition, pointed 
out that prior to any developments there are environmental studies, there are impact studies, there are 
local hearings, where people express their views on that development. They expressed a view, number 
one, they would like to have the employment and the economic activity so that they can increase their 
wealth and have on-the-job training. Secondly, they expressed the view on the other hand that it may 
have an impact on their environment and on their traditional way of life. We all wrestle with those. I 
mean, when you break the prairie it changes the prairie. And it has some benefits and it has some costs. 
You lose the prairie-dog towns on one hand, but you can grow wheat on the other. The same with 
mining. You start mining and it changes from one life-style to another. But they have opportunity to 
express themselves. As your colleague has pointed out, some of the projects go, some of them stop 
because of impact studies, and environmental and others. So you’re right. They have a significant say. I 
couldn’t argue that. 
 
Mr. Yew: — No, what I’m trying to get at, Mr. Premier, is the fact that the hon. member from Meadow 
Lake expressed on March the 24th that they wanted to change the existing surface lease agreements 
specifying to an extent that a certain number of northern native people ought to be hired at those 
developments, and I raised the question at that particular time and I raised it here in the legislature with 
regards to that surface lease agreement. Where did Mr. McLeod, hon. member from Meadow Lake – I 
see him walking – get his advice? Did he get his advice from the local councils in northern 
Saskatchewan? Did he get the advice from the LACs, the LCAs? I guess not too many people here know 
they refer to the local councils in northern Saskatchewan as LACs – local advisory councils and local 
community authorities. And my question to the minister was: where did you get your advice from? Did 
you get it from an individual or did you get it from a local council? And he said it was from an 
individual. 
 
My question is, you know, the seriousness of the question that the member for Elphinstone was raising, 
the seriousness of that issue is the fact that there is at this moment 85 per cent unemployment at the very 
minimum, and possibly 98.9 per cent unemployment at the maximum. My question to you is: will you 
retain those surface lease agreements? I mean the clauses specifying that a certain number of 
Northerners will be maintained in the work-force. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, this is somewhat like DNS estimates, but I understand from the minister that 
the surface lease agreements are in force, and section 3 of those agreements deal with socio-economic 
concerns and impacts, and they are to be recognized and dealt with on a continuing basis. I mean, again 
it’s a balance of all these things that are under consideration, as economic development and as training 
and as employment takes place. 
 
So, yes. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I guess what my colleague from Elphinstone and I are trying to get from you, Mr. Premier, 
is the recognition that is required for this special area. 
 
The northern administration district is very unique in a sense that we have such high  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1793 

unemployment. Welfare – it’s sky-rocketing. 
 
Now the development is happening right in our own back yards. The resources are being extracted by 
multinational corporations, what have you, and all we’re simply asking your administration is to 
recognize the problem of the high welfare and high unemployment problems that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan, and designate or maintain the existing surface lease agreements that we have. And I 
guess my question to you, Mr. Premier, is this: will you maintain those surface lease agreements, or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I just replied, Mr. Chairman, that I’m advised that they are in effect now, and 
section 3 of them applies to the socio-economic conditions, and they are in effect. I can’t really add any 
more than that. They are in effect, and they’re there for that purpose, and they’re carrying on. 
 
Let me just add that I have confidence. I have confidence in the minister, and I have confidence in the 
ministers of economic development and the ministers involved in agriculture, and the ministers involved 
in our total industrial strategy – in their ability to provide opportunities, economic opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people from one end to the other. I have that confidence. I cannot agree that our policies 
will be precisely the same as the former administration. If you want me to say that, no, unfortunately I 
can’t say that. Clearly, people in Saskatchewan made a choice, so . . . But yes, I recognize those special 
problems, and we are giving it very serious consideration, and the minister in his estimates has explained 
it probably in much more detail than I can. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Premier, I raised that specific question, because on March 24 the minister indicated to 
the local advisory councils and the LCAs involved at this particular meeting that – I think what he 
referred to was the retention of rate – that you would be introducing a new clause or something, to the 
extent where you would do away with this agreement. And basically my question to you is: will you 
retain the existing agreements that we have, or will you not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Again, I’m advised by my minister that those provisions are in force now, and he 
advised me that when they come to an end, and they’re renegotiated, the same sections that are of 
paramount concern, section 3 in existence today, will still be there. So those applies to the 
socio-economic impacts on local residents, as I understand it. So he has said that in the House, I believe, 
and in his estimates, so I can just reiterate that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — A short question, Mr. Premier. Clearly what has upset some of us is that a 
pattern was followed with respect to Cluff Lake – which at least in our judgement worked out 
successfully, and provided a substantial amount of native employment – which provided for a given 
percentage of the work-force to be of northern origin. The same with Key Lake, and on the Premier’s 
own admission, working well. The recent contract signed for the next phase, phase 2, of Rabbit Lake, 
under whatever name, did not contain any such clause, but talked about best efforts or words to that 
effect, which is a really quite different policy, and I wondered whether this represented a change of 
direction by your government from the pattern which had been followed at Cluff Lake and Key Lake, or 
whether there were some other reasons why the pattern for those two mines was not followed with 
respect to the new mine in being at Rabbit Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, my minister advised me that, in this example that the hon. member has 
asked me about, we are following the tradition that has been practised by  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1794 

primarily I guess it’s Gulf Minerals in their operations in the Athabasca area, and they have had a very 
successful rate of native employees and local employees. And it’s relatively well recognized in the 
Athabasca basin that it is successful. So to that extent, we followed along the same tradition, and I think 
it goes back again to the balance that I was talking about. We are there to make sure that it works, and 
we want to do whatever we can to strike that balance to encourage, one, economic activity and, two, to 
facilitate the employment opportunities for Saskatchewan people, particularly where they live. And so I 
can just go back and say that this example may prove to work, as it has in the past, that didn’t have the 
same rules and regulations, or the laws, that some other example might have had. But our objectives, 
I’m sure, are the same. Methodology, as I said, may be different from one administration to another. The 
objective is to make sure Saskatchewan people have the greatest opportunity for employment, and I 
don’t really think I can add much more. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Premier, in your opening remarks regarding an 
economic strategy for northern Saskatchewan, you indicated that the priority of your government was to 
bring northern Saskatchewan into the mainstream Saskatchewan. And I would hope that when you said 
that that you meant that they would be given equal opportunities, the same as everybody else in this 
province. You have been in government now for one year, and I question the statement that you just 
made, given the fact that in Saskatchewan we have a 9 per cent unemployment rate, 8, 9 per cent. And in 
northern Saskatchewan we have an 85 per cent unemployment rate. Now that is quite a difference, and 
that most certainly did not exist one year ago today. In Saskatchewan we had an unemployment rate of 4 
per cent in this province. Today we now have an unemployment rate of 9 per cent, and I would say 
probably closer to 10, 11 per cent. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan one year ago today we did not have 85 and 90 per cent unemployment, but we 
most certainly have that today, and it’s increasing day by day. More and more of the work-force in 
northern Saskatchewan are becoming unemployed and drawing unemployment insurance and are on 
welfare. You have indicated that you want to bring them into the mainstream of life and that you are 
exploring ways of doing this. You speak about the educational facilities that you are constructing in 
Prince Albert, and that is fine. I compliment you on that, but the fact is that will not be taking anybody 
from northern Saskatchewan or any place in this province to go into any courses probably till 1984 or 
’85, which is two to three years down the road. And I think that that poses a serious problem to northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My first question to you, Mr. Premier, is: do you recognize the fact that education is a very important 
part of developing northern Saskatchewan and a strategy for northern Saskatchewan, a long-term 
strategy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Pardon me, Mr. Chairman. Did you just ask . . . Did the hon. member ask if 
education was an important part? Long-term strategy? Yes, I could only reiterate that it is, and that’s 
why we’re spending money on it, that’s why we have our Outreach programs, that’s why we’ve got the 
expanded technical schools, and particularly the new one in Prince Albert. So, yes, it’s a very important 
part of the long-run economic and development strategy of the entire province, but I think it’s 
particularly important for the northern half. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes. I most certainly agree that education is a very important part in northern 
Saskatchewan. We have to provide the best possible education and the  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1795 

best possible educational facilities to the citizens of northern Saskatchewan, especially to our young 
people up there. 
 
Mr. Premier, two weeks ago in this House, when I asked a question of your Minister of Education 
regarding the replacement of a school that was destroyed by fire two years ago in La Loche, I asked him 
if that school would be ready for the 1983 fall term. He indicated to me, and to this House, that that 
school would not be completed for La Loche until the fall of 1984. Do you consider this a proper way to 
facilitate education in northern Saskatchewan, by reconstructing a destroyed school that was destroyed 
two years ago and now you’re saying that it will not be ready until the fall of 1984, because it’s just too 
fast to go in there and construct a facility of this type in that short a period? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Pardon me, Mr. Chairman. When did you say it was destroyed? What was the 
date, do you know? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Of what? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Of what year? Mr. Chairman, if the school was burned in February of 1981, I am 
sure that the hon. members would have liked to have got it rebuilt by ’82. They were still in power at the 
time. They had a year to look at it. I would like to see schools being rebuilt just like that. I can only . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order, order! If the member wants to ask a question, would you ask the 
question from your standing position? Anybody in . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I didn’t get an answer from the Premier on my last question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, the question was: can we have the school built before ’84? I don’t know 
whether it can be built before ’84. I reiterated the point that it was apparently destroyed in February of 
1981. I don’t know from our records if we found that there were any plans at all by the previous 
administration, which was yours, to rebuild it at all. It takes a while to rebuild a school, to have it 
available in a particular area and to do it right. I would like to have them be able to be built in a week, 
but I guess they can’t be. 
 
We are committed to education; we are committed to education all over Saskatchewan and indeed in 
northern Saskatchewan. So our commitment will continue and I can assure the hon. member that our 
commitment to education will continue. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Premier, you have just . . . I’m not too sure of the date. I indicated February of 
’81; I’m not too sure. It’s approximately two years ago that that school burned down. Regardless of what 
the date is, you asked me what the date is. I don’t think that the date of when that school burned down 
has anything to do with the rebuilding of that school. I think that you’re trying to shrug away from the 
responsibility of rebuilding that institution. To get up and answer a question and say, ‘Well, what date 
did it burn down, what month?’ . . . You know, to me the most important part is to get that facility 
rebuilt, and get them students into a proper school as soon as possible. And your minister has got up in 
this House and indicated that it will not be constructed for another 18 months. 
 
Well, I want to say that when we left government last year, plans were already in place to  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1796 

start the planning of that school, but your government took over on April 26th and what did you do? 
You scrapped, and you cancelled the plans to rebuild that school. There’s no reason why that school 
couldn’t have been planned, and rebuilt, and ready to go in the fall of 1983, this term. My question was: 
do you consider that as a priority in education, by holding off the expansion of that school that was 
destroyed by fire until the fall of 1984? Do you consider that as putting education as a priority in 
northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I won’t debate at length unless the hon. member wants to, Mr. Chairman, 
about this school. I’ve just reiterated. It burned well over a year prior to your defeat, and we have no 
records at all of any plans to rebuild it – to build it at all. There’s nothing. Maybe it went through the 
shredder; I don’t know, but there’s no records that we can find that you had planned to rebuilt the school 
at all. So it is a little bit out of order, perhaps, for you to come on and say: ‘Well, where’s our new 
school?’ We have committed over $4 million to build the school, and that was more of a commitment 
that we could find anywhere from the previous administration, so, I mean, be fair. We haven’t even been 
in power for a year; a year of transition, and doing all kinds of things, and I could go through them. I 
don’t think you want me to do that. 
 
And we have made a commitment to the school, and you had an opportunity immediately after it was 
burned to build it, and there’s no records at all that you were going to build a thing there. I’m really 
going to leave it there. We’ve made the commitment and it will be built, and it will be done right, and so 
forth. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Premier, you have indicated that your government has committed $4 million for 
the reconstruction of the school at La Loche that was destroyed by fire over two years ago. We’ve 
determined now that it was over two years ago, because it was well over a year under our administration, 
and you have had a year, so the school burned down well over two years ago by your own admission. 
And you have indicated in the House that you have allotted $4 million for the reconstruction of the 
school, and yet you’re saying that it cannot be constructed until the fall of 1984. If that $4 million is in 
there to rebuild that school, I say: why are the plans not out? Why are the tenders not being put out by 
the unit board in La Loche? They have 1,500 children in La Loche that go to school. The largest 
population of schoolchildren of any community in Saskatchewan, and you are saying that you have 
committed the $4 million, yet your minister indicates that the school cannot be ready for use until the 
fall of 1984. And I say that that’s not a priority for education in northern Saskatchewan, just like when 
you got in you cancelled the bus line. That wasn’t a priority for La Loche either. And you cancelled, and 
you studied, and as a result we had massive unemployment in northern Saskatchewan. You indicated . . . 
I’ll get off that. I’ve got the answer. I’m not going to get any further with you. 
 
I want to ask you a few questions. You went over some of the things that you felt were important to 
bring northern Saskatchewan into the mainstream Saskatchewan. You indicated that your government 
was planning to start some game farms. I wonder, Mr. Premier, if you could comment on the game 
farms that you’re planning for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I can’t provide any more details other than that we have an advisory . . . well, 
several advisory councils . . . one in terms of general development in the province of Saskatchewan. I 
have one in terms of native development and agriculture, but I don’t . . . I can’t give you any more 
details on that. I know I can on the wild rice and some other things, but they’re ongoing and they’re 
active, and we’re  



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1797 

exploring them, very sincere research, and actively involving people in that area with respect to their 
interests, and their trainings, and the markets, and all the elements necessary to make them go, if at all 
possible. I could add to the hon. member that in terms of some of our Outreach training program for our 
people . . . And incidentally the school is to be opened the fall of ’84, right, which means it’s being built 
between now and then. Now, that’s just a little over a year, because this school year is coming to an end 
and by next year, we’ll have it built. So I hope he includes that in his record that he provides his 
constituents. In terms of Outreach training, there’s truck driver training, a 7-week course that is in the La 
Ronge region. There is office education training, a 38-week course, La Ronge region. There’s chemical 
lab and environmental lab technology training, 40 weeks, in the La Ronge region. MVNR training, 28 
weeks, La Ronge region. There are some examples of some of the things that are being provided for 
people to be able to take advantage of the economic activity in the local areas. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Just a short comment, Mr. Chairman. You made the remark that the school is going 
to be constructed, would be ready for the fall of 1984. Most certainly that’s what we were just 
discussing. I wasn’t discussing that you were going to build it in the fall of 1984. I was concerned that it 
wasn’t going to be open in the fall of 1983. That’s when I feel that it should be ready for occupancy, not 
the fall of 1984. 
 
To get back to the game farms, you specifically said, ‘game farms in northern Saskatchewan.’ You 
didn’t distinguish between fur-bearing animals – and I speak of raising foxes, and mink ranching, or 
anything like that. You zeroed in on game farms. Could you indicate what type of games, or what type 
of animals? And I know you must . . . You’ve been discussing it. You mentioned game farms. What type 
of animals are you talking about – buffaloes or wild animals of the forest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I can’t provide that information. Well, we are studying several possibilities 
and I’m advised that, and we’ve had several projects under examination and when they become pilot 
projects or when we do these things, then it’ll be known to the public. But we’re looking at all sorts of 
activities in terms of renewable resources and non-renewable resources. Renewable obviously are timber 
and agriculture, game, fish, water, etc.; the non-renewable – mining, so forth. So they’re actively being 
examined by people who understand them and know them and have been involved in them. And when 
they’re ready to go to the public in terms of some pilot projects, the public will be informed. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Premier, I wonder if I could get you to comment on the Northlands agreement 
that was used in northern Saskatchewan. I believe there were five-year agreements and then I believe 
there may have been another addition added on that. And a lot of that money was used to develop the 
infrastructure that we do have in northern Saskatchewan today – highways, schools, fire halls and such 
things as this. Are we still in the Northlands agreement or are we re-negotiating? And if you are 
re-negotiating, do you have any idea of when it might be signed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I am advised, Mr. Chairman, that we are operating under an extension of the 
Northlands agreement and we have preliminary negotiations under way with, between the two levels of 
government about the future . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon me? Yes. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, in closing I want to impress upon the Premier that the situation is 
severe in northern Saskatchewan and you’ve talked about the mines,  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1798 

and you’ve talked about tourism and you’ve talked about timber and fish and water projects. And I 
would just, in closing, encourage your government to seriously look at and encourage that type of 
development, whether you get involved with it as a government or encourage private enterprise to go in 
there and develop the tourism, the timber and the fish and the type of projects, the limestone mine that is 
a possibility and I hope that it becomes a reality in Pinehouse and the graphite mine at Southend, 
Reindeer. 
 
In closing, I would also ask that when the graphite mine or the limestone mine or any new mines are 
developed in that area, that you negotiate the type of a surface lease that will at leave give Northerners 
that opportunity that they have now under the surface lease agreements at Cluff Lake and at Key Lake. I 
question the validity of the statement that the Gulf Minerals mine at Wollaston Lake is working very 
well, because I don’t believe if you go in there, that you’re going to find that 50 per cent of the 
employees at Gulf Minerals are Northerners. I think you will find that it’s quite low. They draw mainly 
from the Stony Rapids, Black Lake, Fond-du-Lac area. But I would encourage your government to 
continue with this type of surface leases and to get some development into northern Saskatchewan as 
soon as possible and take a serious look at expanding the vocational training centres that we do have 
already situated in La Ronge, and especially in the west side where we have such a large labour force in 
that west side. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes. I have a question to the Premier. It has to do with the suggestion by native 
groups that native rights . . . the constitution be amended to include native rights. And I refer to the 
constitutional conference which you just had. My question to the Premier is twofold. First of all, what do 
you understand the position of the native groups to be? What are they requesting? And secondly, what is 
the position of the Government of Saskatchewan with respect to that request? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t profess to speak, nor do I want to for the FSI or for 
AMNSIS (Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) or for anybody else. And they 
can express their concerns. Basically their concerns is for equal opportunity in this country, and for 
some constitutional protection of some agreements that were signed years and years ago, that would give 
them opportunity to develop and to have their children develop. And what we agreed to in Ottawa was a 
process to allow all these concerns and aspirations to be solidified. Some of them are not constitutional. 
Some of them are. And for many areas it’s not quite clear in the minds of a lot of people what, for 
example, some things like sovereign governments might mean. And everybody admits that. It’s a little 
difficult to totally understand. It means one thing at a local level, a municipal level, or on a reserve, and 
so forth. It means something else when we get into international trade. 
 
So the agreement that we struck really was a mechanism that allows us to proceed for ongoing 
negotiations, and I believe was a milestone for natives in general. Certainly the inclusion of women’s 
rights in there which was – we supported at the outset – was a major milestone for women, not only 
native women, but for women right across the country. So generally, it’s always the question of equal 
opportunity for people, regardless of ethnic origin, regardless of demographics, regardless of geography. 
And that’s the concerns that the natives brought to the table, and I believe we were the only province to 
hold a day and a half, or two days meetings here and prior to the convention in Ottawa, to deal with 
these, and to understand them fully. So we had an entire Saskatchewan delegation, which was excellent. 
The relationship continues to be good, and I’m looking forward to very positive results in the future. 



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1799 

Mr. Shillington: — That’s a surprising claim, Mr. Premier, that your relationship with native groups is 
good. At least some of your ministers have been conducting a growling match for months over various 
issues. I don’t however want to get side-tracked on that for the moment. I want to know what . . . apart 
from ongoing meetings, is the process any more definite than that? Is there any ministerial committees 
meeting and working on it? Is there anything more to it than just an agreement to meet and discuss it 
again? If I were a native . . . if I were a leader of a native group, I’d be somewhat concerned if there 
were nothing more definite than an agreement to meet and discuss it again. That may not result in very 
much progress. Is there something ongoing now, are there a group of ministers working on it, or what’s 
happening? When do you expect . . . (inaudible) . . . summarize my question . . . When do you expect to 
meet and discuss it again? And what is ongoing in the meantime, if anything? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — The ongoing process is just that. Our officials are meeting with native leaders and 
native officials on a regular basis, discussing all kinds of things – land claims, economic development, 
development packages, financing, education, independence, in the sense of economic independence and 
the kinds of things that we can do to encourage that – generally to facilitate the development of the 
native in an independent economic fashion, because clearly with economic independence comes more 
social and more political independence. 
 
Those discussions are going on, well, daily. We have a complete staff that’s doing that on a daily basis. 
And the minister responsible and I discuss it, and I meet with the native people. The next processes will 
be us dealing with more and more of the specifics, and then generally there will be another convention 
or conference or super mega visit on the whole topic, and in fact, there may be several. So it’s an 
ongoing process. My officials are involved on an ongoing basis; the minister is involved on an ongoing 
basis; the native community is actively involved on an ongoing basis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, I want touch now on the broad policy of the 
government with respect to environmental impact studies. And I pointed out that when the Cluff Lake 
mine was put on stream, there was an environmental study and public hearings. And when the Nipawin 
dam project was put on stream there was an environmental impact study and public hearings. And that 
was true with respect to somewhat more minor projects such as the Squaw Rapids-The Pas power line. 
The question I ask is: have any public hearings been set up since you assumed office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the hon. member, we’ll dig up all that we can find. I 
have a couple here. We had several types of hearings. 
 
There’s one that was filed and was an impact and environmental impact study on phase 2 of Cluff that 
was reported in November this last year, November 30th, 1982. The Department of the Environment 
completed its technical review along with Environment Canada, Atomic Energy Control Board and 
independent consultants. The 30-day public review period was just closed on April the 26th, 1983, and 
the issues raised are now being evaluated and the need for additional public inquiries shall be assessed, 
and are being assessed. 
 
There was a study completed, well, I believe that one was 1981 – pardon me. A symposium was held in 
April of 1982 in Saskatoon to deal with hazardous wastes. There still may be ongoing concerns in that 
area. There is the possibility of some  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1800 

environmental work with respect to the potential for something like Rafferty Dam, and in the event that 
a decision was ever made to increase the possibility of coal-fired generators in that Estevan area, and if 
water was needed, there would have to be some environmental studies there. 
 
I will see if I can locate, through SMDC or anybody else that is active in our employment, to pull 
together any other environmental things that may be going on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I was asking a rather narrower question. I’m sure 
that environmental impact studies are still carried on, and when an environmental impact study is done, 
then a decision has to be made as to whether or not there are going to be any public hearings. And that is 
the time when the public gets an opportunity comment. And my question to you is whether or not in the 
past year, less three or four days, your government has made any decision which would require public 
hearings on any issue involving the environment of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, as I mentioned, Mr. Chairman, I will endeavour to get any information that, 
with respect to decisions we may or may have not made, with respect to environmental hearings . . . I 
don’t have that information with me. I can’t recall, at this time, that I’ve made decisions, or that we have 
made decisions, to go ahead with one or more or whatever. I will endeavour to provide the information 
as quickly as we can get it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I want to turn to another subject, and that has 
to do with crown corporations and the broad policy that you are pursuing with respect to crown 
corporations. And I will confine it now to utilities, and confine it now for the moment to power, the Sask 
Power power utility and in its gas utility, and Sask Tel, and, if you wish, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance Act. 
 
But I will perhaps start with Sask Power in its power and gas, and Sask Tel in its non-competitive 
aspects. And what I’m asking is: what is the policy with respect to aiming at profits? Is the proposal, and 
I am now wanting to use the terms with some precision, the business or financial terms, the accounting 
terms . . . Are we aiming at a break-even figure, or are we aiming at a profit, and if so, what are the 
broad profit objectives? Because . . . 
 
And I will give a little preface to this because, when the party which is now the government was in 
opposition, they strongly advocated the idea that the utilities should be operated at a break-even figure, 
and that profits were undesirable, whatever they may be used for: even if they were used to reinvest, 
they were undesirable. They should be used at a break-even figure, and indeed, at times arguments were 
suggested that they should be operated at a loss. 
 
Since that, we’ve had the Wolfgang Wolff commission which suggested really some different profit 
objectives, and we’ve had the public utility review commission legislation which I think includes some 
different profit objectives, and I am trying to find out what the government’s broad policy is with respect 
to the profit policy of Sask Power, Sask Tel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I spent quite a bit of time at length going over this in the last 
estimates, and I’m sure the same question, I’m sure you’ll find it’s identical. 



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1801 

Generally public utilities are viewed by this administration as natural monopolies. Natural monopolies 
tend to be industries which have large economies of scale. In other words, it could be monopolized by 
perhaps only one firm. Because of the economies of scale, that firm, if it could take over the power, 
would have a natural monopoly position which could extract monopoly profits from the public. 
 
The theory behind natural monopolies and why they go into public utilities is that we want to capture 
some of those monopoly profits, or if you will, run down that long-run cost curve so that the consumer 
can take advantage of that by providing the service at cost, somewhere close to the long-run average 
cost, and not be in a position to extract monopoly profits, or if it’s run in the public sector, not be in a 
position to tax people above those long-run costs. 
 
Our objective in public utilities, as it is for most administrations across Canada and the United States, is 
to provide that service in the long run at cost to the public – run it efficiently and effectively. That 
includes the capital projects that generate the service, whether it’s a power, hydro-generated or 
coal-fired generated or something. 
 
But they, in the long run, break even. It does not include, and the reason you were criticized before, is to 
use that public utility as a source of taxation to rob Peter to pay Paul. And that’s what causes people to 
be upset. In the event that you raise power rates or you raise telephone rates above what normally would 
be the case, when they are already in a profitable position to subsidize something else, that isn’t what 
they were designed to do. And they weren’t designed to lose $50 million either, as some utilities . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Under your administration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I won’t get into that. All I want to suggest, sir, is that in the long run it’s to break 
even, it’s to cover costs. It’s to run as efficiently and effectively as possible – not to incur large debts in 
this public sector, not to use it as a source of taxation, but to cover the capital cost to get the projects 
done and provide the service. 
 
I believe in theory and in, I suppose, just the intuitive minds of the public, that’s what they’d like to see 
a crown or a public utility operate now. The role for the public utilities review commission is precisely 
as a watch-dog to say, ‘Aha! Is this rate justified? Are you using this as a source of taxation? Are you 
efficient enough? What does the product line look like? Are your rates corresponding to the service 
you’re providing?’ And in most jurisdictions around North America that public utilities review 
commission is looked at as a watch-dog on behalf of the consumer, because this is a monopoly. It is a 
publicly run monopoly. A monopoly, clearly, has an awful lot of power. So our objective is to have a 
well-run, efficient, break-even analysis, in the long run. If there are huge losses that have to be looked 
after, something has to be done to make sure that we pay for those losses. If they’re capital projects, 
something has to be done to look at that. If there is an unhealthy debt-equity ratio in the conventional 
sense, and something has to be done to correct that so it is healthy in the long run, the consumer would 
like to have that. 
 
So, I don’t think I can add any more, and it’s to a large extent what I said the last time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, you can add a good deal. You could add some 
precision, and I’m going to ask some precise questions, and ask you  



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1802 

what you’re saying. 
 
First, do you believe there is a place for a dividend in your analysis? Is there a place for a dividend 
payable by not a utility in vacuo but Sask Power – Sask Power, which is in broad terms using perhaps 
$1.2 billion, most of which is provided by borrowed money and some of which is provided by retained 
earnings? You know the financial statement of Sask Power. You’re an economist. I’m asking you: are 
you saying that in the future Sask Power should be paying any dividends or should not be paying any 
dividends? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I think it’s fair to say, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, that there is a 
difference, and the Wolff commission pointed this out. There’s a difference between the public utilities 
on one hand, and resource crowns on another – made that separation. I make that separation. I don’t 
believe people of Saskatchewan look at Sask Power the same way as they would Saskoil, in terms of 
dividends. So, in the conventional sense, in practice and in theory, public utilities are not a mechanism 
whereby you adjust the rate structure to tax people so that you can generate a dividend. 
 
On the other hand, resource companies, if you have them you must have them for a reason. What are 
they going to do? They’re not just there for the sake of philosophy. Hopefully, they can pay a dividend 
to the people of Saskatchewan. So the resource companies – yes, they had best be paying a dividend 
because we’ve put a lot of money into them. Public utilities to run on a cost-break-even basis, long run, 
paying the cost of the long-run capital projects to provide the service, whether it’s the telephone 
equipment or the power, or whatever. So I just throw out the distinction between a utility, a natural 
monopoly on one hand, and Saskoil, which is certainly not a natural monopoly by any stretch of the 
imagination. 
 
Resource crowns can pay dividends. I think that’s fair ball. They should. The utility – I’d have serious 
problems. I’m sure a lot of people would, in saying that you can now raise the rates to form a dividend, 
to form a pool of monopoly profits to pay a dividend. As I mentioned, they’re not set up to rob Peter to 
pay Paul. They’re set up to provide that service at cost, because of their structural characteristics in the 
market-place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Premier, I started out making very clear I was talking 
about utilities, and not resource companies. I hoped to avoid these rambles off down every lane in the 
country. I take it your answer is no. I take it your answer is that in your opinion, Sask Power should not 
pay a dividend. Am I right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes. In the normal sense of a public utility, it should not have as its mandate to 
pay dividends. The mandate is to provide the service in long run at cost, not to go in the hole, not to 
raise monopoly profits, but to run it at cost. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — That gets us step one. Now, as the Premier will know, one of the ways of 
measuring costs, which an economist or an accountant might well use, is that you have to pay the costs 
of the capital employed. Now, with Sask Power, the great bulk of the capital employed is borrowed 
capital, and there’s no question about your paying the costs of it, because they show up in the operating 
statement as interest, and accordingly they are paid in the ordinary course of business activities. I am 
now asking you – and you know that there’s a couple of hundred million dollars of somebody’s money 
in the power corporation which does not bear interest; it is retained earnings – in your judgement, should 
the cost of that money be included in the rates, or should it not? 



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1803 

It is a question of whether you say that that money belongs to the people of Saskatchewan, in which case 
they should get a return on it, or belongs to the ratepayers, the customers of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation, in which case presumably they should get the benefit of those retained earnings. And it’s a 
question of one’s philosophy of utilities, whether or not you say that those retained earnings are what 
has accrued to the Crown for providing all of that borrowed money at no return to the Crown, the risk 
taken or whatever, or whether you say that those were amounts accumulated from customers in the past 
and the future customers should get the benefit. And it makes a reasonable difference, because we’re 
talking about $200 million at 10 per cent is $20 million, and that’s a not insignificant sum of money in 
deciding whether the corporation should make a profit or not. And I’m asking: whether or not, in the 
view of the government – and I use Sask Power as an example; I could go on with other utilities as well 
– should there be a return on the equity and, if so, who should get the benefit of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, I’m not quite sure where the hon. member is leading. The more retained 
earnings that you have, the less money you need to borrow to build the capital projects. I mean, if you 
have retained earnings and you can use that to build a new dam or to build a new generator, then you 
have to pay less interest on money that you may have to borrow to do that. So, in the long run, it is 
reflected in the health of the crown corporation, which is reflected clearly in the level of the rate. 
 
If you’re running the operation poorly and you have no retained earnings, and you couldn’t put it 
together, then you wouldn’t be able to contribute that retained earnings towards that capital project. 
Therefore, you’d have to borrow money, and therefore you’d have to pay more interest on it. So the 
better run the corporation, private or public, the more internal capital that it can generate, the more 
money that it has to put in its own projects from internal sources, as opposed to borrowing it, and that is 
the dividend. 
 
To a large extent, people like to think that that public utility does well. To the extent that it can do well 
and run it efficiently and effectively, then it doesn’t have to borrow and the public doesn’t have to pay 
for that interest, because the interest has to be paid by somebody. And those long-run capital projects 
have to be amortized over time, incorporated into the rate structure. I don’t know; I can’t add any more 
than that. I mean, to the extent you have more retained earnings, you can use the money; you don’t have 
to borrow money. Clearly that’s a benefit to the consumer, because it’ll probably show up in the rate 
because he doesn’t have to pay for the interest. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 – An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation Act, 1979 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Finance: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 34, An Act to amend The Workers’ Compensation 
Act, 1979, be discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial 
bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 



 
May 4, 1983 
 

 
1804 

Bill No. 35 – An Act to amend The Rural Municipal Secretary Treasurers Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Finance: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 35, An Act to amend The Rural Municipal 
Secretary Treasurers Act, be discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on 
non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 36 – An Act to amend The Education Act (No. 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Finance: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 36, An Act to amend The Education Act (No. 2), be 
discharged and the bill be referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 37 – An Act to amend The Credit Union Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, with leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 37, An Act to amend The Credit Union Act, be 
discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 39 – An Act to repeal The Mining Associations Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, with leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 39, An Act to repeal The Mining Associations Act, 
be discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 40 – An Act to repeal The Artificial Insemination (Animals) Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, with leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 40, An Act to repeal The Artificial Insemination 
(Animals) Act, be discharged and the bill referred to the stranding committee on 
non-controversial bills. 



 
May 4, 1983 

 
1805 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 41 – An Act respecting the Department of Education 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, with leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 41, An Act respecting the Department of 
Education, be discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial 
bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:00 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	WELCOME TO STUDENTS
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	QUESTIONS
	Uranium City
	STC Rate Increases
	INTRODUCTION OF BILLS
	Bill No. 43 – An Act to amend The Municipal Employees’ Superannuation Act
	Bill No. 44 – An Act to repeal The Tax Sharing (Pipelines) Act
	Bill No. 45 – An Act to amend The Municipal Tax Sharing (Potash) Act
	ORDERS OF THE DAY
	Clause 1

	THIRD READINGS
	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	Item 1

	SECOND READINGS

