






















































Hansard: March 01, 1983


(2216) 2217 
 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 1, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you, and 
through you to the House, guests from Saskatoon and Toronto. They are representatives of Saskatoon 
Region Community College, with their supervisor, Robin Stonehouse, and also from Toronto, Darrell 
Nunn, the teacher chaperone from Seneca College in Toronto. So, we hope you enjoy your visit to the 
House this afternoon, and I would like to extend to them a great welcome on our behalf, and I will meet 
with them after question period. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance Layoffs 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As he envisions, my question is to the 
minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. Yesterday, Mr. Minister, you 
announced what must be the most extensive layoffs of any crown corporation in the history of this 
province, involving some 10 to 15 per cent of the workforce. Will the minister confirm that the entire 
safety section was eliminated in SGI? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad the opposition woke up. In response to the 
member’s question on the safety division, the functions of the safety division have been assumed by 
other people in other departments at SGI. There are several other provincial departments and agencies 
involved in traffic safety promotion and education, including the highway traffic board, the Department 
of Education and the Department of Highways. There were many areas of program duplication. We have 
eliminated those programs at SGI that were being carried out elsewhere. And, Mr. Speaker, as well, of 
the $6 million that was spent by the provincial government in 1981 on safety, only $400,000 of it was 
spent by SGI. As I said earlier, a safety function will be performed at SGI and carried out by the public 
affairs units. As well, SGI still supports the high school driver education through its premium tax. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, by way of background let me say, Mr. Minister, that if you really 
believe that you can eliminate the entire department . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Is the member on his feet to ask a supplementary question? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I should have stated, Mr. Speaker, that this was a new question. Mr. 
Minister, I would remind you by way of background that SGI played a role that the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2218 

highway traffic board didn’t, in that it was involved with safety in all its aspects. The highway traffic 
board’s role is much more limited. And I say to the minister, if you really believe that you can eliminate 
the entire department and not have any effect, you are the only person in Saskatchewan who does. My 
question is: how does the minister justify gutting the safety department, as you have, at a time when all 
members of your government are expressing increasing concern about the accident rate in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am only repeating myself because I said it in my first 
reply to the member, that the safety function will be performed at SGI, and carried out by the public 
affairs unit. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — And will you confirm that they are expected to do so with no increase in 
staff? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the member had been following the news report on 
the reorganization, the fact is that what we have done at SGI is completely reorganized the corporation. 
And in every case where we’ve had duplication we’ve merged some departments, we’ve reduced staff, 
and the concern that the member has is invalid as far as I’m concerned. As I said, we are still going to 
carry on the safety function. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. By way of background, I would remind the 
minister that during the decade of the ’70s, the SGI grew from having about 60 per cent of the 
Saskatchewan market to having over 80 per cent. That didn’t occur by chance. It occurred because SGI 
had a peculiar commitment to the public through such programs as the safety program, and had a 
commitment to its agents. And that leads me to my next question. 
 
I understand that your training division in SGI has been gutted to the point where there is only one 
person left in the area of training. And I ask you how the agents, particularly the small offices and the 
rural agents, can expect to receive adequate training when your training department is a vestigial 
department? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I can keep repeating myself all day, Mr. Speaker, and the same 
answer will always come out. As I’ve said, we’ve removed departments as such. We have merged them 
with others. I’m not exactly sure at this point where the training section actually went. I don’t have the 
complete organizational chart with me. It would take me a couple of . . . I do have it as a matter of fact. 
It might take me a little while to look it up. But there has been merging of departments. Where we’ve 
removed a department, we’ve moved these people or some of them into others, and we’ve changed the 
functions. It’s a reorganization. 
 
I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that in 1978 there were 1,200 and some people at SGI. There has been 
no growth in SGI since that period of time in numbers of customers. We have today over 1,300 
employees at SGI, more than they had at that time. The only reason they had growth in staff at SGI from 
that period to today was for their expansionary plans, a venturing out into other areas where they have 
no business venturing out into. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you. What I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that we have 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2219 

almost 100 people more today than we had at that point in time, and we will provide much better service 
to the people of Saskatchewan than what has ever been provided, simply because we are going to direct 
our attention to the raison d’etre of SGI, why it was there, why it was structured in the first place, and 
that is the intention of the new organization. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Since the minister doesn’t know where the 
training section went, let me be of some assistance to you. I can tell you where it has gone. I refer to an 
article in the Leader-Post and the headline says it all: “Private firms stand to gain from new SGI 
philosophy.” I’ll tell you where it’s gone, Mr. Minister. They are going to be hiring the same sort of 
services from the consulting, and it is bound to cost you more. My question is: are you telling this House 
that you can go outside SGI, hire consulting services, and bring them in and do it at a smaller cost than 
you can do it in-house? Is that what you are asking us to believe? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, yes, as a matter of fact that brings up an excellent point, and 
certainly in some areas there is cheaper . . . much less cost to hiring from outside than it is from within, 
and having a built-in organization — not to say, and again I repeat, not to say that we aren’t going to be 
doing some of it. 
 
There is an association in Saskatchewan that does as well training of agents and training of other people, 
and as a matter of fact we intend to provide better training for adjusters and claims personnel than what 
has been provided in the past. Some of it, yes, may be done through the private sector. 
 
The same thing applies to the corporate services in the corporate field. We had 12 lawyers at SGI; we’re 
down to nine. We may even be reducing that slightly, I don’t know at this point in time, but not by much 
at this point, and only through attrition, by the way. The fact is that it’s cheaper for us to hire . . . 
(inaudible) . . . services, legal services in this case, than it is to have them on staff to the extent that we 
had them on staff . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Minister. Since you raised the area of litigation, 
something I know something about, let me ask you if you seriously believe . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . By way of background, let me say that there isn’t anyone who’s familiar with the field of litigation 
who believes that you can do routine litigation cheaper through the private bar than you can through an 
in-house lawyer. There isn’t anybody who’s familiar with the area who really believes that. Surely, Mr. 
Minister, and this is my question, surely this is just good old-fashioned patronage. You want to reward 
your friends in the bar who have rewarded you. Surely, that’s all this is. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, to answer the member’s question on the legal services which was 
the last one he put to me, Mr. Speaker, let me advise the hon. member that prior to the reorganization at 
SGI there were two legal departments. They have now been merged into one and the staff has been 
reduced from 12 to nine. And, I will again advise the opposition and this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that 
the corporation will look outside the organization for legal assistance, just as it has been doing for the 
past number of years. As a matter of fact it has been going on, not only what we’re bringing in, but from 
your administration as well. You were doing some of it as well. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Your balance sheets don’t show that 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2220 

your corporate people made money because your balance sheets aren’t set up in that fashion. But your 
balance sheets are set up in a fashion that they show your salvage division made money. I note from the 
list of people who are fired that you’ve gutted the salvage division as well. And, I say to you again, Mr. 
Minister, surely that’s just good, old-fashioned patronage. There can be no other excuse for having 
eliminated most of the salvage division. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I don’t know where the hon. member has been, Mr. Speaker, or what he’s 
been reading. There are somewhere between 150 and 200 employees, and I’m not exactly sure of the 
exact numbers — I would call it about 165 employees in the salvage division. Show me. Show me 
where we have gutted the salvage division and removed those people. And as I understand your term of 
“gutting,” we’ve thrown it out. We’ve removed some people, of course. We’ve trimmed the fat all the 
way through the organization. We still have more people than what we had back, and I’m referring to 
1978, prior to their moving the growth to take care of the new programs they wanted to come in. Mr. 
Speaker, we are going to run a more efficient corporation than what they have ever run, and their record 
will show the kind of efficiency they had in the operation, losing 50 some million dollars on two 
statements. We don’t intend to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Industry and 
Commerce, the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance. Will he confirm that 
yesterday’s firings wipe out the licence renewal personnel in Estevan, and in Weyburn, and in North 
Battleford and in Swift Current? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — If you want me to look it up, I could check it out, Mr. Speaker. No, I will 
not confirm it at this point because I simply don’t know. I have gone through the list. I have it here and I 
can check it out. I will take notice of that question because I’m not sure that we have removed any or all. 
I’ll have to take notice of that question. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister. Your list will show licence clerks — one, 
two, three and four and four issuers at Estevan, Weyburn, North Battleford, Swift Current — Estevan, 
Weyburn, North Battleford and Swift Current. I wonder if the minister would check and confirm that he 
is, in fact dismantling the renewal offices at Estevan, Weyburn, North Battleford, and Swift Current? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, Mr. Speaker, I will not confirm that until I have more evidence of 
what the hon. member is indicating. And, where are you looking, if I might ask the question, because I 
don’t see what you’re talking about? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I haven’t got that information. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. I am looking casually at your list, and I certainly don’t 
have a full list. And I note that seven positions at North Battleford have been eliminated, and I suspect 
more since some of them are not identified. Would the minister confirm how many positions at North 
Battleford have been eliminated? How many SGI jobs at North Battleford are gone? 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2221 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take notice of that question as well. I will say though, 
that if you’re looking at the in-scope list, that the — and I’m not sure that he is — but if he is looking at 
the in-scope it’s a matter of seniority as to who is bumping who. We’ve laid off those with the least 
seniority. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, I wasn’t asking at that point, who had 
been laid off, but what jobs had been eliminated? I say to you that the jobs of licence clerks and licence 
issuers at North Battleford and Estevan and Weyburn and Swift Current had been eliminated. I ask you 
to confirm that or deny it, and if you’re not able to do so, I ask you to do it later. 
 
I ask you now to tell me how much money was being spent on traffic safety promotion and education by 
the Government of Saskatchewan, which you felt was wasted. How much extra money was your 
government spending on traffic safety, promotion and education which you are slashing by this move? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I replied to that question earlier, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t have the figures 
for 1982. I gave you the ones for 1981. They were the latest figures that I have, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan in 1981 spent $6 million, of which $400,000 was spent by SGI, of which most of that will 
be eliminated since it was redundant, since it was duplication of what was being done by other 
departments, which was a waste of money. I you don’t call duplication a waste of money, I don’t know 
what you would call it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, the minister has confirmed that $6 million is 
too much to spend on traffic safety promotion and education, and therefore . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Mr. Minister, is it not true that you eliminated the money and did not put the money into other areas 
of safety promotion and education, if, as you say, there was needless duplication? You didn’t use the 
money to expand the program or reinforce it. You slashed it. Isn’t that true? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, what I have said to the hon. member is that we have 
removed the amount that was duplication of other areas. If the Leader of the Opposition does not 
understand the meaning of the word duplication, I can’t help him. They were programs that were being 
implemented or being used or being provided by other departments, and there was no need of having 
duplication. 
 
I did not, as the member indicated, say that $6 million was too much money. I didn’t say that. No; I said 
that $6 million was spent, and if the program of safety is being duplicated and only really $3 million is 
being provided, as an example, what’s the point of spending another 3 million? In our case it was 
$400,000. We are still spending some of it, but it has been mergers with another department. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — A question to the Premier. We’re having a very difficult time finding out 
exactly what’s going on in SGI. What I would like to ask the Premier is whether he knows whether the 
licensing renewal office in Estevan has been closed or not. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I believe the minister has taken note of the question, and he can respond. I’ll 
take note too, if you like. 
 

Bulk Price of Farm Diesel Fuel 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2222 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Premier. On April 26 last year, the price of farm 
diesel fuel was 29.5 cents a litre, or $1.34 a gallon, as most of us would understand a little better. 
Tonight at midnight the price will increase once again, and tomorrow the price of farm diesel fuel will 
be 36.2 cents a litre, $1.65 a gallon. That’s 23 per cent increase in bulk price of farm diesel fuel in just 
10 months. My question is this: what will be in your government’s March budget to cut the cost of diesel 
fuel for farmers? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, let me make a couple of observations. The first is that it was the 
rural population in the province of Saskatchewan who asked the new government to take the tax off 
gasoline. Rural Saskatchewan asked for that because people in rural Saskatchewan drive most to curling 
rinks and to schools, and there are school bus divisions and so forth. 
 
Second, with respect to diesel fuel, that is a federal tax and not a provincial tax. Now, if you are 
suggesting that we subsidize the farmer so that the federal government can come in and tax and tax and 
tax and the Saskatchewan government subsidize that so it can be taken right back to Ottawa, I don’t 
think you would find that very popular among taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan. Now, I would 
take some exception to the argument that we begin to subsidize so that Mr. Trudeau can pick up the tab 
or take that kind of money. There is no tax in the province of Saskatchewan; the tax you are talking 
about is federal. So let’s make that very clear. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. I didn’t ask about it being a federal tax. I’m aware of 
that; I’m aware of the tax. My question was: are you going to do anything in your budget to help the 
farmer? I can’t help it if your new policy is that we have a love-in with the federal Liberals all of a 
sudden, with this government, that you want to get along with them, in the Minister of Finance’s words, 
“We have to compromise and see it their way.” My question is: what are you going to do to protect the 
farmer in the meantime? It’s not my fault you couldn’t negotiate a better deal. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, to adequately answer the question would take more time than 
there is in question period, but if the member will look back on April 26, and if he would look a week 
ago Monday, he would know that our farm policies and our farm programs, whether it’s farm purchase 
programs dovetailed with the farm credit corporation, our natural gas distribution systems, the removal 
of tax that applies to all rural Saskatchewan . . . If he doesn’t think that’s popular, he should look back at 
April 26 and a week ago Monday, because it is very popular. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — If it wasn’t for his party opposite, we wouldn’t be facing these increases in 
Ottawa today. There was a handful . . . Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, he asked for it. There was a handful of 
members of parliament from the province of Saskatchewan who voted against the prime minister from 
the West, the minister of energy from the West, the minister of transport from the West, the minister of 
the wheat board from the West. Your party voted against them for what we have today, and we are 
receiving that today. So, that’s where it belongs — not here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, he takes credit for our party defeating that government. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2223 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Is the hon. member asking a supplementary? I would ask the hon. member 
to preface his comments by the type of question he’s asking. If it’s a new question, please say so. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask a new question. My question is this. 
You’re saying that our party was responsible for defeating that wonderful Clark government. Who was 
responsible for electing the Liberal government is the real question. But the farmers in Saskatchewan 
were led to believe during the April campaign that they’d get a 40 cent discount on their purple and their 
diesel fuel. They really did. They lost a $65 million advantage over their city cousins. You’re a farmer; 
you have a quota book. You tell everybody that. The farmers expect you to do something for them. They 
want at least that $65 million back that they had before . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! This is not a debating period, but when members ask questions in a 
debating form, they’re going to get answers in the same way. I think today’s question period has been a 
perfect example of that from both sides of the House. So I would ask members to ask succinct questions 
and you will likely get that type of answer. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Two quick observations. Number one, if anybody misled the public it was 
members opposite about the gas tax removal. We said clearly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not on 
diesel fuel. 
 
The saving in Saskatchewan is now over $1 per gallon, compared to, say, the province of Quebec, 
Quebec city, Montreal. Number two, about 70,000 farmers in the province of Saskatchewan . . . I believe 
you’ll find there’s 55,000 automobiles (ball-park) in rural Saskatchewan. And those people are the ones 
that initiated the idea with us to give them a break. They have received that benefit far more, in a 
comparative sense, because they travel to and from places 30, 40, 50 miles at a crack. So in terms of the 
benefit applied all over the province of Saskatchewan, rural people are delighted. We said if there was 
some provincial tax on diesel fuel, we’d take it off. But there isn’t. 
 
And finally, I want to find out, does the member say, is he asking us to raise taxes so that we can 
subsidize Mr. Trudeau and his increased taxation on rural farms? What was he asking for? Because 
we’re not prepared to do that. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 
Return No. 1 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Yew that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for return 1 showing: 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2224 

With respect to construction projects in northern Saskatchewan announced in the Legislature in 
March, 1982, including the DeTox Centre and the Crisis Centre in La Loche, the Training Centre and 
the Crisis Centre in La Ronge, the Dillon Road, the Beauval-Pinehouse Road, the Cumberland Weir, 
and construction on highways 102, 106 and 155: (1) for each project, whether approval has been given 
to proceed; (2) for each project, whether tenders have been called; (3) for each project, the amount of 
the provincial grant which has been offered; (4) the formula used as the basis for the calculation of the 
provincial grant. 

 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Are we not going to get answers to these questions, all of them? I’m not sure 
if the member can speak at all; I’m just curious if we’re not going to get answers. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I can give the House an indication that what we will be asking for is to stand 
those motions for return down to 14. Starting at 14 we will start indicating to the House that we would 
be prepared to accept that particular motion and to be providing to the House those particular questions. 
What I will be doing is asking simply to stand the questions from no. 6 through to no. 14; no. 14 will 
then start being ready and we will start providing that information to you and hope to have the rest of it 
available to you next week. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, on the motions that we are talking about, namely from 6 to 
14, I think there has been plenty of time, plenty of time for the ministers to get an answer to these 
questions. This has been going on for a long time. I believe since June in some instances. For example, 
the questions being referred to here — I would like to use one that was proposed under my name, no 8, 
which asks with respect to the construction of special-care homes in Biggar. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, order! We are in fact beginning to debate. We were on no. 6 and now 
you’re talking about no 8, and I don’t think that the House can proceed in that fashion. If you want to 
debate, then we’re going to have to go back to no. 6 and deal with no. 6 and then proceed. No. 6 was 
called and we’ll have to come to a solution of how we dispose of it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I thought that we were dealing with the motion that we deal 
with the resolutions from 6 to 14. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I believe that was a suggestion by the Minister of Finance and he did not have 
leave to proceed. Can we come back then, to return no. 6? Return no. 6, stand? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just want to be clear that we have the commitment from the minister that he 
will be providing either answers to these, or amendments to them, or passing them next week. If we had 
that assurance, I think the opposition wouldn’t be as alarmed as we are. So do we have a commitment 
that you’re going to deal with these next week, either by passing them or rejecting them. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — For, say, a specific response, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know whether you have a 
question period type thing, but with regard to motion no. 6, I am of the view from the procedural people 
that that particular answer will be ready next Tuesday. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’m asking the House what your pleasure is in dealing with this. Is it to be stood or 
are you going to debate it or what is the process? 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2225 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would ask that we stand this particular motion with that undertaking to 
you. If not, we can simply adjourn the debate on it. 
 
Stood. 
 
Return No. 2 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for return 2 showing: 
 

With respect to the hospital construction projects at Lloydminster, Yorkton, Cutknife, Melfort, 
Nipawin, Maidstone, Indian Head, Davidson, Regina and Saskatoon announced in the Legislature in 
March, 1982: (1) for each project, whether approval has been given to proceed; (2) for each project, 
whether tenders have been called; (3) for each project, the amount of the provincial grant which has 
been offered; (4) the formula used as the basis for the calculation of the provincial grant. 

 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I was making a comment earlier on motion 8, which I agree 
was not in order. Now that we’re on no. 7, I’d like to make that point. The question that was asked for 
on this case was with respect to hospital construction at Lloydminster, Yorkton, Cut Knife, Melfort, 
Nipawin, Maidstone, Indian Head, Davidson, and on and on. What I’d like to know is why, when this 
question I believe was put in last summer, a question this simple that the minister should be able to write 
out today — he’s sitting there beside the minister — why doesn’t he simply write the answer out and 
give it to us? I’m not sure why you need officials to prepare an answer for a question as simple as this, 
or the next question which deals with nursing homes. Surely the ministers have the answers. Why don’t 
they simply write them down and give them to us? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, just simple a short comment with regard to the arguments 
advanced on this particular motion by the opposition House Leader. I take it that any rules do not 
indicate that information has to be provided at such and such a time, and I think we probably take a 
lesson from the members opposite when they were in government. I recall putting in a lot of questions, 
and I recall (the day before we were about to adjourn) the grand production being made by the then 
government as they rolled into this Assembly boxes and carloads of orders for return and the 
information one or two days prior to the adjournment of the session at that particular time. I suppose to a 
degree we are trying to expedite this a little bit better. Perhaps progress comes in small steps in this 
particular Assembly, but I can assure you that we would not try to do something like that, and I would 
beg your indulgence, and I’m sure you’ll have the information prior to the end of the session. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — In respect to no. 7, I want to draw to the attention of the minister that the opposition 
are agreeable to co-operating in complicated questions in which details need to be collected, and it takes 
a considerable length of time. I want also to say that the minister goes back to the previous 
government’s performance, but I want to indicate that their claim has been that they are going to be a 
very open government. I want to say that not providing answers to questions of the straightforward 
nature of a question like no. 7 indicates that what they are heading toward is a very secretive type of 
government. A closed government won'’ allow the public the information which we have requested. I 
don't think it's good enough, Mr. Speaker, for the member opposite to 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2226 

start going back to past performance. What we are looking at now is the performance and the 
commitment which that group of people, that government, gave to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Accordingly, I want to say we have not received an answer for one single question that has been filed 
since the session was called last June. As a consequence, I want to say that of course we are concerned 
with the lack of attention that the government is giving to these questions. Accordingly, I would like to 
urge the Minister of Finance to give us his commitment that he will indeed provide all of the answers 
here before the closing of the session. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — May I say, I’d like to hear the response of the minister to that last question 
asked by my colleague for Quill Lakes. Part of our concern is that we . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
You — some of these should have been provided. There is no excuse for not providing some of these. 
 
Also, we have a broader concern, and that is that they are going to be dealt with. Do we have the 
commitment from the Acting House Leader that items 7, 8, 9 — 10 is in a different category — 11, 12 
and 13 will be dealt with next week? If we have that commitment, I think we’ve registered our protest 
and we may go on to deal with the items, so do we have your commitment that you will deal with those 
items next week? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to get into a controversy on this, but the facts 
are relatively clear. There has simply been (and I invite anyone to attempt to refute this if they can) no 
occasion in which an order of the Assembly — for return no. 2, let us say, and the one that we’re 
debating — which asks for some very simple information, has not been answered in the 46 days of the 
session, when the minister in charge of that particular department — that is the Minister of Health — 
has not had his estimates up so that we could ask him any questions in the 46 days of the session. That 
confluence of events has, I suggest, not happened since 1905. If anyone can find a refutation of that, I 
invite them so to do, but they will not. 
 
Accordingly, when we are asked a question, “Where do we stand,” by some people at Maidstone, as I 
was the other day, I say, “Well, I’ll try to find out. We have an order on the order paper; we have a 
motion on the order paper, but it’s not replied to and we have not had an opportunity to question the 
minister. I’ll try to find out.” But, we are, as I point out, at day 46, and we’ve not had a forum when we 
can ask a reasonable question as to where the government stands with respect to a hospital at Maidstone 
— what grants it will get, what the formula is. Those are really not appropriate questions for an oral 
question period. They are appropriate questions for an order for return, notice of motion for returns, or 
for questions on estimates. I think we can all see that. We haven’t had it. 
 
As I understand it, the Minister of Finance is saying: we will get answers to the great bulk of these 
before the end of the session, and he will not repeat the error of the previous government, and bring 
them in just a day or two or three before the end of the session. So we have his commitment that we will 
get the answers, and they will not be on the last day, or the second last day before the end of the session. 
I welcome that commitment and accordingly I will raise no further objection to item number 7 on the 
proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter being stood, if that’s the way you wish to handle it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What’s the motion to stand? 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2227 

MR. SPEAKER: — The motion is the one that is here before you, and the only way to dispose of it is 
to either vote it off, or for somebody to speak and to stand it — to adjourn it. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, there’s certainly some confusion in the order of House proceedings 
coming from the opposition in the House today. Notwithstanding all of that, I’ll attempt to alleviate 
some of that misunderstanding and distortion that seems to be across the way. Certainly, we recognize 
the importance of the subjects that have been placed before the Assembly, and the various motions. I 
have every confidence that our government will in very due course, and in the very near future, provide 
the answers to the questions that are raised on these motions. I can say, Mr. Speaker, having been 
associated with a good number of these members for a considerable length of time, they have never let 
me down yet. They consistently provide answers to the opposition, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would 
want to assure all members that we would be looking for replies to these motions that are before the 
House, and subsequently, Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — State your point of order. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to simply advance to the members 
opposite and to the House that we would be prepared to agree to — and if I can skip ahead and perhaps 
expedite some time, and I would simply advance — orders nos. 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 27, 
33, 35, 39, 44, 51, and those up to that point would be provided at this point in time, and I would have 
an amendment for 49 when we get to that one. 
 
Those are the ones that we’re prepared to agree to at this time. That information is now ready and will 
be presented. The rest of the ones we will be asking to stand, an I’m sure more will be available next 
week. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — To be sure that our votes come out right at the end of this day, it’s very difficult to 
proceed in the manner that you are suggesting, but what I would ask you to do is to deal with each return 
as they come through, to stand those that you wish to stand, and to deal with them that way. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — What I would like to know is the numbers that have been left out. Are you 
giving us an assurance here that we will deal with them and get answers to them next week? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would give you assurance that we will deal with them next week. 
 
Return No. 18 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for Return No. 18 showing: 
 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Energy during the period May 8, 1982 to 
November 26, 1982 to commercial air lines for air 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2228 

fares. (2) The name of each individual for whom air fare has been paid and the amount for each 
individual. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 19 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return 19 showing: 
 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Finance during the period May 8, 1982 to 
November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name of each individual for whom 
airfare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 20 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return 20 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Energy. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 21 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return 21 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Finance. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 23 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Lusney that an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return 23 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 24 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Lusney 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2229 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for return 24 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Rural Affairs. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 25 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Shillington that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return 25 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 26 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Shillington that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return 26 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Co-operation 
and Co-operative Development. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 28 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Shillington that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return 28 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Labour. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 30 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Shillington that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return 30 showing: 

 
(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs during the 
period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name of each 
individual for whom airfare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 
Motion agreed to. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2230 

Return No. 31 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Shillington that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for return 30 showing: 

 
(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development 
during the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name 
of each individual for whom airfare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 37 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Koskie that an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return 30 showing: 

 
(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Continuing Education during the period May 8, 
1982 to November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name of each individual for 
whom airfare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Koskie that an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return 30 showing: 

 
(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Education during the period May 8, 1982 to 
November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name of each individual for whom 
airfare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 43 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Koskie that an order of 
the Assembly do issue for return 30 showing: 

 
For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Education. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 48 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for return 48 showing: 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2231 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Social Services. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Return No. 53 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 
of the Assembly do issue for return 53 showing: 
 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Social Services during the period May 8, 1982 
to November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name of each individual for whom 
airfare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, on item 49 I would propose that the motion be amended as 
follows: 
 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Social Services during the period May 8, 1982 
to November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for employee airfares. (2) The names of each employee 
for whom airfares have been paid and the amount for each employee. 

 
The reason for that is there could come a situation where tickets are paid for non-employees. That would 
be contravening the privacy situation. That’s not a very common thing but it can exist, and we wouldn’t 
want to duplicate that. That’s why I propose that amendment. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just want to clarify, Mr. Acting House Leader, that “employee” includes 
the minister for these purposes. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, that would include the minister and any staff of the minister’s office. 
 
With regard to that amendment, then, we will take two or three or more days to provide that as amended 
to you. It’s being worked on if you can have that time. 
 
Motion amended as agreed to. 
 
Return No. 54 
 
MR. YEW moved, seconded by Mr. Shillington, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 
54 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 
special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Environment. 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2232 

Return No. 55 
 
MR. YEW moved, seconded by Mr. Shillington, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 
55 showing: 
 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Environment during the period May 8, 1982 to 
November 26, 1982 to commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name of each individual for whom 
airfare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Return No. 56 
 
MR. YEW moved, seconded by Mr. Shillington, that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 
56 showing: 
 

Regarding the employment of Ed Charlette: (1) whether he is employed by the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan; (2) if so, his position, annual salary and the date on which he commenced 
employment. 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would on that ask leave to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Return No. 90 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON moved, seconded by Mr. Thompson, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 90 showing: 
 

With respect to any rental land purchased from any housing projects by or on behalf of Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation included in the Cornwall Centre: (1) the amount requested by the owners for 
such land: (2) the amount of any counteroffer for such land; (3) the amount paid for any such land. 

 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Return No. 91 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON moved, seconded by Mr. Thompson, that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 91 showing: 
 

With respect to any land being expropriated by or on behalf of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation for 
any rental housing projects included in the Cornwall Centre: (1) the amount initially requested by the 
owners for such land; (2) the amount of any counteroffer for such land; (3) the value of the land as 
alleged by or on behalf of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in any 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2233 

court proceedings. 
 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would ask for leave to adjourn debate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on a point of order, is there any opportunity where all these could be moved in one 
lump, because I will be asking to adjourn debate on each one of them? We could save going through 
this, I’m sure, tedious exercise for everyone in the House. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I believe, being that the members are all in attendance, that they could be moved in 
one lump. Could you propose that? 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, as suggested by the minister that items 6 to 30 be moved as a 
group, I would move that motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, and I would ask for leave to adjourn debate on each of 
those or as a package. 
 
Debates adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CONTINUING EDUCATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 

Item 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. I would like to introduce the officials from the 
Department of Continuing Education: Mr. Gil Johnson, deputy minister; Mr. Ed Evancio, assistant 
deputy minister; Mr. Lorne Sparling, executive director of institutes; Mr. Frank May, executive director, 
administrative services; Mr. Morris Campbell, director of student services; Mr. Jake Kutarna, director of 
community colleges; John McKendry, director of policy planning, universities; Mr. Ray McKay, 
director of northern continuing education; Mr. Toby Stewart, director, office of native career 
development; Mr. Gerry McIntyre, director, training needs assessment (I guess he’s not here); Mr. Doug 
McGuigan, budget officer; Darrel Hogg, co-ordinator, manpower training; Dr. Alex Guy, special adviser 
on science and technology to the minister; Mr. Ian Wilson, provincial archivist. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I want at the outset just to indicate to you that in my 
view, any money that a province or a nation spends on education is certainly money well spent. I want to 
say that I believe that no province and no country can afford to neglect its commitment to education. 
 
I want to say that certainly we must look and recognize that we live in a rapidly changing world with a 
great growth of technology and great advances in the methods of 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2234 

communications. And as a consequence the globe has, to some extent, shrunk. And perhaps, indeed, 
throughout the world problems become an integral problem for the rest of us. I think as we look all of us 
are aware of the degradation and the starvation throughout the world, are aware of how little we have 
really achieved in the distribution of wealth throughout the globe. It seems to me that basically our 
course in the future is to address the needs and the problems of the human race, or conceivably it could 
lead to the total destruction of a nuclear holocaust. 
 
I believe that the privileged people of the planet, and I think Canadians are a part of that privileged 
group, those indeed who have the opportunity to be educated must take a leading role in helping to solve 
some of the global problems. I think that Canada is not indeed a military power although we have our 
alliances, and it seems to me that we have a unique role in this global struggle. I think we have an 
opportunity and a sphere of influence in addressing some of the problems, and I believe that through 
education of our young people and our society that perhaps we can maximize our benefits in addressing 
the problems which I’ve alluded to. Having said that, and sharing, I’m certain, with you the deep 
importance of our educational system,; and recognizing that Saskatchewan for many years has, indeed, 
stood in the forefront of being recognized as a province with a high educational standard and level; 
having made those comments, I would just like the minister, for the period of time that he has been 
minister, and I recognize that it’s rather a short period, to briefly outline some of the priorities of the 
Department of Continuing Education that he sees as needing to be addressed. And perhaps he could also 
outline some of the concerns which he feels must be addressed in the future. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, I would like at the outset to say that I certainly generally 
concur with what the hon. member for Quill Lakes has just stated in connection with the general state of 
affairs in education as they exist in the latter part of the 20th century, and what he has stated with regard 
to concerns for where we are going in the future. Certainly it is incumbent upon those who are given the 
degree of responsibility and education to address ourselves to the needs of manpower at the present 
time, and to the needs of manpower as projected in the future. One thing that has been abundantly clear, 
or has become abundantly clear, I should say, to me in the short period of time that I’ve been education 
Minister of and Minister of Continuing Education is that the expectations of the people are such that 
education is not just something where we have growth and development for a short period of time, but 
rather that it is something that refers to growth and development that takes place from birth until death, 
for which reason education has grown in scope by leaps and bounds. Add to that, what the hon. minister 
has made reference to, the tremendous changes that have taken place in science and technology, in social 
habits and so forth, and we see that it is a tremendous challenge to all of those who have any degree of 
responsibility in this area. 
 
Now, in speaking specifically to what I think the hon. member wished me to talk about, I would say that 
we look forward to the tremendous challenge that is there. When I take a look at the report that was just 
recently submitted in adult basic education — a report that points out some things that perhaps we 
should have been aware of, and maybe we have been aware of, and maybe haven’t attended to, maybe 
there’s good reason for us not having attended to some of these things because of the difficulties 
involved in trying to remediate some of these real situations. 
 
I speak about such things as the fact that in this province, there are 177,000 people who have grade 10 or 
less education. That indicates to me that there is one out of 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2235 

every five to six people in this province who has grade 10 or less education. When you add or put 
alongside of that statistic the fact that 74 per cent of the people who are on social assistance today have 
grade 10 or less education, these are statistics that we have to be sensitive to and we have to come to 
grips with. Because not only does it tell us something about the plight of those people from a moral issue 
how debilitating it must be for some of these people who end up in that area where they are low-income 
people, where they are on unemployment insurance, where they’re on social assistance as I’ve stated, or 
in many cases incarcerated, then I think that it becomes really, really a shocking kind of a situation and 
something that we must do something about. 
 
So I would think, hon. member, that one of the things that we will be addressing ourselves to is to try to 
do as much as possible to give education and training to those people who are in worst need of it so that 
we can therefore make them a part of our human resource. That is one of the things, one of the areas 
where we will place a tremendous amount of emphasis in the future. 
 
I think that another thing that we are intending to do is to place a much greater emphasis upon skilled 
training and technological training than we have in the past. Our needs assessment indicates that this is 
where we have the greatest need and the greatest shortage, not just in this province but in Canada at 
large. At the present time, the training spots that we have in the present technical institutes meet only 
about half of the real needs, so that we are going to attempt to improve that situation. We are going to 
attempt to improve that situation through such a project as was announced, that is the construction of the 
Prince Albert technical institute. As a matter of fact, we have announced the expansion of the new 
technical institute in order to offer a greater variety of programs and to offer more training spots, 
virtually doubling the training spots in the Prince Albert technical institute compared to the original 
plan. 
 
We are going to be placing a great deal of emphasis upon alternate methods of training. By that I meant 
to go to such plans with the training facilities that we have, such as expanding the number of hours of 
training or expanding the school year. We are thinking in terms of decentralization in the offering of 
programs, and by that I mean an expansion of extension programs certified and controlled and 
administered from the institutes. 
 
We’re thinking in terms of advancing the delivery system, the delivery mechanism that is out there at the 
present time through our community colleges. These are just some of the initiatives that we have been, 
not just thinking about, but making specific plans in connection with. And we are also thinking in terms 
of expanding the development of science and technology and research generally. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you for your comments, Mr. Minister. I want to say that the areas you have 
mentioned certainly, I think, have added emphasis; or continued emphasis can be placed on the areas 
which you have mentioned. Certainly those who have grade 10 or less education, properly, I think, to 
play a role in the mainstream of society, will in fact require skills training. 
 
I don’t want to prolong the philosophical type of approach, but you have dealt with the technical schools 
and the type of training for that specific area. Could the minister outline some of his priorities as he sees 
them in respect to the university campuses? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, maybe to hurry things along, I will try and sort of wing it, not 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2236 

having prepared an overview in regard to what we are planning to do, and perhaps not having finalized 
precisely what our entire direction is with regard to the university scene. For one thing we see there is a 
problem with regard to the university facilities with regard to university enrolment at the present time. 
The University of Regina itself has set a record in so far as first year enrolment is concerned, something 
like 31 per cent increase this year alone. I think, if I remember correctly, that at the University of 
Saskatchewan, there was something like 13 per cent. 
 
It’s going to bring about the need for increased productivity at the university level. It’s going to bring 
about the need for the possibility of increased funding. It’s going to bring about the possibility of us 
looking at makeshift arrangements, and ways of accommodating the students who wish to attend the 
university. 
 
Where this enrolment is going to take us down the road — a year, two years, five years hence — is very, 
very difficult to project. As a matter of fact, in discussing this issue with the university presidents, they 
have great difficulty. They indicate that at no time in the past have they ever felt less confident in 
predicting what the future enrolments hold in store for the universities. I think that we have to use a lot 
of common sense, and judgement, and consultation with the university sector in order to determine 
whether we should be going. 
 
We have to keep in mind that we are going to be making a big thrust in the area of technical education, 
and we have to try to take an educated guess as to what extent that will affect enrolment at the 
universities per se. There are a number of variables in there and a number of unknowns. But certainly, I 
think it’s incumbent upon us to do our very level best to address these concerns. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to turn to the general budget that was brought down by the minister in 
November. I recognize that the format of the budget again was set by the previous government, and to a 
large extent that was adopted. The major victims, it seems to me, in your November budget was that cuts 
had been made in the post-secondary programs of the North, and particularly the capital budgets in the 
heritage fund, such as STI, the University of Saskatchewan geological science buildings, and the P.A. 
institute. I mean money that we had in our March budget for STI, for the P.A. and for the University of 
Saskatchewan geological science building. I want to say that there were major cuts. 
 
If we take a look at the March budget, our proposal for STI was $6.2 million; November, 1982, it was 1 
million. The P.A. institute, 1.1. million; you proposed to put in 0.216. The geological science building, 
March, 1982, 0.6 billion; reduced to 0.15 million. And in DNS, the continuing education branch and 
community colleges, we note that in March of 1982 we proposed over $6 million; in November of 1982, 
$2.92 million. I want to say that in the total for all programs and projects there was a minus $8.6 million 
in the November budget compared to the March ’82 budget. I recognize the circumstances, but I also 
recognize what the minister said in respect to priorities. 
 
I think it was very clear within the department that the need was to get more facilities in the institutes 
and, accordingly, the previous government was moving in that direction. And so I will come to those 
more specifically, but I wonder if the minister could indicate the rationale for, particularly, the decreases 
in respect to the geological science building, the P.A. institute, the DNS cutbacks in the continuing 
education branch, community colleges, those items which I have mentioned. Could you give an 
indication as to why the government saw those as a very low priority? 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2237 

It seems strange that now the minister is saying that indeed we need to double our spaces in institutes. 
And that information was available in the department when you took over, a thrust was being made by 
the former government, and it seems to me what has happened is that there has been really a delay — a 
very substantial delay — in meeting that particular need. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, at the risk of making the odd error here as far as the numbers 
are concerned, because I don’t have all of the information in front of me — and I guess that’s partly due 
to the fact that there are a number, just a large number, of specific projects and items that have been 
referred to here by the hon. member — I will try to deal with these one by one as quickly as I possibly 
can. 
 
In regard to the Saskatchewan Technical Institute, STI, that whole project has been held up. The first 
phase of that project has been held up due to the strike and, from latest reports, it should be completed 
sometime in June of 1983. As far as the other addition that was sort of promised for the future, that was 
reviewed and it was determined that it was one of the things that would not be an essential part of that 
institute at this particular time. 
 
As a matter of fact, our government reviewed all projects as far as education is concerned, as far as 
continuing education, health, and so on are concerned. But in regard to the emphasis being placed upon 
technical education, we ended up spending more money than was promised by the budget of the 
previous government in each of the technical institutes and in the two vocational schools, namely, at 
Prince Albert and Meadow Lake . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . In operating. In operating where we 
saw, to tell the truth, a real need for money at the time. 
 
As a matter of fact, I personally made a visit to Kelsey Institute in Saskatoon where there was 
considerable concern being expressed by students, by staff, and by the administration of that institute 
because of the fact that they claimed that the money that had been allocated and promised for this past 
year was going to cause the termination of some of the programs and release of some of the staff. I was 
very, very pleased to be able to make an appeal to our cabinet for additional funding because of the need 
that was apparent, and I’m very pleased to say that our government, even though we were in the process 
of restraint and in the process of deficit budgeting, did feel that education should be placed on a very, 
very high priority. 
 
In regard to the geological science building, I was personally a little bit confused about where that stood. 
Going back in to the whole history of it, I saw different figures where cabinet had approved 17.75, 
treasury had approved 16.7, and budget bureau had approved another figure; then I saw another figure of 
$23 million. It seemed, from the best I could understand about it, that the previous government had 
decided to put it on hold because they could not agree on the level of funding. So that was the state of 
affairs when I became Minister of Continuing Education. So, the geology building was under review 
along with all the other projects. 
 
I am pleased to say that it is in the budget cycle for 1983-84, and by that I mean that I am going to be 
presenting this as a very top priority, as far as university capital construction is concerned, to the cabinet 
for the 1983-84 budget. 
 
In regard to the Prince Albert technical institute, the initial plan that had been announced by your 
government was to build a technical institute at Prince Albert at a 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2238 

cost of something like $15.4 million. We did review that; we saw many things about that plan and about 
the programs which we found to be very desirable and very beneficial to Prince Albert and the whole 
parkland area, as well as northern Saskatchewan. But we felt that it fell short of the real needs for that 
area. So our government gave the approval for an expansion of the Prince Albert technical institute so 
that it increased, as far as cost is concerned, from $15.4 to $25 million. It increased, as far as space is 
concerned, from something like 12.700 square metres to 17,000 square metres. It increased, as far as 
capacity of training is concerned, from 394 to 634 students. 
 
As far as program is concerned, we added such programs as mining and forestry, electronics, an 
expansion of industrial mechanics, and an expansion of machining, as well as programs such as 
cosmetology, food services, business education, and leadership training, just to name some of the 
programs that we have added in that area. Hopefully, we are going to use that as the base from which to 
offer an expanded program of training in northern Saskatchewan. We presently have plans under way, 
and are trying to complement those plans with the national training act, to have something which is as 
realistic and as meaningful as possible for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
As far as community colleges are concerned, the previous government had offered an increase of 14 per 
cent; we changed that to an increase of 7.4 per cent. We took a look at the community colleges and the 
programs which were being offered. The decision that we have made is not to eliminate social and 
interest programs, but to make these as close to cost recoverable as possible, such as exists in some of 
the community colleges such as Regina and Saskatoon, where the programs already are completely cost 
recoverable, along with efficiency cuts that we were able to make, and guided by the fact that 
community colleges had reached a degree of maturity where they could function and still not operate at 
a reduced level as far as program offering was concerned. This was one of the ways where we realized 
some efficiencies. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to get into the specifics of those in a moment. I really think that what has 
happened in the nine or ten months is that a definite program which the previous government had for a 
substantial increase in the funding toward the development of more spaces in institutes — STI, and get 
on with the job in Prince Albert . . . There were certainly a number of options that we looked at in 
respect to the size and the programs. All of those were available. I’m rather disappointed in the minister 
having delayed for one year, because as he has indicated in his release here, “Saskatchewan may expand 
training programs in the next three years.” He went on to caution about the possibility of doubling the 
number of spaces because he says, “I’m just one person.” I note the minister does use that quite 
consistently. But he said that he will have to really expand these to help get all of these young people 
trained for the jobs that are going to be created in the new open for business policy. I want to just raise 
for the minister’s information that the new job opportunity in the province may be some time coming, so 
he should take that into consideration. If one looks at the young people’s jobless rate, Saskatchewan 
workers in their early twenties had the highest January unemployment rate — 17.3 per cent — of all age 
groups in the province, Statistics Canada figures show. 
 
What I’m saying is that we can’t, Mr. Minister, continue to live on slogans. I think that, as the president 
of the University of Saskatchewan indicated, more and more people are returning to take training at 
university and at institute levels. The reason that the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2239 

universities are bulging, and the technical schools, with applications — and I grant not all can be met in 
the institutes — is basically because there are in fact no jobs. As the president indicated, this is an ideal 
opportunity for young people at least to go into institutes during a period of very low employment or job 
opportunities and at least do a meaningful thin in obtaining further education as an investment for the 
future. Surely we must be optimistic to the extent that the economy, not just here in Saskatchewan, but 
throughout the country, will indeed turn around. 
 
Really what I’m emphasizing here is that I think that we really do need some very concrete action in 
respect to fulfilling the requirements of the students. I look at the university and one of the areas where 
there are considerable complaints is undergraduate studies, as being a very low level in comparison to 
post-graduate studies at the two campuses here in comparison to the Canadian average. I think that’s an 
area also that will have to be addressed. Perhaps with respect to what he has indicated to the public — 
that he has some pretty large plans for expanding the training program — since he has indicated that to 
the press, perhaps he would elaborate for the benefit of the members of the opposition. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, in responding to the hon. member, I thought that I had indicated that in 
my initial response about the emphasis that we were placing upon technical training, but I would be 
pleased to reiterate some of the things. 
 
First of all, about your concern in the P.A. technical institute, we’re doing our level best to make sure 
that that isn’t held up. As a matter of fact, our present plans call for identical timing with what would 
have happened before — that is, for the first phase — and so it is being planned accordingly. The first 
phase will be open — of the P.A. technical institute — in September of 1985, and a second phase in 
1986. As far as the jobless rate for young people is concerned, this is really consistent with what the 
situation is right across our country. 
 
We really weren’t in a very good position as far as skill training offering was concerned in our province. 
We were, I think, tied for last place with New Brunswick. I think that we do have to d something, and 
we do have to do a considerable amount in regard to increasing the offerings as far as skill training is 
concerned. That’s why we’re not just looking at the building of institutes, but we’re looking at other 
alternative ways of providing skill training, such as I mentioned — such as extending of school years 
and school days, such as extension of the university outreach and extension programs, such as purchase 
of equipment and putting it into buildings that we can put it into, and provide training as quickly as we 
possibly can. 
 
I agree with you, we can’t wait. I think it’s too important a thing. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to turn to a few specific areas. I recently got the annual reports, but I took a 
look at the annual report of 1980-81 when I didn’t have the report — the current reports — and I noticed 
in respect to the training of the disadvantaged, it indicates there that there are two federal-provincial 
agreements governing the training of disadvantaged, affecting overall costs and the type of rehabilitative 
training services offered by the department. Under the terms of the vocational rehabilitation and disabled 
persons agreement, training is offered to mentally and physically disabled persons who are vocationally 
handicapped. 
 
In 1980-81 some 587 persons received training under that program. The concern that I have is, first of 
all, can you indicate whether the two federal-provincial agreements 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2240 

governing the vocational training for the disadvantaged or disabled are in fact still in place? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — You’re referring to the VRDP? Yes, yes, that’s still in place. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — What I’m concerned about, then, is a very substantial decrease in the amount that is 
being expended. That is not only a substantial decrease in respect to what we proposed in our March 
budget. In March we proposed $3,776,070. In the estimated 1981-82 it was $3,432,790. And I find that 
what has happened in the current budget is that there was a drastic cut in the training for the 
disadvantaged of $2.9 million, about. Could the minister explain the reason for the major cut? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, the information that I have is that fewer candidates presented 
themselves for training this year, but that no one has been turned down for training. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Maybe in the report could the minister indicate . . . I noticed in 1980-81, 587 persons 
received training. Can the minister indicate the number that have been received in the current year? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, the statistics wouldn’t be complete for ’82-83 to the end of this year, so 
we haven’t got that information right now. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — You are saying that the information is not complete. I agree that it may not be 
complete. I wonder if the minister has any statistics up to the present time as to the number of people 
that have taken advantage of it. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Sorry, I didn’t get the question. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Could you give me the number that have participated to date? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — To date, the number is 525. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Also, Mr. Minister, in 1980-81, the department established what was known as the 
Outreach program. During that year they set up the administration board for the delivery capacity of 
something like 40,000 days of training, and began I guess in August of 1981. I would like the minister to 
indicate to what extent that program, Outreach, has been used; he could indicate the number of days of 
training, say, in 1981-82 and ’82-83. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — The total number of students involved were 1,107. The total number of 
locations in which programs were offered in the Outreach programs were 34. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I wonder if the minister could give an evaluation of how he evaluates the 
effectiveness of the Outreach program. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — An evaluation was done this spring and was completed some time in June. 
The evaluation pointed out that the programs were about the equivalent from the point of view of being 
cost effective, of the programs in the institutes and that the one real advantage of the Outreach program 
was that it was reaching the people who would not end up going to the institutes. So it was a good, 
sound report as far as the effectiveness of the programs was concerned. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2241 

MR. KOSKIE: — Just on another specific topic, Mr. Minister. In respect to community colleges, I 
know in 1981 there was a definite formula that was used for the funding of community colleges and I 
wonder if the minister could provide me with the details as to the actual formula for funding of the 
community colleges. If it’s a formula and a document, if you want to provide that to me now or at a later 
date, that’s fine. I guess the next question is: was indeed the same formula that had been used in the past, 
in say 1981, used during the current year? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, first of all to your first question. Yes, we could provide you with that 
formula. It’s about at three-page document. And the last time that the formula was used as such as in the 
‘81-82 fiscal year. And now we are using a straight percentage increase and not using that formula, or at 
least this particular year. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — For the past year you’re saying you just used a straight percentage increase over the 
previous budget. Is that what you’re saying? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — That’s a straight percentage increase over last year’s . . . that would be the flat 
grants, the grants to the community colleges. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I know that what is being considered, and it has been openly discussed, is that more 
of the costs relating to the programs in the community colleges will indeed, part of it, or a greater 
proportion of it, in the future be funded by a fee to be paid by the individual enrolling. I don’t know if 
that is policy but certainly discussions have taken place that that is being seriously considered. I’d like 
the minister to comment in respect to that. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, well, there has been a trend in the community colleges over the last few 
years to offer more courses, more programs in skill training — a higher and higher percentage of those 
programs. But in addition, yes, we are attempting to move in the direction of making the social interest, 
the personal interest programs more cost recoverable than they have been in the past. And what we are 
doing is pointing at a situation where we’ll have it 100 per cent cost recoverable. But we do have to keep 
in mind that there is a difference, a considerable difference or variations, I should say, throughout the 
province and where there is a sparsity of population, the community college has more difficulty in 
making that a viable operation, as opposed to, let’s say, Regina Plains Community College would have. 
So we have to keep in mind this whole idea of accessibility of programs along with our aim to make 
these programs cost recoverable in the future. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Just one other question in respect to community colleges. I note that in the overall 
budget of your government, that in respect to the administration, that there was some cutback there, and 
some decrease in personnel. I was wondering if the minister could comment on that. (I’m kind of 
wandering around the report, but I think we can wind it down pretty fast.) I’m really talking about the 
cuts in the amount of administration for community colleges. It has in fact been decreased over the 
previous budget, and fairly substantially decreased from what was proposed in March. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — As far as permanent staff is concerned, we’ve reduced in the administration, 
three positions. So we’ve gone from 1981-82 — there were 18 positions — down to 15 positions, over 
that period of time. Those were . . . (inaudible) . . . 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2242 

MR. KOSKIE: — I want to turn to another area that is of some concern. We have had in the past a 
number of general proficiency awards (and I looked in the 1980-81 report of the department) and there 
were some 1,300 awards granted to top grade 12 students throughout Saskatchewan. I wonder if the 
minister could indicate the number during the current year, if he has that, or for the 1981-82, I guess. 
Does he have any plans in respect to the continuation or the discontinuation of the proficiency awards to 
grade 12 students? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, the situation is that we have a higher enrolment at the grade 12 level this 
year than we had last year. Because it’s on a percentage of students, we will have a larger number of 
recipients of the proficiency awards, but these have not been determined as yet, and won’t be determined 
until the end of March. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — In respect to student loans, I think the minister has recently had a press release 
indicating that there was a substantial increase in the amount of the student loans during the past year. 
The thing that was disturbing to me in the particular release, and considering the fact of the difficulty of 
young people obtaining employment. (I recall the report — I thought I had it here), but it was indicated 
by the minister that in respect to student loans and bursaries, over 4,000, or 4,400 had been granted 
during the course of the year, and the funding was up from previous years. What I was concerned about 
is that the minister indicated that it may be necessary to toughen up the criteria in respect to who will 
qualify. 
 
It seems to me that the reason for so many more people requesting the loans through the student loans of 
the federal government, and the bursaries and loans from the province is that, in fact, they have not been 
able to get summer employment, and are more dependent upon the student assistance that they can get 
through this method. So it concerns me considerably. I wonder what the minister has in mind when he 
indicates that in respect to this topic he intends to look at toughening up the criteria. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — The problem in the past has been that we have really never made use, full use, 
of the federal loan money that is available. And so what we are going to attempt to do is we will be 
giving more money in terms of bursary, but we will be using a higher percentage of the federal money, 
so we are changing our terms of reference, our criteria, in that regard. We have actually given out 12 per 
cent — $6.1 million this year as compared to $4.2 million last year, and we will be increasing that 
mount by something like 12 per cent next year, so we are actually going to be giving more in terms of 
bursary help to students, that we’re going to be taking full advantage of federal loans. We anticipate that 
the federal loan is going to increase. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — You indicate that you are going to be taking better advantage of the federal loans. 
Could the minister indicate specifically what he means by taking better advantage of the federal loans, 
because I don’t follow quite what he is saying? All I know is that there are certain criteria set down and 
students apply for the federal loan. Many of them get turned down and then there is an appeal 
mechanism, and I don’t quite understand what you mean by indicating that you are going to take better 
advantage of the federal loans. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, what we are planning to do, in effect, is to loosen the criteria 
on the loans so that it will be easier for students to get loans. The criteria will not be as stiff for students 
to get loans. This is federal money. We have not, in the past, taken full advantage of federal money that 
has been available. We’re particularly 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2243 

concerned when we feel pretty optimistic about the fact that the federal mount of money that’s going to 
be available for loans is going to be increased. We are going o hold, we are not going to loosen, 
proportionately, the bursary criteria. That’s where we mentioned in the news release about the criteria. 
 
The advantage of doing that is so that we will have more money available for needy students. If we are 
anticipating that there will be another increase in enrolment of students at the university level, then our 
concern is that we should have enough bursary money available for those students who are needy. This, 
however, has not been determined as of this time because these are still proposals that we are working 
on, or recommendations that we are working on, and they still have to be reviewed by the bursary and 
the loan committee, which has student representation on it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I was under the impression that the provincial government administered the federal 
program of student loans, and that the federal government set the criteria. Am I incorrect in that 
assumption? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Some of the federal criteria are followed, but there are certain areas where we 
have jurisdiction. That is on provincial amounts of money that we will allocate. We still have control 
over the awarding of bursary money. That’s right. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — You indicate that a greater utilization of the federal component — I don’t understand 
what you’re saying when you say that you’re going to have a greater utilization of the federal 
component. I just want to add on this that the former minister was, in fact, the chairman of a committee 
of ministers of education across Canada. They were, in fact, lobbying the federal government to relax 
the criteria. 
 
Certainly, one of the areas of great concern was in respect to farm children. Many of the parents had 
assets which, in fact, took them out of the . . . May not have much income, but will have a considerable 
amount of assets. Many of the farm children would not qualify, I know that during his period of 
discussion with the federal government, as I recall it and you can correct me, he did in fact get, in 
respect to the assets, increased, it seems to me, to $150,000, which was of some assistance. 
 
What I’m asking, I guess, is: are you anticipating a change in the federal government’s student loan 
criteria by which you are going to make better use of federal funds? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — No, I can’t honestly say that we are expecting a change in criteria, I did say 
that I expect — having met with the Secretary of State about a month ago in Victoria the ministers of 
education across Canada were very optimistic about the fact that there would probably be an increase in 
the level of funding offered in terms of loans. 
 
I can’t say that we are anticipating that there will be a relaxation of the criteria that the federal 
government use. I guess what I am saying is that we have never taken full advantage of the criteria that 
exist in awarding money to students for one reason or another. We have never taken full advantage of 
the criteria, and now we are planning to go the full route as far as what the criteria will allow us in 
offering money to students. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do I understand the minister to be 
saying, when he says take full advantage, what he means is that the department proposes to require 
students to borrow every penny they can under the federal loan plan before they qualify for any 
bursaries, and that in that sense of the word, the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2244 

department is taking advantage of the federal criteria? The student in fact will be receiving the 
disadvantage of being barred from bursaries until he has taken the full advantage of the federal loan 
program. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in reply to the hon. leader, partly right, but it will be 
based upon need, and those with greatest need will get the biggest break, and those who are more able to 
pay back the loan will have to get a higher proportion of loan, the reason being that we want to ensure 
that we’ve got enough money available for those students who are really in need of help. We want to try, 
as much as possible, to accomplish the principle of accessibility for all people who have the ability and 
have the desire and the motivation to go to university. That’s the reason for us changing our criteria 
somewhat, or relaxing them. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I had a couple of questions that I wish 
to ask, and I apologize if they have already been covered while I had to be out of the House, out of the 
committee. 
 
First I turn to university enrolments, and ask the minister what projected university enrolments he sees. 
Could he give me the current university enrolments in full-time equivalents at the University of Regina 
and the University of Saskatchewan, following the second semester registration at the University of 
Regina? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I’m not sure that I’m able to provide the specific information. There are many 
statistics that come out, and it’s sometimes very difficult to differentiate between part-time and full-time 
and extension and things like that. 
 
It’s somewhere in the neighbourhood of between 9,000 and 10,000, as far as I can figure out, who are 
full-time students at the University of Regina, and somewhere in the neighbourhood of between 13,000 
and 14,000 at the University of Saskatchewan, full-time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, depending on what the figures are required for, the so-
called full-time equivalents is a fairly common measure of the number of students. But if you don’t have 
that information with you, fair enough. 
 
With respect to space, I suppose the full-time students are a better measure there, since many of the part-
time students don’t put a pressure on space, although some of them do. Can the minister advise whether 
or not his government is satisfied with the space available at the University of Regina and the University 
of Saskatchewan for the students who are now there and the students which his department projects will 
be there in the next year or two? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I did make some comment about the projections for next 
year. Having spoken with the presidents of the universities, they feel that they have some difficulty in 
projecting enrolments, perhaps more difficulty than they have ever had in the past, in projecting what 
will happen for this coming year as far as enrolment is concerned. 
 
And I satisfied with the amount of facility that we have available at the university? No, I think we could 
use additional facilities at both universities, and perhaps we could have been adding additional facilities 
over a period of a number of years, or at least this is what is indicated to me. However, be that as it may, 
perhaps we will have to do some things which we haven’t done in the past on a makeshift basis. At the 
present time I 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2245 

don’t seen an extreme amount of difficulty as far as classroom space is concerned at the University of 
Saskatchewan. At the University of Regina, perhaps it is more critical. We are presently thinking in 
terms of what can be done in order to satisfy the requirements. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, if the minister feels that something more 
might have been done over the past years in providing space, would he explain to the committee why he 
did not proceed with the geology building at the University of Saskatchewan in 1982? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I also did attempt to address myself to that question. For one thing, our 
government reviewed every project that was under way, whether it was educational or with regard to 
health or social services. When it came to reviewing the geology building specifically, there was a 
considerable amount of confusion as to what the price really should have been. As a result, it was put on 
hold. I am hoping to bring this forth as a high priority for the University of Saskatchewan for the coming 
’83-84 year. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — If it is to be a high priority for ’83-84, wouldn’t it have been better to 
build it in ’82-83 when admittedly . . . perhaps someone needs to study it, but if it’s reasonably obvious 
then why not go ahead with it when we are very clearly needing the jobs and economic activity which 
would flow from that sort of project? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, first of all, I think we are faced with a situation where we have 
restraints, where we were deficit budgeting. I feel that had the previous government stayed in power 
with the circumstances and the information which was given to me by the same officials, the same 
decision would have been made by your government. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I can assure you that was not the case. We’d 
wrestled that one to the ground. We’d had a fair number of proposals for that and had decided on one. 
There is, I think, no question that that project would have gone ahead, as the engineering project went 
ahead and as others went ahead in a relatively orderly manner. But that is water under the bridge. 
 
I ask you what the approach of your ministry is with respect to an archives building. Is that still on hold, 
or are you prepared to bring that one forward at this time? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I am not in a very good position at the present time to be able to expand upon 
the ’83-84 budget finalization because I just don’t know where we stand with regard to that. It is one of 
the projects, one of the proposals, that we will be reviewing. That’s about as far as I can expand at the 
present time. Certainly I can see the need for us to do something with regard to getting more suitable, 
better accommodations for archives in the city of Regina. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, when you took office there were 
preliminary plans for an archives building. I have seen models prior to our leaving office. I don’t know 
to what degree of specifics the planning had proceeded, whether it was at line drawing or some lesser 
stage. The question I direct to you is: what work has been done since you took office on further planning 
of an archives building? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Planning went on until the end of June, and then it was put on hold. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2246 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, has a site been selected for the archives 
building in Regina? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — The site is still under consideration. Some consideration is being given by the 
archives board, or has been given by the archives board, for locating it on university property. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, when the minister says “university 
property” as the consideration being given by the archives board, is he referring to the College Avenue 
campus or the Wascana campus of the university? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — To the Wascana campus. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that is a change. Some consideration 
was given to that, but basically the decision was made to have it along College Avenue some place. I 
take it then that that matter is now under review and no decision has been made as to a location. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — That is right, yes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, with respect to facilities at the 
University of Regina, a recent news report quotes President Barber as indicating that attempts were 
going to be made to use McNiven School. This certainly would be an appropriate stopgap measure but 
indicates some considerable measure of pressure on the University of Regina. Could the minister say 
whether or not his department is working with the University of Regina, planning additional classroom 
space on the campus? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Leader of the Opposition, yes, I can say that we have 
been giving some consideration to planning or addressing ourselves to the plight of the university as far 
as facilities are concerned. As far as McNiven School in particular is concerned, nothing concrete has 
been decided in regard to using that location. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, could the minister give us additional. 
Information on what capital projects are in the planning stage for the University of Regina campus? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, as I mentioned, we are just giving consideration to what kinds of 
initiatives we can use in resolving their problem as far as the facility is concerned. And I have no 
information. I am not able to expand upon anything more specific than that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m not sure whether I understand what 
the minister is saying. If he is saying that the department is looking at the problem, I would have thought 
that that would be true on any given Monday morning in any given week of any year in the last 10 years. 
That’s what departments are for: to review in a general way the problems and challenges which are 
facing the post-secondary educational institutions. What I’m really asking is: is there a project that has 
gone so far as to have a name — an additional classroom building or a fine arts building or any other 
project on the University of Regina campus? And I’m now talking about the Wascana campus; I’ll come 
back to the College Avenue campus in a moment. Is there a 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2247 

project at a sufficient stage of development that it has a name that is under discussion now? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — No. The answer to that would have to be no, not at the present time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I turn now to the College Avenue 
campus of the University of Regina and ask the minister whether his government has a general policy 
with respect to either the rehabilitation of the present buildings on the Regina Avenue campus or some 
measure of demolition of those buildings and their substitution with modern buildings? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — At the present time, the university is doing a study on what to recommend 
with regard to either the renovation or the rehabilitation of the Regina campus, or the old Regina 
campus. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, inasmuch as the project will be one 
which, unless things are very different than they have been in the past, will be carried out by the 
government in the sense that tenders will be called by the government, is the government participating in 
the study or will the construction actually be supervised by the University of Regina? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, tenders will be called by the 
university. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the project will be approved by either 
the Department of Continuing Education or the Department of Government Services or both in detail 
prior to the tender call. Is that accurate or not accurate? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — The universities commission has the first approval and then the government. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in view of the fact that the government 
will need to approve the project, is the minister able to state any policy decision of the government as to 
their favouring the rehabilitation of the existing buildings or their substantial demolition and 
replacement by new buildings? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — No. I don’t think that we would be until we get the recommendations from the 
study that is being done. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do I understand then that the 
government is (if I may phrase it that way) indifferent to whether or not the buildings on the College 
Avenue campus of the University of Regina are demolished and replaced, ore rehabilitated? The 
government doesn’t have a view as to which is better in a broad public interest. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — No. I didn’t say that, nor did I intend it. I think that what I would say is that 
we are most interested in hearing a professional opinion from people who have that kind of expertise. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m sure you are interested. It’s quite 
possible at least to have a preliminary opinion before you talk to an expert. What I’m asking the minister 
is does he have an opinion on whether or not those 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2248 

buildings should be demolished and replaced, or should be rehabilitated? Obviously he cannot give a 
definite opinion until he has costs, and until he has . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, you can have 
opinions before money is committed, notwithstanding the apparent custom that prevails in Swift 
Current. I am asking whether or not the minister and the department have an opinion on what would be 
more desirable, other things being equal. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I think that from the point of view of our government, the main problem that 
we seem to have is that there’s such a backlog of buildings that are in need of rehabilitation and/or 
renovation that we would like to get a professional opinion with regard to the total picture before 
making an opinion as far as the government is concerned. If you were to ask me my personal, private 
opinion, I would see some merit in very carefully analysing and scrutinizing the possibility of renovating 
and/or rehabilitating the present buildings. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m frankly disappointed that the 
government doesn’t have a position on that, and wouldn’t be approaching the project with a belief that 
the buildings should be rehabilitated, and should not be demolished unless there are fairly substantial 
reasons otherwise. Very clearly, from the very tentative answers given by the minister, the government 
has not take this approach, but one other thing is on study or on hold, without any opinion. 
 
After a period of nine or 10 months addressing that question, I would have thought the government 
would have arrived at an opinion. I’m disappointed to think that they do not at least have a tentative 
opinion on whether or not they perceive the development of that campus as one which is essentially to 
rehabilitate the old buildings, or one which is essentially to demolish the old buildings and erect some 
new buildings either there or on the Wascana campus. It’s very clear from the minister that they have 
not arrived at any such even tentative view, and frankly I’m disappointed. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just wanted to put forward a proposition to the minister. He alludes to the 
geological science building at the university, and he indicates that the previous government had not in 
fact made a commitment to a particular proposal. I want to say that I have received copies of letters 
which went to the Premier of this province. I want to just indicate a part of the feeling at the campus in 
Saskatoon. It says: 
 

When at last, after 20 years of waiting, we reached the top of the priorities list, the gloom was 
dispelled and we have been eagerly planning the new building, which we need urgently. Replacement 
faculty of high calibre were recruited on the understanding that they would not long have to endure the 
present awful facilities, and there was a new mood of optimism. 
 
And now your government (and this is to the Premier, Mr. Devine) announces that the funding has 
been rescinded. The news is heartbreaking. 

 
So, certainly I don’t think it’s fair for the minister to indicate that in fact there was no approval by the 
previous government or no commitment to the construction of the geological science building. Because 
certainly the university was disappointed at the actions of your government. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, Mr. Chairman, essentially the previous government had three figures 
circulating around — one was in the area of $19 million, one was in the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2249 

area of $17 million, and one was in the area of $16 million. The universities commission said that they 
could not build this building for the amount of money that the OC was approved for. So that was the 
state of affairs when we became the government. That’s the reason it was rescinded at that time, because 
of the mix-up and the lack of decision on the part of the previous government. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, one is amused at anyone asserting a lack 
of decision who for nine months has not moved a muscle on a project, for nine months has not even 
turned his mind to the question of what ought to be done. If in fact there was a difficulty, which there 
was not (the middle figure was the one which was approved, as the minister will know), if he believes 
that another figure was the appropriate figure, he could have found that out fairly swiftly and dealt with 
the matter, but he did not. He confined himself to doing nothing and upbraiding others for what he says 
is a lack of decision making. 
 
The question that I want to direct to the minister is this. He has suggested that there was a substantial 
backlog of work to be done when he took office. I’m sure he is right. From that I will take it that his 
average spending will substantially exceed the average spending of the last couple of years of the 
previous government. Now, the average spending on capital the last couple years of the previous 
government was $16.3 million and $17 million. I take it therefore that when we get the accounts for the 
year we ware now in, the year that will end next March, we will have a figure as large as one of those. 
And I know we won’t and he knows we won’t. If we don’t, which we all know we won’t, the budget 
which comes down next month will compensate for that and the first two Tory years will be at least as 
big as the last two NDP years. 
 
If that isn’t so, then I know that his crocodile tears about what hadn’t been done by the previous 
administration are nothing more than that, that in fact he doesn’t intend to spend any money. He intends 
only to bemoan the fact that a previous government didn’t spend money. He has a clear target there — 
$17 million and $16.3 million in the last two NDP years. If he could get up to that level of spending in 
constant dollars, which by now would be in the level of $20 million to $25 million a year on the average 
— and you have made a very poor start and you’ll have to get up to $35 million or so a year in the 
upcoming year and the year thereafter — then I will congratulate him. But if he doesn’t, then I will think 
that his comments about what his predecessors did not do are scant comfort for those who see inaction 
on his part and on the part of his government. 
 
There has never been a greater increase in enrolments at the two universities in a shorter time than we 
have now seen in the last couple of years. That is confirmed. Never may be a long time. It could have 
happened immediately after World War II. I haven’t checked those figures. As the president of the 
University of Regina has said, the enrolment at the University of Regina has grown by 30 per cent in the 
last two years which is, I believe, unprecedented for that university. At any rate, by any standard, it’s a 
very high rate of growth. This presents a new situation requiring more action by a government and so far 
what we’ve got is less action by a government. The test is going to be in the upcoming budget, and we 
will see whether or not the minister believes that something ought to happen, or whether he believes that 
we ought to lament what did not happen in the past and do nothing for the future. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the scolding that I have just received from the 
Leader of the Opposition. I guess I just have to be apologetic for the fact that in nine months we can’t 
correct what damage was done over a period of — except for what? eight years — approximately 44 
years. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2250 

As far as matching capital construction is concerned, I don’t think we’re in the business to try and match 
what anybody did last year or the year before. I think what we’re in the business of trying to do is to 
meet the needs that are out there — the real needs, educationally. I think what we have to try to do is to 
take a look at the total picture of the needs. If the Hon. Leader of the Opposition had been here maybe 
he would have heard a few of the statistics that I pointed out about the fact that we have a need to 
educate a heck of a lot of people out there who have grade 10 or less education. We have to place a 
tremendous amount of emphasis upon that. We have a real shortfall in so far as technical training and 
availability is concerned for students to get training in technical institutes. 
 
As far as the university scene is concerned, sure, you can point to this year or that year. That’s a game. 
But what you should also start pointing at is that over the years, if you take a look at the ups and downs 
of capital construction for university, that’s what it looks like. Now, I’m not going to stand up here and 
say that we’re going to try to match you and your government, what your government did — not at all! I 
think it would be foolhardy; I think it would be irresponsible as far as the taxpayers of this province are 
concerned. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — What I am saying to you is that we will do our level best to look at the thing 
straight on, to do those things which are most needed, to save money wherever it is possible. Certainly, 
we are going to try to save money as far as capital construction is concerned, because I think we are 
expected to do that. I think we can look forward to meeting the needs of manpower which exist in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I am sure nobody in their right mind could 
take any exception to anything the minister said. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — He is in favour of motherhood, and may I put ourselves on the record as 
being similarly in favour of motherhood. We are proud of what has happened. I hope he will be equally 
proud of what he has been able to achieve when he leaves office shortly. 
 
May I ask the minister what he achieved with respect to constructing any sort of a technical facility in 
La Ronge during the year under review? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, at the present time what we are 
doing is taking a look at what the needs are in La Ronge. At the present time we are taking a look at the 
DNS facilities which do exist there. We see the need for expanded facilities in La Ronge, that is true, 
and for expanded programming. I think that we have made some steps in this connection. We have some 
plans for the future very definitely. 
 
Also, we are thinking in terms of attaching, as a base, the Prince Albert institute and using it as a base, 
not just for La Ronge, but for several of the other places in our northern training strategy. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2251 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the little satellite at buffalo Narrows was, I 
think, a particularly successful experiment. I think the earlier one at Meadow Lake was not a successful 
experiment in relative terms. I am not urging the minister to necessarily build anything at La Ronge. We 
are not talking about buildings, but programs, and I want to underline that. Has he reached any 
conclusion about when he would likely go ahead with any additional training programs at La Ronge of 
the type that are now being offered at Buffalo Narrows in heavy vehicle operation, motor vehicle 
maintenance, welding, and the like? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, just as a general statement, I think that we could safely say that we have 
our plans in shape to be announced fairly soon, with the idea of starting in the fall of this year. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, first of all I want to commend the minister for, I believe, 
what I class as a very sincere and serious comment regarding education and training for northern 
residents which he made on February 24. I quote: 
 

Mr. Chairman, I fully concur with the hon. member (this was in response to Mr. Koskie) in regard to a 
need for us to address ourselves to recognizing the need for taking initiatives in order to educate 
Indian children and Metis children. 

 
He was referring at the time to trips that he made into remote northern communities. I, for one, and I 
believe a good number of our opposition members, my colleagues, felt the same way — that the minister 
was speaking from the heart and I really appreciated his comments. I just wanted to make that point 
clear, and I sincerely respect any minister that can get up and say what he feels deep down and put the 
goldarn politics aside and feel what he actually believes in — helping minority groups in this instance, 
especially the people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I am puzzled though. For some reason or other there has been quite a reduction in comparing the budget 
handed down by the former administration for items under the continuing education branch. We had, 
with the former administration, allotted $5,003,810 for the ‘81-82 fiscal year. In your budget estimate 
for 1983 under the same item, vote 26, item 9, you have earmarked $2,386,080. That is quite a drastic 
cut when I take into account your comments of the 24th of February, your arguments, and also the 
arguments you placed before us just awhile ago that there is a need to emphasize and priorize training 
and education for northern residents, when in fact here in black and white we see a drastic reduction. I 
wonder if the minister may want to comment on that and I’ll just rest my questioning for the time being. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Member from Cumberland, I’m not sure I have the 
right figures in front of me, or I’m not sure that I am interpreting them correctly in order to answer your 
question. But the figures I have indicate that in 1981-82 the total of enrolment was 704, and that in 
1982-83 it was 934. However, the total number of training days was down slightly from 53,000 to 
50,000, roughly, in training days. And, I guess the only way I can explain it is the slowdown in the 
economy. I also agree with you that it’s something that we have to do something about in order to turn 
around. 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you for verifying the need, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I’ll just go on to indicate 
also to the minister that there were drastic cuts in other areas that pertain to your portfolio. The other 
cuts were to community colleges. There are grants to third-party organizations under vote 26, item 19. 
Quite a cut in there as well from the former 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2252 

administration’s proposed budget of $938,500. It’s been cut by $534,590, and also there was a cut on 
continuing education of $47,900. Therefore a loss of $582,590 was also incurred in that area. 
 
Now, with regard to getting back to the emphasis you placed on the need for training, skilled training, 
and industrial training in northern Saskatchewan. This really puzzles me, Mr. Minister, when we take 
into account the drastic cuts into those basic departments that could deliver that type of much needed 
training and education programming. 
 
If I should go on, I’ve noted as well that under your 1982-83 estimates, it’s quite confusing on page 66. 
Under vote 26, item 9, you have noted that portions of certain subvotes are also included in the 
following votes to reflect a realignment of DNS. You’ve got continuing education, culture and youth, 
education, government services, plus maybe another seven branches or departments listed here. 
 
This indicates to me that portions of this budget, or portions of another budget, are amalgamated into 
these various other branches. And it’s really confusing to me, and I’m sure people, communities and 
various educational associations up in northern Saskatchewan are very confused trying to figure out 
what portions, what priorities have been allotted to them from these various other branches. 
 
I wonder if you might not be able to clarify that for me. If not now, possibly in writing at a later stage, so 
that when I communicate with my people, my constituents and the people that I am responsible to in 
terms of my critic role, I may have answers that will verify what has been allotted for those specific 
programs. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


