






















































Hansard: November 22, 1983


79 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 22, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT, AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 
CLERK ASSISTANT (PROCEDURAL): — Mr. Tusa, from the continuing select committee, presented the first 
report of the committee which is as follows: 
 
 Your committee, in accordance with rule 88 of the Legislative Assembly, has established a select 

committee on fire prevention — protection. The terms of reference of the said select committee are 
as follows: 

 
 That a select committee on fire prevention — protection composed of five members be established 

to consider and report on: 
 
 Training requirements for fire brigades; training needs of volunteer, professional and industrial fire 

fighting personnel; institutional fire emergency programs, hotel fire emergency programs, 
government-owned buildings, emergency programs and fire-fighting prevention needs of police 
forces; the depth of training regarding; desirability of certification programs; arson investigation, 
educational requirements; injection of fire prevention education components into trade school 
courses, i.e., plumbers, sheet metal, electrical, etc.; the desirability of a permanent training facility 
with fire ground and burn facilities, classrooms, dormitories and a drill hall of adequate size for 
indoor ladder and fire fighting unit practice; so that training may be carried on throughout the year; 
to provide specialized facilities for training in hazardous goods and materials; specialized training 
in automatic sprinkler protection; advanced officer training; and facilities for small city fire 
departments to use. The adequacy of present fire statistic program maintained by fire safety unit and 
as required by section 4(b) of The Fire Prevention Act; and other matters of fire prevention or 
protection as may be relevant or appropriate. 

 
 And that the committee have the power to sit during intersessional period and during legislative 

sessions except when the Assembly is sitting; and that the committee have the power to send for 
persons, papers and records, to examine witnesses under oath, to receive representation from 
interested parties and individuals to engage such advisers and assistants as are required for the 
purpose of the inquiry, to require the assistance of staff employed by departments and agencies of 
government, and to hold meetings away from the seat of government in order that fullest 
representation may be received without unduly inconveniencing those desiring to be heard. 

 
 And that the committee be instructed to submit an interim report to the Legislative Assembly by 

March 31, 1984. 
 
MR. TUSA: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion of concurrence but before so doing, with your 
permission, I would like to make a few remarks. 
 
On April 21 of 1981, Mr. Speaker, there was a report submitted of the special committee on the review of rules and 
procedures of this Legislative Assembly in which they made a number of recommendations. Among the 
recommendations they made referred to select committees. I would like to read a few of the recommendations that 
that report contains. 
 That the rules be amended to provide for the establishment of a continuing select committee to be 

made up of nine members. 



 
November 11, 1983 
 
In this session of the legislature that hasn’t been done, and there are seven government and two opposition 

members on the continuing select committee. Another recommendation was: 
 
 That the committee will have the power to establish form time to time select committees with the 

power to call for persons, papers and records, and to examine witnesses under oath, and with the 
power to travel and to hear testimony away from the seat of the government. 

 
 That the continuing select committee will have the power to determine the broad topic for review, 

consideration and report by each select committee. 
 
 That the select committees be empowered to report directly to the Legislative Assembly from time 

to time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the idea of select committees has been modelled after the system used at Westminster. In their 
parliament they have select committees which continuously sit throughout the life of the legislature or parliament. 
However, we here in Saskatchewan do not have enough members to have continuously sitting select committees. 
Therefore, the mechanism of continuing select committees which would, from time to time, strike select 
committees, has been established. 
 
These committees, Mr. Speaker, are particularly for the use of private members on both sides of the House. 
Through the mechanism of these select committees private members are able to have a direct input into the 
decision-making of government. They also have the opportunity to go out and talk to the public. So the public also 
has greater communication with their government. 
 
I would like to point out to members on both sides of the House that select committees are very powerful. As the 
recommendation stated, they have the power to travel from the seat of government. They have the power to call 
witnesses. They have the power to make them swear under oath. They have the power to call for all papers that 
they deem necessary to carry out their study. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would urge members, and particularly private 
members, to look at the mechanism and vehicle of select committees very closely, and that they give serious 
consideration to using them in the future. 
 
With that, I am very pleased to announce the striking of the first select committee, and the following members will 
be on a committee on fire safety and prevention. They are as follows: the member from Rosthern, Mr. Ralph 
Katzman, will be the convenor; the member from Kelvington-Wadena, Sherwin Peterson, will be on the 
committee; the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, Mr. Michael Hopfner, will be a member; the member from 
Regina North West, Mr. Bill Svenson, will be a member; and the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, Mr. Allen 
Engel, will be the fifth member. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move: 
 
 That the first report of the continuing select committee be now concurred in, seconded by Mr. 

Lingenfelter, the member from Shaunavon. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take just but a few moments of the time of the Assembly 
to agree with the member who is moving the motion to establish this select committee that we indeed are in favour 
of the committee, and my colleague from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg will be taking part as a committee member. 
 
I think, however, I would be remiss if I didn’t point out the fact that a similar committee proposed by the member 
from one of our northern constituencies, Mr. Fred Thompson, was  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

81 
 

turned down only earlier on in this year — a committee that would have studied economic conditions in the North, 
the fact that 85 per cent of the people in the North are unemployed — that our proposed committee dealt with by 
the continuing select committee was turned down. I would hope that in the future that the kind of co-operation that 
is expressed today by the opposition in setting up a committee proposed by a government member, that we would 
get the same kind of co-operation, which hasn’t been evident in the past, and I do second the motion by the 
member who made the motion. 
 
SOME HON MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to the House, 22 grade eight students from 
Davin School in Regina, from my constituency, and their teacher, Terry Vargo. I hope that they have had a good 
tour of the buildings, and they are here to watch with question period. Unfortunately, I will not be able to join them 
at 2:30, but my colleague, the Minister of Culture and Recreation, Mr. Folk, will join them. I would ask the 
members of the House to welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
HON MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just want to join my colleague form Regina 
Lakeview in welcoming these students from Davin School. While the school is physically in Lakeview, the vast 
majority of the students actually come from Regina Centre, the heart of Regina centre. So I want to second what 
my learned friend said, and hope that your visit today is educational and worthwhile. 
 
HON MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. RYBCHUK: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 35 students 
from the Regina Plains Community College, registered with the adult education upgrading class. They are 
accompanied with teacher-chaperones Bob Brown and Rosemarie Sturge, and are seated in the West Gallery. I 
hope their stay here will be both educational and entertaining, and I look forward to meeting them at 3:00 o’clock 
for pictures and refreshments, and I would ask the House to welcome them here please. 
 
HON MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — This is a repeat performance. I take the word of the staff of the Assembly that this 
school is physically located in Regina Victoria, although the Regina Plains Community College is in Regina 
Centre. And I suspect that many of their classes are taken in Regina Centre. 
 
Once again I want to welcome these students. I hope that your visit here is educational and worth while as it often 
has been in the past when you’ve met with the member for Regina Centre. 
 
HON MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Inflation Rate 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the Minister of  



 
November 11, 1983 
 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. It has to do with the latest cost-of-living figures which have become public 
this morning, issued by Statistics Canada. And those figures show that Regina and Saskatoon are tied at having the 
second highest inflation rate in Canada year over year. In the last 12 months, Regina and Saskatoon are tied for 
having the second highest rate of inflation. The inflation rate in Regina and Saskatoon is 6.1 per cent while the 
national average is 4.9 per cent. And this can only get worse as winter approaches. 
 
My question to the minister is this: what specific plans does the Minister have to reduce the rate of inflation for 
citizens of Regina, Saskatoon, and elsewhere in Saskatchewan this winter? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, I might remind the Hon. Leader of the Opposition that under his 
administration the cost of living was as high as 12 per cent, and I think that getting it down to . . . 
 
HON MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Eighteen months later it’s at 6 per cent. I also might add, Mr. Speaker, that the reason 
for the slight increase is the cost of alcohol and food, of which we really do not have much control. 
 
The latest increase in alcohol was directly attributed to the federal excise tax. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In the light of the fact that Saskatchewan has about 
the highest inflation rate of Canada, does the Minster of Consumer Affairs agree with the actions of her 
government in increasing utility rates two, three, sometimes four, and even more times the rate of inflation? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — In response to the Leader of the Opposition’s supplementary question, Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to remind the hon. member that under his administration utility increases increased three times a 
year, at times as high as 23 to 27 per cent. Now we froze, Mr. Speaker, we froze utility rates in Saskatchewan for 
one year, as we told the people we would out on the hustings, because we wanted to know for sure that those 
increases that the utility crowns were requesting were justified. We have put into place PURC. PURC is doing an 
excellent job, and I might add, Mr. Speaker, that in meeting with the consumer association of Saskatchewan 
branch, a few weeks ago, they were most pleased that PURC is in place and that the consumers finally have an 
input into determining utility costs. 
 
SOME HON MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. As the minister will know, PURC grants no increases 
. . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. This is a time for asking questions not giving information. If the member has a 
question, proceed. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that the public utilities review 
commission grants no increases that are not asked for by the utilities, and in view of the fact that your government 
has imposed a 5 per cent guide-line on working people, on school boards and hospital boards, do you agree with 
the utility should impose the same guide-line on themselves when asking for increases in utility rates by the public 
utilities review commission? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The utilities apply for an increase, given the information they have inside, given their 
projections for the upcoming year, given projections in the long term for additional capital expenditures. That’s 
what utility increases are based on, Mr. Speaker, and I might add that PURC will not play with utilities like the 
former administration did. When an  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

83 
 

election was coming up, down went the utility rates. When the election was over, up went the utility rates. We 
want our crown corporations to work efficiently and provide a service to the people of Saskatchewan. PURC has 
the authority either to grant a higher increase than is asked for or roll back an increase that was requested. I think 
we have a lot of knowledgeable people sitting on PURC, and I tell you, this government has faith in their decisions. 
 
SOME HON MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Is it no part of the policy of your government to 
restrict the requests that the utilities make for rate increases to something akin to what you are asking working 
people to accept as increases in incomes? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I might say, Mr. Speaker, that under the former administration the performance of the 
crowns . . . After the massive borrowings that were ordered by the previous administration, the debt ratio of the 
crowns are extremely alarming. It is something that this government will have to cope with and we are coping with 
it, and we are making long-term plans. And in essence, what do the utilities do? I can recall the former attorney 
general saying that utilities must be able to provide a service to the public at a break-even cost. We’re trying to 
provide that. Unfortunately, because of the massive debts incurred by the utilities prior to us taking over, those 
previous debts must be addressed, and this is the only way that we will accomplish it. 
 

Statistics Canada Report on Inflation 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a question of the Minister of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs. In the StatsCan report for July, Statistics Canada attributed the rising rate of inflation in 
Regina and Saskatoon, which was already then at near record levels, to natural gas and power increases. In the 
Statistics Canada report for August, Statistics Canada attributed the rising rate of inflation in Regina and Saskatoon 
as accountable for by the SGI insurance premiums. Stated by Statistics Canada in their report. Members opposite 
who deny that can look at the report. My question to the Minister is this: in the light of the July Statistics Canada 
report and the August Statistics Canada report, can she continue to deny the relationship of those utility increases 
with the rising cost of living and her failure to protect consumers? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, the increase in the CPI that have just been let out for October, the rise is 
attributed to the cost of alcohol — now the Leader of the Opposition is suggesting that we lower the cost of alcohol 
— and the increase in the cost of food. Now he is taking the stance of his federal leader’s wife; he wants us to pay 
the farmers of Saskatchewan less for their products than they deserve. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I am somewhat surprised, Mr. Speaker, to hear grain prices get into that answer, but I 
guess they did. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Comments of that type are not allowed in question period. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — My question to the minister is — the Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs — 
will the minister no admit, in the light of the StatsCan report for July and August, that the time has come to end the 
double standard, that the time has come to admit that a double standard isn’t just bad leadership — it aborted your 
restraint program before it began? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I apologize to the member. I didn’t hear your question. I couldn’t hear it over your 
colleagues that were hollering. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Will the minister not admit that the time has come to end the double standard of one 
rate for people’s salaries and no controls at all on utility increases, in the light of  



 
November 11, 1983 
 
the clear and straightforward report of StatsCanada for July and August? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I would hardly say, Mr. Speaker, that there is a double standard. we have imposed a 5 
per cent limit — that’s better than what Manitoba has done. They’re at zero to three. I think we’re quite generous 
with the 5 per cent. The government, I don’t think, would want at this point, and I don’t think we could get into 
price controls. There’s too many outside factors. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. When the utility rate increases of 13, 15, 
18.5, and 43 per cent were announced, what information did your department provide you with on the impact of 
those increases on the cost of living? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I don’t quite understand the thrust of the hon. member’s question. The increases that 
were allowed by the public utility review commission were based on information that they had had. There’s two 
opposing sides to every question. The learned men and women sitting o n the utility review commission base their 
decisions on the information provided to them by the crowns on behalf of consumers, The Consumers Association, 
Saskatchewan branch, made a presentation, made their feelings known, and the utility costs that were permitted are 
a decision purely of that board. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would direct to the minister’s attention the same question since she didn’t answer it. 
what information did your department provide you on the impact of those utility rate increases on the cost of living 
when they were announced by the utilities? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — My department didn’t provide me with any impact. We don’t do our own survey here 
in Saskatchewan. We rely on the Canadian figures as they are gathered right across the country. We don’t have the 
resources to do that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, supplementary. Is the minister telling this House that your government went 
ahead, increased the utility rates without any thought and without any information on the effect that that would 
have on the pocket-books of the average consumer, the small business person, and the farmer in this province? 
How do you call such a department a representative of a Saskatchewan consumer? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Obviously, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member does not realize what the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs does. I can say that in determining the type of increase that the crowns have to 
ask for, I am very confident that the people sitting in those crowns are very cognizant on the increasing costs to 
consumer for certain utilities. But what are we to do? We have an awful debt to service, a debt incurred by the 
members opposite when they were in power. And those debts, you know . . . I don’t know how they borrow 
money, but on this side of the House when you borrow money you got to pay it back. And we’re attempting to pay 
back the literally hundreds of millions of dollars that they borrowed without any thought of ever having to come 
down to the day when those capital borrowings had to be paid back, and that’s what we’re doing right now. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well was that, was that . . . By that brief, concise answer were you telling this House 
that those utility rate increases were announced without any information, and without any idea of what impact that 
was going to have on the Saskatchewan consumer? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, they weren’t. Mr. Speaker, PURC, when they meet, PURC is opened. Various 
organizations make representations to PURC. One was the consumers association Saskatchewan branch. Small 
businesses have made representations. Various organizations who are users of utilities have made representation, 
and I must say in looking at what some of the utilities were asking for as a rate of increase, and what PURC 
actually will allow them, I would say that the members of PURC took into consideration the representations made 
to them by the public. 
 



 
November 22, 1983 

 

85 
 

Claim Against Richard Collver 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance office. This question, Mr. Speaker, has to do with what I term the sweetheart deal which he 
approved at the expense of the Saskatchewan taxpayers with respect to the former leader of the Progressive 
Conservative Party, one Dick Collver. My question to the minister is this: will he table in the legislature the 
independent legal opinions which he received which recommended to him that the claim against Dick Collver of in 
excess of $1.1 million be dropped? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask the hon. member to repeat the last part of the question. I’m 
sorry I didn’t hear it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is this: will he table in this legislature the 
opinions which he received from independent legal counsel advising SGI that they should drop a claim of more 
than $1 million against Mr. Richard Collver? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, no I will not table those documents and I don’t know why the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order. Order. When the Speaker’s on his feet the Assembly is to be quiet, and 
if that rule is not obeyed then I’m going to ask a couple of members to leave the Assembly. Will you give the 
member a chance to answer? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, I will not table any of those documents. The hon. 
member opposite had the same information handed to him when he was government. I may add, Mr. Speaker, that 
it was a political move on their part to begin with to initiate that law suit. They spent $100,000 or more in the time 
that they were in government. Mr. Speaker, it would have cost us another two or three times that amount of money 
to continue with it, to service nothing more than a vendetta, as my hon. colleague indicated. 
 
They had six years in which to bring that case to trial, and didn’t bother moving on it at all during that period of 
time, Mr. Speaker. The suit was initiated, as a matter of fact, just prior to the 1978 election for the sole reason of 
embarrassing the leader of the Progressive Conservative Party at that time. And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I have 
no reason, I have absolutely no reason to protect Mr. Collver or anyone else, Mr. Speaker. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, my supplementary is this: on what condition does the minister refuse 
to table the independent legal opinions on which he is giving up a claim for over $1 million which the public of 
Saskatchewan have a right to recover if it is in fact recoverable? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated I won’t table any of the information that we have. They 
have the information while they were in government. They were given the same advice by legal counsel at that 
time. The main reason, Mr. Speaker, that I have no intention of tabling that information is I don’t intend to allow 
these people to harass any of those people. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that the information given to the 
House that the previous government had a legal opinion advising the dropping of the suit, in view of the fact that 
that information is totally and 100 per cent wrong, will the minister now obtain an opinion from independent 
counsel and lay it before this House,  



 
November 11, 1983 
 
indicating that in the opinion of independent counsel that claim of more than $1 million should have been 
abandoned? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: —Mr. Speaker, if I may have my chance at this. The decision that was made . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Would you like to try it? Thank you. 
 
The decision that was made by the board, Mr. Speaker, was a very proper one, and it was a business decision that 
was made by the board and by management. As I indicated earlier, that claim sat for six years. It was started in 
1976, initiated in 1978, and by the time we came to government in 1982 nothing had happened with it. The sole 
intention of that claim was for the purpose (for political reasons) to embarrass the leader of the Progressive 
Conservative Party. 
 
He talks about a $1 million suit of recovery. First of all, there was a credit check made. There were no assets in 
Canada. Mr. Collver had no assets in Canada. Had we won the case, there was no guarantee we could have 
recovered any money. Secondly, there was a credit check done in the United States. The cost of attempting to 
recover anything in the United States was astronomical. Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, the counter-suits could very well 
have cost SGI an equal amount of money without any opportunity of recovering any of the money that we might 
have won on, had we won it. There was no guarantee . . . As the hon. member knows full well, there is no 
guarantee that we might win a case. We may spend $200,000 or $300,000 in attempting to win a case, lose it, lose 
the counter-claim against the case that had been initiated by Mr. Collver, and end up by paying an equal amount of 
money. And in the long run, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan would be a million-and-a-half the loser rather than not 
be losing anything at all as it is now. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that the business decision referred 
to by the minister was made by the board of SGI, and in view of the fact that that board at that time consisted of the 
minister who was a Collver candidate in 1978, Mr. Ray Malinowski, who was a Collver candidate in 1978, Mr. Al 
Wager who was a Collver candidate in 1978, and Mr. Eli Fluter who was a campaign manager for a Collver 
candidate in 1978, do you not think it would have been better to assure the public that an impartial decision was 
made to obtain an independent opinion from an independent lawyer and make that decision public? 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. If members ask questions I believe it’s only proper that the minister be given 
an opportunity to answer, and I believe his colleagues could also give him an opportunity to hear and to answer. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, he also left out 12 other members of the board that are on 
SGI’s board of directors. Secondly you had six years in which to move on this case. why didn’t you do it while you 
had the chance? Why didn’t you use the opportunity when you were government? You blew it. You had until April 
of 1982 to solve the case. I’ll tell you why — because you were told not to. That was the reason you didn’t move 
on with it. You were told by your own management and your own board there was no point I n moving on it, so 
you didn’t. Now you wonder why we didn’t move on it. We at least did a review of it. We spent a year reviewing 
it, and we did get an independent opinion on it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. With respect to the counsel, the very distinguished 
counsel, Mr. Si Halyk, engaged to pursue this matter, who engaged it, who commenced the action and pursued it to 
the examination for discovery stage, did you obtain an independent opinion from Mr. Halyk and, if so, will you 
make it available to the House? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: —Mr. Speaker, in 1980 late . . . I can’t remember the exact dates. In 1982 the case was 
transferred to another solicitor. I might also add — he talks about Mr. Halyk in  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

87 
 

this legislature — that it was in 1977 that the minister at the time who was responsible for SGI called a meeting of 
three or four individuals, asked if there was a possibility of pursuing a case against Mr. Collver. This was in 
November of 1977, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was immediately thereafter that I believe it was Mr. Halyk came back with the recommendation that yes, there 
was a possibility for action. He was then instructed by the minister not to do anything until May of the following 
year just prior to an election . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. We’ve shouted the question period out. I think we’ll proceed with the order 
paper. 
 
Order, please. It’s very difficult to accomplish any work in the House if members are not going to co-operate, and I 
would ask for them to co-operate so that we can be heard. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the hon. member for Meadow Lake, by 
leave of the Assembly: 
 
 That notwithstanding rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan, that this assembly shall on Thursday, November 24, 1983, meet at 10 o’clock a.m. 
until 1 o’clock p.m., and that when this Assembly adjourns on Thursday, November 24, 1983, it do 
stand adjourned until Monday, November 28, 1983. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is at the request of the members opposite to attend their provincial convention, a percent that has 
been maintained in this House for some time. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I move the said motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Before orders of the day, I wonder perhaps if I would be permitted 
to make a short comment with regards to an event in history that happened 20 years ago today when John F. 
Kennedy, then president of the United States, was assassinated in Dallas, Texas. 
 
History in the making at that time was abruptly stopped, and I suppose was left to the imagination of the world as 
to what was going to happen and what in fact did happen. Today we perhaps ask ourselves, and perhaps the media 
more than we ask ourselves, how good of a president was John F. Kennedy? And too often it seems to me, that’s 
what we see in the headlines of a newspaper. It seems also that it’s rather foolhardy. I would suggest, to argue a 
man’s greatness 20 years after his death. The reality is that, the way I would see it, is John Fitzgerald Kennedy 
brought a new sense of politics when he came to office more than 20 years ago today. Perhaps new idealism, a 
sense of populism, a sense of youth, a sense of vitality, that the American and perhaps the world — a political stage 
— had not seen before, or certainly had not seen before for many generations. 
 
Kennedy was a symbol of hope for a lot of American people, and I think a symbol of hope for a lot of people in the 
entire western world; a man who defied all odds. Is suppose, to become the first Irish Catholic citizen of United 
States ever to become a president; a man who devoted himself and brought a new focus to the whole concept of 
equality in American politics to, I  



 
November 11, 1983 
 
suppose, the civil rights movement and to many other things. 
 
He met various crises in his thousand days as president of the United States on the international stage — the Bay of 
Pigs, Laos, the question of Berlin, the Vietnam situation, and the extension of that particular situation. 
 
Perhaps more than anything, the death of John Kennedy signalled a new era in American politics, and perhaps in 
western world politics, in the advent of violence to our society, and violence against leaders of our society that 
perhaps we hadn’t seen at least in several decades before that. 
 
With the murder of this, what I believe to be a great man, we see following that, the murder of various other 
figures, including his brother, Bobby Kennedy, and Martin Luther King, and several other people. But certainly I 
think it augured in a new era of violence against politicians, and I think, looking at this from members of this 
Assembly, members who are elected by the people of our jurisdiction, I think something that we have all had to 
live with in that era of time. 
 
Perhaps all of us would have the memories that we would see of the former President Kennedy. Perhaps I, like 
many others, would be attracted to the inaugural address when John Kennedy just became the president of the 
United States. And the words that he spoke at that time perhaps are very true again today, and perhaps could be 
forcefully advanced again today, when he said: 
 
 Ask not what your country can do for you, but ask what you can do for your country. 
 
And I think, more than anything else, that phrase and those words depict to me, and to many other Canadians, and 
certainly to many other Americans, the meaning of John Kennedy. 
 
I think the world lost a great leader 20 years ago today. I think Canada had a special place in its heart for John 
Kennedy, and certainly the Americans did. And I would simply like to join with other members of this Assembly 
in commemorating the death of a great man 20 years ago today. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, may I add a brief word to that which has been addressed to the House 
by the Minister of Finance. 
 
John Kennedy was a remarkable figure in the history of the United states and the history of the world. 
 
The world suffered an enormous trauma during World War II, and following that, there came leaders who were by 
and large associated with World War II: Mr. Clement Attlee, and Mr. Charles DeGaulle, and President 
Eisenhower, and Winston Churchill was another. And then at the end of the ‘50s the world had more or less 
reached the time when a new leader could turn, not backward toward the conflict of the previous decades, but 
forward toward the promise of what the rest of this century might be able to hold for us. 
 
And in the very forefront of that change of mood, potential change of mood for the world, was John F. Kennedy, a 
person who brought a dynamic personality, a particular sense of charm, of intellect, of ability to rally around him 
fine minds that the Americans have called on many occasions “the brightest and the best.” And he was able to do 
that, and in the course of so doing hold out hope and promise for a world which was searching for that hope and 
that promise. 
 
Undoubtedly, he would have suffered the same problems that other politicians suffer when in office. Martyrdom no 
doubt saved him from the compromises that inhabit the imperfect world of politics, but when he came upon the 
stage he offered to the people of the United States an opportunity to dedicate themselves to the high ideals which 
have always been part of the American dream and the American heritage. 



 
November 22, 1983 

 

89 
 

 
None of us can say what would have happened had he survived. All of us, I think, can acknowledge that this best 
hope of a new frontier — the words he used — of some new initiatives, perished when he died on the streets of 
Dallas. The Americans picked up their lives and the public affairs of their country in a way which was the 
admiration, I think, of the world. None the less, they picked up their lives and the public affairs of their country 
with a sense of sadness and a sense of loss from which they have never fully recovered. 
 
I know that all of us in Canada, who had a great affection for John F. since he came from Massachusetts, which has 
many, many connections with Canada, share their sense of loss, and I join with the Minister of Finance today in 
expressing our sympathy and sense of sharing their loss with the people of the United States. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Schmidt that a humble address be 
presented to His Honour, the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, before getting into the main thrust of my remarks this afternoon, I 
would like to congratulate the addition to cabinet, my new colleagues in cabinet, particularly the Minister of 
Agriculture, who as legislative secretary to the former minister of agriculture was very well trained and I think is 
going to be an excellent Minister of Agriculture, and additionally, the legislative secretaries that have been added 
to the list of those who are out serving the public of Saskatchewan. Additionally, I would . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, and additionally I would like to congratulate those who have received appointments as 
officers of the legislature and officers of our caucus, and while I’m doing that I might also congratulate any 
changes that may have been made or may be coming to members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now that I have that off my chest, Mr. Speaker, I would like to deal for a while with some of the remarks made by 
the Leader of the Opposition yesterday when he was addressing this Assembly, and in no particular order, I’ll just 
deal with them as they come to mind, and I’m sure the Leader of the Opposition will listen attentively, because I 
don’t raise these to embarrass anyone, I just raise them to set the record straight. 
 
And I’m sure that the Leader of the Opposition was embarrassed when the member from Shaunavon raised earlier 
this summer the issue of the luxury cars. And it’s true that many of us on this side of the House do drive luxury 
cars. I have, Mr. Speaker, a luxury car, and I enjoy it very much. It’s a good car. It’s got about 90,000 kilometres on 
it. I get about 18 miles to the gallon; I haven’t made the metric conversion on mileage yet, but it’s about 90,000 
kilometres on it and it’s a good car. It’s a luxury car. It’s a 1980 or ‘81 Olds Delta 88. 
 
But not all in my caucus have a luxury car, Mr. Speaker. I have a cabinet colleague who invited me to ride to 
Saskatoon with him here a couple of weeks ago. I couldn’t get into his car, Mr. Speaker. He has a little wee tiny 
Ford, trucking on down the highway there. We turned around. My colleague, the Minister for Small Business and 
Tourism, now he fit the car all right. I couldn’t get into it. 
 
My colleague, another little guy, the Minister of Continuing Education and Manpower, drives a 1980 or ‘81 
Camaro, a nice little sports car just zinging on down the road there. But he didn’t buy  



 
November 11, 1983 
 
that, Mr. Speaker. He didn’t order it through the CVA. The fellow who had that car, that nice little sports car 
zinging around the countryside, out impressing the agriculture community of Saskatchewan, was the former deputy 
minister of agriculture, Gerry Gartner, the fellow that the Queen found it desirable to terminate. He’s now in that 
. . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Where is he? Manitoba? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, yes. He’s now in Manitoba doing to Manitoba what he did to Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — But I want to get back to my luxury car. I want to get back to my luxury car, Mr. 
Speaker, because my luxury car, depending how the sun’s shining on it, is either yellow or green. I’m not sure; just 
kind of in between there. But aside from that, it is identical to the luxury car that the Leader of the Opposition 
drives which happens to be black. Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And yours has more miles on it? 
 
And where did I get my luxury car, Mr. Speaker? Well I think I may be given a small clue when I tried to describe 
the colour of it. My luxury car, before I inherited it, was driven by one Don Cody, former minister in the Blakeney 
government. and I just wanted to set the record straight, Mr. Speaker. We have luxury cars. Absolutely. Pontiac 
Parsienne, luxury car. My colleague, the Minister of Energy. We have luxury cars but where did we get them? We 
inherited them, Mr. Speaker. They left them for us. 
 
I want to talk a little bit . . . I’m sorry to see the Leader of the Opposition going but I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And it’s going to get heavier. Because I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, about double standard, something that 
the member for Quill Lakes will be very, very familiar with, Mr. Blakeney, in his . . . I mean the Leader of the 
Opposition, because I have to be formal in this place. Mr. Speaker, I can’t call him Al or Mr. Blakeney. The Leader 
of the Opposition yesterday talked about the new government hiring our friends. Well, yes, we’ve done that; we’ve 
done that. George Hill is my friend, and Dennis Ball is my friend. Al Wager is my friend; Eli Fluter is my friend; 
Cliff Wright is my friend; Wally Nelson is my friend; Herb Pinder is my friend. Nadine Hund is not my friend. 
Nadine Hunt is not my friend. I don’t apologize at all for hiring our friends; we hired a lot of competent people. 
They’re doing a great job for us. 
 
Now, I want to talk to you, Mr. Speaker, for a while about the incestuous relationship that had gone on with the 
previous administration, and I do hope that the member for Quill Lakes comes back before I get half-way through 
the list because he who’s up on it. He shows up on it a time or two. and I know that you people had a lot of friends 
and you hired them all — every one of them. I’m sure. But I want to go through just . . . And this by no means 
all-encompassing, Mr. Speaker. This is just a few of the names that I was able to just pull off the top of my head 
earlier today. 
 
But we have here, Mr. Speaker, a fellow . . . And I also want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that some of these people 
may have even been competent professional civil servants. But the point I want to make is that, by and large, they 
were friends of the government opposite, and they got their positions, buy and large, through their connections with 
the members opposite. And I’m going to go through some of the list, just you know, because I don’t think that 
everybody is aware of this. And I will go, only because they’re written this way, in alphabetical order. 
 
I have here the first one: Harvey Abells. Who is Harvey Abells? Harvey Abells is a former Tommy Douglas 
organizer. Look at this — son-in-law to Auborn Pepper, former NDP MLA for Weyburn . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And that’s fine, that’s fine. I think probably he was; I think probably he was. I think probably he 
was, Mr. Speaker, a competent, professional civil servant. The fact is, he was a friend of the former administration. 
I’m not critical of you for hiring your friend; he was  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

91 
 

a good guy, probably did a good job. We hired a few good guys, too, that are doing good jobs, and they’re friends. 
 
Oh, but look at this, Janet Abells, (or is that Jeanette?) daughter of Auburn Pepper, secretary to the minister of 
northern Saskatchewan. And she was probably a very good secretary and a friend. 
 
Now we have, in alphabetical order, Mr. Speaker, Doug Archer. Doug Archer was an EA to the hon. (your 
predecessor, not while he was Mr. Speaker. I’m thinking that it was much earlier than that) but Doug Archer was 
an EA to the former hon. Mr. Brockelbank, and he was appointed director of administration, Government Services. 
What’s his connection with the party? What’s his connection . . . I guess what I’m trying to figure out, Mr. 
Speaker, how was it he was able to get his job? Was it because he was competent? Was it because he was a friend 
of the former government? Was it because he had some blood relationship to someone in the former government? 
Well, I looked on my list, and it says here that he was in fact a brother-in-law of Mr. Bill Knight, former NDP MP 
for Assiniboia. 
 
I’m going to bring you right up to the present day, I’ll tell you that, if it takes me till 10 o’clock tonight. The list is 
long. 
 
Then we have Pat Atkinson. Now Pat Atkinson still works for government — not for me. She might even be doing 
a good job. I don’t know, because she doesn’t work for me. But how did she get her job, Mr. Speaker? I’m a little 
curious. It might have even been through a competition. I don’t know, but she’s a friend of members opposite. And 
who is Pat Atkinson? Pat Atkinson ran against my colleague from Saskatoon Nutana for the NDP in the last 
election. Now what did she do prior to that to cement this relationship with members opposite? She was 
vice-president, Mr. Speaker, of the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan. Her dad’s name was Roy Atkinson — 
Roy Atkinson, a very, very dear friend of mine, former president of the National Farmer’s Union, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we have in alphabetical order, Mr. Speaker — and I’m skipping a few because I don’t want to take up the 
whole day on this; I’m just doing this for the record you understand — we have a fellow here by the name of Curtis 
Bowerman. Curtis Bowerman, Mr. Speaker, worked for the highway traffic board. And who is Curtis Bowerman, 
Mr. Speaker? Curtis Bowerman is the son of Ted Bowerman, former NDP cabinet minister. 
 
And continuing, Mr. Speaker, in alphabetical order, George Burton — George Burton worked with the 
transportation agency as director of public communications. I don’t know where George is today, Mr. Speaker. I 
think George might have even been competent. I don’t know, I never knew the fellow. But I know John, and John 
was George’s brother. John was the former NDP MP, and I even forget what riding, but that’s not important. Then 
he was given this position by my predecessor when I was in agriculture. He was given the position of director of 
the transportation agency, Mr. Speaker. I found it to be the Queen’s wish, Mr. Speaker, that he should no longer 
work for government, and so I obliged the Queen and he no longer works for government, Mr. Speaker. Now we 
have another Burton. We have another Burton — wife of John F. Burton, Zenny Burton, and she worked for the 
Highway Traffic Board. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Zenny Burton. I don’t know where John is today. I kind of sense from the question 
periods lately that he is doing the research for members opposite, but I’m not entirely sure about that . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, he may have. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have another name here that will be familiar to all. I’m driving a luxury car that used to be 
his — Don Cody’s. Don Cody was an MLA from ‘71 to ‘75, when my colleague, the Attorney General, put him 
into retirement. A rather cosy little arrangement was worked out with his friends opposite. He was given a senior 
position, Mr. Speaker, in SGI. Some retirement.  



 
November 11, 1983 
 
Some cosy little arrangement. Talk about looking after your friends. And this incestuous little relationship . . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch on a few more. 
 
I see here that’s a Donald Faris. Donald Faris,, Mr. Speaker. He’s the independent guy on the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Exactly right. Appointed, Mr. Speaker, director of communication. Did he sit in this House from ‘71 to ‘75? 
Donald Faris, I understand, sat in this House from ‘71 to ‘75. He was torpedoed from office, Mr. Speaker, by my 
friend and colleague, the Hon. Gerald Muirhead. He will never see the light of day inside this Chamber again. And, 
Mr. Speaker, from ‘75 to ‘78, where was Donald Faris — or ‘75 to whenever we got to him.? Oh, I’m sorry. I 
made a mistake. ‘78. It was ‘78. It was ‘78. It was ‘78 that you finally fixed him up and made him director of 
communications and education, Department of Co-ops . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m going to get to that. I’m 
going to get to that. 
 
And continuing in alphabetical order, Margaret Fern. Margaret Fern was an NDP candidate in ‘82 in Regina South. 
Sought the NDP provincial . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, she took two runs at it. She took a run at a seat in Saskatoon in 
‘81 and didn’t get the nomination so she came down to Regina thinking . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I 
understand that you would be. I understand that you would be. It was a nomination. It was a nomination, and I 
should take a moment, Mr. Speaker, to explain to the member from Regina Centre the difference between a 
nomination and an election . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think the record will bear it out. 
 
In any case, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on, and we have guys like . . . I know this guy to be competent, but 
I’m wondering if he would have been here had it not been for his relationship with the previous administration. 
 
One Ted Glover, NDP candidate in Milestone. Remember him? David Henley. Gwen Jones, Don Keith, Bill 
Knight. Who’s this Bill Knight? Former NDP MP, appointed principal secretary to the premier. Where is he now? 
I understand you guys blamed him for blowing you out of the water last time, and so you’ve banished him to . . . 
Oh, and Mr. Speaker, here’s another Knight — Howard Knight, bother to Bill Knight, appointed EA to minister in 
charge of the Rentalsman . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right, cousin to Doug Archer; cousin to Bill Knight. 
 
Look at this one, Mr. Speaker. We have here . . . Surely this can’t be his whole family. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Well, I don’t think he had anybody in his family who didn’t work for government. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I’m sure. You all may have heard of the name Koskie. Deanna Koskie. I’m just 
going to touch a few of them, Mr. Speaker. Deanna Koskie, wife of Morley Koskie, sister-in-law to Murray 
Koskie. Well, she worked in the AG’s department. Linda Koskie, well, sister-in-law to Murray Koskie, Morley 
Koskie, brother to former cabinet minister, Murray Koskie. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What did Morley do? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Vice president of SGI. Is he still there? He’s not there anymore, Mr. Speaker. Ted 
Koskie, appointed executive assistant to the Minister of Consumer Affairs; brother of Murray Koskie. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I think part of the reason for the slight increase in the unemployment figures in 
Saskatchewan today is that the Koskie family is no longer working for government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, we have names like Kramer, Kuziak, Liggett, Kowalchuk, Lusney. 



 
November 22, 1983 

 

93 
 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Which Lusney would that be? Is that Norm’s EA? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — No, Kimberley Lusney, appointed clerk, Minister of Finance. Father — you’ll never 
guess — Norman Lusney, MLA. 
 
Gordon McNeil, Mr. Speaker. Gordon McNeil, NDP MLA from ‘75 to ‘78. He used to sit right in that chair beside 
my colleague, only my colleague wasn’t there then. 
 
I can remember when he used to get up her and get carried away on some emotional tangent. What happened to 
him, Mr. Speaker? Well, after the 1978 election, he was fixed up with a nice, cushy job at SMDC. But he was the 
man that had some character because, when the government changed hands in 1982, he had the decency to resign. 
He didn’t wait for yours truly to become chairman of SMDC and take care of it otherwise. 
 
Nesdoly — giving him a job with community college in Nipawin. And the list goes on and on. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Don’t stop. Don’t stop. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Schmeichel. Dale Schmeichel was an EA to the Hon. John Messner, sought the 
nomination for the NDP but lost, and as his reward for his valiant effort, he was given a job at SMDC. I took some 
personal delight in seeing that that no longer existed, but he had a brother called Francis Schmeichel was an EA to 
the Hon. E. Cowley. I mean this really is a happy family you guys have. 
 
Going back into history a little bit, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Regina Centre came up through the system as 
well. He got his training as EA to the former attorney general. Then there was . . . I don’t know. Is she still your 
partner in law — Louise Simard? If she is still the partner in law of my colleague, she’s by far the smartest of the 
two. She also sought the nomination for the NDP and worked for the attorney general. 
 
Randy Snyder, son of Gordon Snyder, former minister of labour; Alex Taylor, defeated NDP MLA appointed 
director of negotiations, Department of Health; George Taylor, Attorney General’s department . . . I mean, Mr. 
Speaker, the list goes on and on. The member for Cannington takes some delight in setting the record straight, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit more about double standards. That takes me to the question of beer and 
wine advertising. On the one hand . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Mr. Speaker, I think I struck a nerve. I think I 
struck a nerve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you see, we had in the neighbourhood of $400,000 a year going out of the province, advertising 
dollars going out of the province, to pump advertising back into Saskatchewan through cable and satellites and 
magazines and books and out-of-province publications. So it was here anyway. All we said was let’s take a look at 
putting some controls in, putting some positive advertising tied to it — some control, as it were, and keep the 
advertising dollar at home. That’s all we said, and we did that. So the advertising dollar is kept at home. 
 
I see that the member for Shaunavon agrees with this . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . The member for Shaunavon 
agrees with this, Mr. Speaker. He has, on Saturday, August 13, in Admiral, Saskatchewan — in Admiral, 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Now he’s denying that he had anything to do with it, Mr. Speaker. I 
understand that he wasn’t invited. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me read from this advertisement from the Maple Creek News, Mr. Speaker. It says: 
 
 Sponsored by the Shaunavon New Democrats, admission free, take part in the horseshoe pitching, 

play some bingo, ride real ponies, cool off (Mr. Speaker), cool off  



 
November 11, 1983 
 

at the beer garden. 
 
It says, “Cool off at the beer garden, children,” just to read one line, Mr. Speaker. It goes on to say: “will receive 
free ice cream.” 
 
We have another one here, Mr. Speaker, Regina Victoria NDP association. And they have on Sunday afternoon, 
October 16, 1 p.m., $10,000 in winnings, Mr. Speaker, lunch and refreshments. I don’t know what refreshments 
mean in this case . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I don’t; no, I don’t, because I take you back to the days of the 
Schenley awards in 1977 or ‘78 when the Schenley booze company was the biggest donator to members opposite. 
I’m not sure that patronage was one of the conditions of that particular donation, but $10,000 in prizes, Mr. 
Speaker, for an NDP constituency association gathering on Sunday afternoon? 
 
Let’s talk about double standards for awhile, Mr. Speaker. I think I dropped the most exciting one, Mr. Speaker, we 
got into booze in a big way in Saskatchewan, this advertising and promoting and making it all happen. But when 
we say we deliver we don’t mean quite the same thing as our counterparts in Manitoba. I’m going to table this 
when I’m finished talking about it, Mr. Speaker, because I think it should be. It says, and this is an ad sponsored by 
the Manitoba liquor control commission in NDP Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, introducing same-day delivery service: 
 
 The Manitoba liquor control commission announces improved home delivery service. Just phone in 

your order for any of our listed spirits, wines, imported or domestic beer. 
 
And the member from Shaunavon says: why didn’t they think of that? 
 
 Our authorized bonded drivers will deliver your orders on the same day. 
 
That’s the NDP answer to home care, Mr. Speaker. And just in case members opposite are ever in Manitoba, the 
phone number is 783-7177, Monday through Saturday. Your order will arrive C.O.D. with a $2.95 delivery charge. 
Quick, convenient, reliable, same-day service from the Manitoba NDP liquor control commission, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m wondering Mr. Speaker if it wouldn’t be appropriate to ask our friend and former colleague, Donald Faris, 
to go over and counsel the members of the legislature in Manitoba as it relates to what surely must be considered a 
double standard, Mr. Speaker, by any stretch of the imagination. 
 
Now I’d like to talk about some other so-called facts, Mr. Speaker, as set out by the Leader of the Opposition 
yesterday, and I quote Mr. Speaker, from page (it’s got to be here some place) but anyway it’s from the Hansard of 
yesterday when the Leader of the Opposition was speaking. He said: 
 
 Just short months ago our government agreed to sell the shares of Intercontinental Packers when he 

knew, or ought to have knows, that that company was proposing to close down its Regina plant, 
probably permanently. The result of the action taken by that minister was 125 jobs probably gone 
for good. Is that (he goes on to say) his idea of making jobs a priority. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have here minutes, Mr. Speaker, of September ‘81, I believe CIC board meeting. This is 
Intercon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You are absolutely right; this is a board meeting of Intercon with Mr. 
Beatty and Mr. Barg. Mr. Beatty and Mr. Barg, known to many of us, worked for CIC under the former 
administration. And it says here, Mr. Speaker . . . This is September ‘81, this particular board meeting and it’s 
being a little reflective because it recognizes now that the previous administration made a terrible mistake back in 
1971 when they bought into Intercontinental Packers, and encouraged them to do the Regina expansion in the first 
place. But it’s talking about 1971 and it says: 



 
November 22, 1983 

 

95 
 

 
 At the time hog production was expanding rapidly in the province and projected to triple from 1 

million hogs in 1971 to 3 million hogs in 1981. The Department of Agriculture had a number of 
programs in effect to encourage increased production and many new hog production units were 
being established in various parts of the province. The new facilities were completed and officially 
opened a short time after the provincial government became a shareholder in the operations in early 
‘73. 

 
But by this time, Mr. Speaker, producers began to drastically reduce hog production rather than the predicted 
increases. Production actually declined by 50 per cent. Why did it decline, Mr. Speaker? Well, it just happens that 
in 1972 the previous administration imposed a hog marketing commission on to the producers of Saskatchewan 
and they just weren’t going to tolerate it. So hog production dropped, the operation was no longer viable, and it 
took them from ‘71-’73 to 1981 to figure this out. 
 
But in the meantime they had done a few things, Mr. Speaker. They, in 1974, discontinued hog-cutting operations 
in Regina. In 1976, hog-killing operations were discontinued in Regina, and there were several other things they 
did in Regina to try and keep it alive. But it was noted, Mr. Speaker, that the study recommended consolidation of 
Saskatchewan operations in order to increase general cost effectiveness and ensure long-term viability and greater 
profitability for the Saskatchewan operations. This is 1981. Current projections show continuing weak 
performance for both Regina and Saskatoon. If the consolidation doesn’t take place — Mr. Deputy Speaker, just 
one other small example of the double standard and bordering on hypocrisy of members opposite. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Bordering on untruth. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — My colleague says bordering on untruth. He is a learned individual and far be it for 
me to argue with him . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Where does it say that? I didn’t go quite far enough. 
 
The board then reviewed a report and recommendations pertaining to the construction and distribution building in 
Saskatchewan to enable — September 1981, when you guys were over here, and because of this kind of 
jiggery-pokery you’ll never be over here again — to enable Regina operations to be made to Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. Board minutes with Mr. Garry Beatty, Mr. Steven Barg, employees of the former administration, CIC, 
sitting on the board, representing the government — clearly, Mr. Speaker, the double standard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how long have I got? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We agreed to let you out for the convention so 
just sit tight. There’s lots more coming. 
 
This is the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, yesterday in this House: 
 
 But the unemployment figures are far worse than the welfare figures. The number of people looking 

for jobs at Canada Employment Centres across this province tells a dramatic story. In October 
1981, under the previous government, the number was 18,000 . . . (etc.) 

 
Well, let me tell you something. Let me tell you something, Mr. Speaker. When the leader of the . . . And in 
question period yesterday, as well, he stands there in front of this Legislative Assembly and says the Saskatchewan 
unemployment rate was up by 11 per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition refers to 11 per 
cent increase in the past year in the unemployment rate, there is no other way to describe it, Mr. Speaker, than he is 
misleading this House, misleading the public, and nothing could be further from the truth. He’s playing with the 
figures, Mr. Speaker. 



 
November 11, 1983 
 
 
I have in front of me, Mr. Speaker, the latest numbers from StatsCanada, and the facts are this: in April of ‘82, 
Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate was 6.3 per cent. Today, as of October ‘83, the unemployment rate is 6.4 per 
cent. But the real story here is, Mr. Speaker, the number of people employed today in Saskatchewan compared to 
April of ‘82, when you dudes were here, Mr. Speaker, again for the benefit of the Leader of the Opposition and his 
party, we have 25,000 more jobs today in Saskatchewan than when your government was in power. So who has the 
better record? And I invite you to look at the facts and quite misleading the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other point, Mr. Speaker, is: what about the number of registrants at Canada Employment and Immigration? It 
says they’re up 75 per cent from a year ago. well, the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that’s not all bad. The reason they’re up 
— if in fact it’s 75 per cent; I don’t accept that figure, but I accept that they’re up. But the reason they’re up is 
because this is where the opportunity is. Melfort alone has an increase in 10,000 registrants. This increase, Mr. 
Speaker, is credited to the Nipawin project, and we have people from all over Canada — people from Montreal and 
Halifax and Toronto — registering in the Melfort employment office. So, you know, the point he makes, Mr. 
Speaker, is to say the least, fuzzy. To say the least, very fuzzy. 
 
Well, one . . . No, I won’t even get into this one, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said it. I’ve said it a thousand times . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . All right . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, okay. And the members opposite, they’ve 
talked and talked and talked about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Do you want to talk about open for business? 
Let’s talk about open for business then, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk about open for business. 
 
My friends opposite tell us, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not working . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, Mr. Speaker, I 
am sure the people of Saskatchewan would far sooner listen to me than the prattle that’s going on over there. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP, the members opposite, have told us that the open for business philosophy hasn’t worked. 
The fact of the matter is: when we came into office, Mr. Speaker, the business climate in Saskatchewan was the 
poorest in all of Canada — the absolute poorest in all of Canada. The previous government, Mr. Speaker, had built 
a wall around Saskatchewan, and it wasn’t a wall of bricks and mortar; it was a wall of mistrust. 
 
I take you back to 1972 when members opposite choked out a thriving oil industry with the introduction of Bill 42. 
And only today, only today, Mr. Speaker, is the oil industry thriving again due to the efforts of my colleagues in 
cabinet, and this government. 
 
Another wall, another brick in that wall of mistrust, put up around this province by members opposite. We saw 
Tommy Douglas travelling the world saying, “People, we have this wonderful resource called potash. Great 
markets; come and develop it for us.” And they did. Then in 1975 the current Leader of the Opposition, when he 
was sitting here said, “Well, boys, thank you, but we’ll have that now.” And in comes Bill 1 and 2. Now that 
doesn’t set a very good stage for a positive business climate. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, why they had . . . I’ll tell you how they had economic growth. Everything is relative, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, why they had economic growth at all. They had it because they borrowed 
to the hilt; they put us so far in debt that you had to pump sunshine to us, and they went and bought holes in the 
ground. They built these wonderful fine family of crown corporations which are now a burden to us, costing us 
money as opposed to generating money. And they say, “How did we have economic growth?” I’ll tell you how we 
had economic growth. We had economic growth because we made New York look better. That’s how we had 
economic growth. Their resource policy, Mr. Speaker, was to take over the potash industry, preferential treatment 
for crown corporations and build the wall to keep investment out. 
 
Even today, Mr. Speaker, even today, Mr. Speaker, business people form around the province from across Canada, 
and from around the world raise the question: what will happen if they get back in? What will happen if they get  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

97 
 

back in? Can we trust the business climate in Saskatchewan yet? Well, they believe me, Mr. Speaker. They believe 
me when I tell them that they are finished. They will never see this side of the House ever again. They are 
anti-business; they are anti-farmer; they are even anti-labour. They are pro-radical, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I assure them, Mr. Speaker, I assure them, that as long as we are government — and we’re going to be here for a 
very long time, Mr. Speaker — they are welcome in Saskatchewan. And while they are here they will be free to run 
their business without the threat . . . They will be here without the threat of expropriation by government. 
 
One example of that, Mr. Speaker, is since we removed the requirement for SMDC participation — joint venture 
participation in mining in the North — we have had more inquiries for joint venture participation than you guys 
had the whole time you were in office. We believe, Mr. Speaker, that the private sector is the key to economic 
strength and diversity in our province. The government has taken action to improve the business climate in the 
province. 
 
First, number one, we repealed the requirement for compulsory Crown participation in mineral development — 
and you weren’t paying attention a while ago so I’m going to repeat it again — that resulted in more inquiries as to 
joint venture participation . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m going to get to that. 
 
We have initiated without strikes, with the support of the workers and union members, new labour legislation. We 
have removed 1,000 obsolete regulations. We have abolished the sales tax on gasoline, giving us the lowest in the 
country. We have begun, Mr. Speaker, to reduce the burden of government on the people of Saskatchewan by 
reducing the size of the bureaucracy significantly. 
 
We have the lowest interest rates for home owners. We have the lowest unemployment rate in the country, and we 
are the only province in Canada to create jobs — a net positive during a recession — the only province in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — And, Mr. Speaker, we lead the nation, Mr. Speaker, in growth. Mr. Blakeney, the 
Leader of the Opposition, has said that we should call it “open for big business,” that we aren’t really helping the 
little guy. Well, let me say this: the amendments to the petroleum royalty structure have resulted in record land 
sales. There are three times as many active rigs as last year. This turn-around has happened as well in natural gas 
with 147 wells drilled this year compared to four in 1982 when you guys were calling the shot. This will generate 
150 million in tax revenue for the province. More than 1,000 jobs have been created in drilling and associated 
activities in the oil patch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the service industry is working again. So are the truckers. So are the seismic crews. Hotels and 
restaurants are full. Retail sales are up. The Laundromats are busy; hardware stores are busy; lumber yards are 
busy. You can’t get a room in a hotel. And he says we’re doing nothing for the little guy. I can’t believe it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Shortly after the heavy oil upgrader agreement was announced two private sector firms announced that two office 
complexes worth approximately $60 million will be built in Regina. The spin-off benefits and jobs created will be 
even higher. It isn’t just big businesses that have benefited from our policies. As well, small business; bankruptcies 
were only two-thirds the national average — two-thirds the national average, Mr. Speaker. This will make them 
hang their heads, Mr. Speaker. There was an increase, there was an increase of 804 E&H tax licences issued to the 
end of October 1983 during a recession, compared to the 10-year average prior to April of ‘82 of 444, Mr. Speaker. 
Twice as many during the recession as compared to boom times, Mr. Speaker. 



 
November 11, 1983 
 
 
At the time of the open-for-business conference, Mr. Speaker, we said we weren’t going to participate in the 
recession. The conference board, which members opposite have said in the legislature is a prestigious organization, 
said despite the recession Saskatchewan did not participate. There is still a lot more to be done, Mr. Speaker. We 
can’t undo in 18 months what it took members 11 years to do, and take a great deal of comfort, Mr. Speaker, that 
through the consultative process that we have adopted, in staying in touch with the people of Saskatchewan, that 
we will be here for a very, very long time, and we will have ample opportunity to bring Saskatchewan to the 
potential that it has a right to enjoy. They will never see this side of the House again, Mr. Speaker. I take a great 
deal of delight in supporting the motion, and opposing what may or may not be an amendment. I wasn’t here 
yesterday. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you to the members of this 
Assembly, a group of seven gentlemen, a Chine delegation from Sino-Chem which is a potash purchasing agency 
from the People’s Republic of China. We would certainly like to welcome them to the province of Saskatchewan. 
They have been in the United States. They came today from Toronto. They will be meeting with officials in the 
Government of Saskatchewan. They’ll be meeting with some people form the potash corporation, and as I 
understand, probably move on from here to meet with some people from the province of Manitoba. 
 
I would like you and all members of this Assembly to welcome our friends from the People’s Republic of China. 
we hope that the business that we have done with your country in the past, we will improve upon that in the future, 
and for generations to come we will be good trading partners and very good friends. Welcome to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I would join with the member from Kindersley in welcoming to Saskatchewan, and 
to say have a pleasant visit in Saskatchewan, a great trading partner, both in the area of minerals as well as grain, 
and we look forward to that relationship continuing. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 
 
MR. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Thank you, MLA, Legislative Assembly. Mr. Deputy speaker, I 
rise with great pleasure today to speak on the throne speech, and I will be very brief, as I always say that a short 
speech is just as good as a long one. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I always remember what my father told me when I was 
first starting to work on my own. I was working with him one morning and I was doing quite a bit of talking and he 
said, “You know, son,” he said, “if talking turned into music,” he said, “you’d be a band master,” he says. “The 
best thing you can do,” he says, “is get your act in gear.” And that’s what the present government is doing now. 
They’re getting the act in gear from the previous government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, being a junior MLA, the city of Moose Jaw in the south, my comments, as I said, will be very 
brief. Also, I am going to mainly deal with some of the shortfalls of the previous government. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I’ve been a resident of this province for the full time of my life,  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

99 
 

and I’ve always worked with the citizens of the province, and I certainly do so at all times regardless to who they 
might be. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hear great cries from the opposition complaining continual about utility rates, 
insurance rates, etc. Well, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say that the previous government, I believe, had no 
management in their government, and to manage crown corporations and a government you must have 
management. And that is why we are in such a deficit today. Mr. Deputy Speaker, those crowns must be managed 
by manager people, and I’m sure that in this government — the Progressive Conservatives — they have 
management in it, and this is why in the precious shortfall of our government was that the well was dry and we had 
to rejuvenate the well. And whenever we get the well rejuvenated you will see the disappearance of deficit budgets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is not emphasized in the province: when we become government in April, there was no talk of 
what the debt was. Mr. Deputy Speaker, furthermore might I say that the previous administration — the opposition 
now — are accusing us of cutting, cutting, and cutting, but previous . . . (inaudible) . . . does not tell us what they 
cut in their years in office. Mr. Deputy Speaker, look at our health services. Did they put much money into it? Who 
tore out the fourth floor in the Union Hospital in Moose Jaw some several years ago? It wasn’t our government. It 
was the NDP. 
 
In the first two years of our government, we have committed over $11 million for senior citizens’ nursing homes. 
This is only $3.5 million that the NDP spent in the last seven years of their administration. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
did the previous government keep the services of senior citizens up to date and their nursing homes in reasonably 
good condition? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, after I become elected in April 1982, I made visits to all the nursing homes in my 
constituency and in the city of Moose Jaw, and to the hospitals. I had meetings with the boards to underline to them 
and find out what position they were in. And at this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just like to cite one instance 
to you of one of the nursing homes in Moose Jaw, which is extendicare. St. Anthony’s home is level 4 care. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the other half of this building was in such a mess at that time, whenever I viewed it, that since 
then the fire department and the Department of Health have asked us to phase it out as quickly as we can as it’s not 
in proper condition to keep elderly folks in. Mr. Deputy Speaker, what will this mean to the city of Moose Jaw? 
It’ll mean 60 less beds for the nursing care home in Moose Jaw. 
 
Let us talk about promises for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I well remember in 1978. In the 1978 election, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the member who was running in Moose Jaw North at that time had an announcement, a special 
announcement, he said one morning he was making at STI. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a candidate, I went up there 
and listened to his special announcement. Mr. Deputy Speaker, at that time he announced that there would be an 
extension to STI which would start in early 1979. What happened to that promise? Quite a lot worse than happened 
to a lot of our promises. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they succeeded in that election. They were re-elected. what did they do with their 
promise? They set it on the shelf till 1981, they make a big show. They come up to Moose Jaw. They do a sod 
turning for an addition to STI. Why did they do that? Because there was an election coming in the spring of ‘82. 
But they did not fool the people of Moose Jaw and the province of Saskatchewan in 1982. The people of the 
province fooled the NDP, and that is why today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a large crowd on this side and a 
very few over there. 
 
I’m quite sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have heard a lot of harassment over the water 
situation in Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the water situation in Moose Jaw and Regina did not occur when 
we became government. I can remember many years ago the previous government saying, oh, they were going to 
do something to the water plant at Buffalo Pound for the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw. What did they do? They 
never done a thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the previous government knew about this long before we became 
government. 
 



 
November 11, 1983 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what did we do shortly after we became government? We listened to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We set up a water review board and went to work on it. Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have not got 
much accomplished on it as yet, but at least there are hopes. When the federal government will decide on the issue, 
we will act accordingly. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just like to mention a few things in regard to the throne speech. I am very pleased to 
see that we have indicated we’ll amend The Workers’ Compensation Act to improve benefits for dependent 
spouses of those killed in accidents. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many more things I could work on and talk on, but I’m quite sure that the most of 
our members will be speaking on the Speech from the Throne. It don’t look as though the opposition will be able to 
come up with much to speak on the throne speech, so I think at this time I will close and say that I will be 
supporting the motion. 
 
Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to congratulate the member from Moose Jaw South for 
having given the first speech from government benches to comment on the throne speech. A man of some 
independence of mind, I may say, a man of some independence of mind. 
 
I want to begin by congratulating the Hon. Frederick Johnson on his appointment as Lieutenant Governor. His 
appointment was preceded by a brilliant career as a jurist. Previous to his career as a jurist he had offered himself 
for public office. He had been a candidate for public office; he had been a successful lawyer. 
 
During the years he served as a judge of the Queen’s Bench he was the chief justice of the province, and during 
those years he set about to reform the rules and procedures of the court. The reforms that he instituted were 
important, not only to lawyers in facilitating their work, but to the public who come in contact with our court 
system. Very rarely does a court reform itself from within. Almost always judicial reforms come from without, and 
the Saskatchewan experience may well be unique in a series of reforms initiated, drawn up and passed by the 
courts themselves. I can only express the hope that his successor in office, Chief Justice Batten, will continue with 
those reforms. 
 
To return to my original point, his appointment adds stature to the office of Lieutenant Governor and as such we 
should all welcome him. 
 
I was informed yesterday that since we met last, our former Deputy Clerk was blessed with a child, and I want to 
wish her and her husband well. I want to express the hope as well that she makes an early return to our public 
accounts committee where she served so ably. Mr. Speaker gave me some degree of concern yesterday when he 
referred to the former Deputy Clerk. I am informed however that she is Deputy Clerk. I am informed, however, that 
she is only on maternal leave and will be returning. 
 
I want to congratulate the cabinet ministers on their appointment. I wished I could have taken time, Mr. Speaker, to 
congratulate them individually, but there certainly is not enough time left in this debate. An appointment, let me 
say in general terms, an appointment to Executive Council is a unique opportunity to serve the province. At the 
same time it provides an opportunity to service, it provides a unique opportunity for personal growth and 
development. Few people have that experience, and I hope all find it as rewarding and interesting as I did. 
 
I don’t want anything I say to be construed as condoning the size of the present cabinet or the  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

101 
 

number of appointments which were made. The size of the present cabinet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is absurd and 
should be a source of embarrassment to every member opposite. A province of a million people simply does not 
need a cabinet of 26 people. A province of a million people simply does not need three ministers without portfolio 
and a fourth minister in charge of telephones. That is patently a waste of public funds. 
 
Having served in Executive Council I frankly don’t know what some of the ministers opposite do to keep 
themselves busy all day. I just wonder what the Minister of Telephones and the minister of hailstones — I meant 
the minister in charge of the crop insurance board — I just wonder what they do with themselves. 
 
The level of responsibility associated with many of the present ministries simply doesn’t justify separate ministers. 
And I can’t believe the powers of self-delusion of members opposite, as awesome as they are, really led them to 
believe that we need a separate minister of telephones, or a separate minister in charge of the crop insurance board, 
or a minister without portfolio from Prince Albert. I know the abilities of the minister are limited but I would have 
hoped that could have handled at one and the same time your present duties and that of the Minister of Telephones. 
I would have hoped your abilities would have extended that far. Apparently, in the Premier’s view, your abilities 
were so limited that you couldn’t do both. 
 
It’s apparent that the present size of the cabinet is an attempt (and I may say a very successful attempt) to maximize 
the number of Conservative members who feed at the public trough. No other sensible explanation has been 
offered to the public and if any other explanations were offered it wouldn’t be believed. 
 
These cabinet appointments are really in the same category and serve the same purpose as the firings of all the 
boards and commissions and the firings of all the public servants. These appointment to cabinet are like the 
appointments to the boards and commissions and the appointments to the public service, simply an attempt to see 
that as many Conservatives benefit as much as possible for whatever time this government may be in office. And 
these appointments defile and degrade the office of a minister of the Crown, just as the wholesale replacement of 
the boards and commissions brought into question their independence, and just as the firings of the public service 
bring into question their professionalism. 
 
But there’s an even more unfortunate aspect to these appointments. It’s the continued failure of this government to 
provide any leadership in their frequent calls for restraint. One thing: this government seems to operate by the 
maxim, “do what I say not what I do.” Once again they say one thing and do another. 
 
I wonder how members opposite square this bloated cabinet with the firings of so many public servants. How do 
you ask public servants of departments such as social services, which is struggling with an inadequate staff as 
we’ve learned on the public accounts last year, how do you ask public servants in departments like public service 
who struggle with inadequate staff, when the Premier deals out the spoils of victory with such great generosity? 
How do you expect your calls for restraint to have any credibility? How do you square this naked greed with the 
freezing of the minimum wage? How do you ask for restraint on one hand from those at the bottom of the 
economic ladder, and at the same time, treat yourself with such largesse? 
 
I may say as an aside I think this government is the only government that could really believe that those at the 
bottom of the economic ladder are fuelling inflation. I assume you believe that or you would not call upon them for 
restraint. Restraint makes no sense unless they are making some contribution to inflation. You seem to believe they 
are the chief cause of inflation. Their belts have been tightened more than anyone else. But leaving that aside, if 
they really need to endure this hardship in the name of restraint and economic recovery, is it really too much to ask 
that the cabinet exercise the same amount of restraint? Is it really too much to ask that you people scrape by with a 
single person who covers such vast empires as the department of  



 
November 11, 1983 
 
rapidly contracting grants to rural municipalities, the department of hailstones, the member from Arm River is in 
charge of? 
 
Whatever they may have given the member from Prince Albert, is it too much to ask that one minister could have 
handled all these? In a caucus of 55 people, is there not one individual with sufficient ability to do all three? I 
would have thought there was in 55 people, but I bow to the Premier’s superior judgement on that subject and only 
on that subject. 
 
On a slightly different but a related topic, I want to congratulate the Lieutenant Governor in getting through the 
throne speech without collapsing from exhaustion. I’ve been a member since 1975, associated with this House as 
executive assistant to the House leader from ‘71 to ‘75, and that is the longest throne speech I’m certain since 
1971, and I’m quite sure it’s the longest one from before that, several years before that. 
 
I really wonder why this government felt the need to repeat so much of your former throne speeches. Were those 
throne speeches so totally lacking in impact that you needed to repeat them in the hope that somebody would listen 
and somebody would hear them? Or were those former throne speeches like stories or jokes you felt, having lacked 
impact the first time, might improve with retelling? A more likely explanation was that the government was trying 
to make up with quantity what that throne speech clearly lacked in quality and substance. Nothing but the most 
trivial aspects of the throne speech could be, in any sense, described as new. Nothing about it would bring any 
relief to any of the Saskatchewan people who had hoped and looked to this government for relief from the 
problems they’re facing. I’ll admit that the throne speech did drone on for some period of time about 
unemployment. No doubt Allan Gregg and the pollsters from Decima whispered in this government’s ear the 
exciting news that everybody else has known for months, and that is that unemployment is a serious problem, that 
the public expect and demand this government to do something about it and ask that they take action. And so the 
throne speech droned on about unemployment, but did this unemployment, did this throne speech, give comfort to 
the unemployed? I suggest it could not have. After watching this government in office for 19 months they cannot 
have been that gullible. 
 
In the very portions of the throne speech which deal with unemployment, this government eschews any 
responsibility for dealing with it. For the throne speech says, with respect to unemployment, it’s not a problem to 
be solved by the intervention of government, rather a problem to be left to the free market, to the forces of the free 
market. This government’s slavish adherence to the unbridled free enterprise of the 17th century seems to prohibit 
any effective action. 
 
I say to this government: in the throne speech, all you are doing is what you have done since the election. As you 
are standing on the sidelines and acting as a cheer leader, you’ll proclaim the virtues of 19th century capitalism and 
do nothing else, and this government apparently believes that such a proclamation is a self-fulfilling prophecy. 
 
I heard the Premier on radio this morning saying that we are number one in economic development, we are number 
one in creation of jobs. I say to the Premier that you are no longer playing ball with the Lakeview Lakers, as he and 
I did years ago. You are expected to do more than just serve as a cheer leader. What’s being asked of you is more 
complex than being captain of the Lakeview Lakers. I say to the Premier that you will not be judged by what you 
proclaim this province to be. You will be judged by what it becomes. You will not be judged by what you say. You 
will be judged by what this government does. You will be judged not by the platitudes that you mouth, but by the 
results you produce. 
 
It should be apparent, even to a government as self-satisfied as this one, that your performance in economic 
development is woefully inadequate. Indeed, members opposite have not dealt with the economy in any of their 
speeches and with very good reason. The members opposite cannot point to a single area of the economy that is not 
worse off now than it was when you took office. 
 
I’m going to get to the problem. The member for Saskatoon Centre wants to talk about the 1,200 new businesses. 



 
November 22, 1983 

 

103 
 

I’m going to talk about them in a moment. I will talk about your 1,200 new businesses. Not one of them employ 
more than five people, but I’ll get to them in a moment. 
 
In the past the centrepiece of this government’s economic development policy was another bit of cheer-leading, the 
open-for-business approach. Do you remember that? I suggest that most members opposite would like to forget it. 
Not a single success can be credited to the open for business approach. 
 
I was amused by a press release which lists some of those 1,200 new businesses — put out by the then minister for 
economic development, the member for Regina South — listed the accomplishments of the open for business 
approach. It was an eloquent testimony to the failure of that approach. Almost all of the businesses listed in that 
press release employed less than five people; all have been undoubtedly untouched by the open for business 
philosophy. 
 
We were told in the press release of a barber-shop in a small Saskatchewan community, and that supposedly came 
about as the result of the open for business philosophy. I’m sure that the previous Conservative government in the 
‘30s, had they been so insensitive and foolish, could have found economic development in the establishment of a 
barbershop somewhere in Saskatchewan. But the government of Premier Anderson had a little more class than this 
government. That government didn’t look to the establishment of barbershops and other similarly sized businesses 
as a sign of economic development. 
 
I ask the minister, the member from Saskatoon Centre, to rise in this throne speech and list the businesses 
established since you took office. you’ll find that almost all of them employ less than five people. 
 
Surely the public of Saskatchewan have a right to expect something saner from this government than that sort of 
nonsense. After 19 months in office, the public of Saskatchewan are asking of this government if even you, and 
there’s nothing precipitous about this government when it comes to making a decision, if even you haven’t come to 
the conclusion that it’s time to try a different approach. 
 
This government has an even worse record in the area of job creation. Far from spinning some equivalent to the 
foolish and pointless open for business philosophy, far from trying to create some harmless diversion, this 
government by their actions exacerbated the unemployment problems of this province. 
 
I will at least say in defence of open for business that if it did nothing to encourage economic development, and it’s 
obvious it didn’t, it probably didn’t retard it either. But in the area of job creation, this government aggravated the 
situation with its very first acts of office. With its very first acts of office it froze the public sector construction. 
 
Ask any tradesman, ask any contractor, ask any architectural firm to compare pre-April ‘82 and post-April ‘82, and 
you find yourself involved in a nostalgic conversation about the good old days. The tradesmen, the contractors, the 
architectural firms well know what a powerful economic stimulus the public sector capital spending of the former 
government was, and what a vacuum was left by this government and your adherence to the outdated economic 
policies of Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan. 
 
The proof of the pudding, gentlemen, is in the eating. Our activist approach worked; your hands-off approach does 
not. It is the activist, interventionist approach of the former government which brought this province to a period of 
unprecedented prosperity. That fact, and not the frantic cheerleading of the Premier and the members of the 
cabinet, will be remembered at the next election. A day of reckoning will come. 



 
November 11, 1983 
 
 
The economic statistics tell the story. Over the past year the national employment rate, and the rate in eight 
provinces went down. The national employment rate and the rate in eight provinces went down. Over the past two 
months, two months in a row, Saskatchewan has been only one of two provinces with an increase in the rate of 
unemployment. Similarly, Saskatchewan is only one of two provinces to have more unemployed persons in 
October ‘83 than in October ‘82. Listen to this: across Canada there was an 11 per cent decrease in the number of 
unemployed people across Canada; Canada experienced an 11 per cent decrease in unemployed; Saskatchewan 
experienced an 11 per cent increase in unemployed. I can well imagine why members opposite would rather talk 
about something else. So we are doing relatively bad; we are doing relatively bad . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . 
Yes, we are under your government; yes we are. 
 
In October ‘83, Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate was higher than in any October since StatsCanada began 
keeping statistics, so we are doing absolutely terrible in comparison with our history. Unemployment is especially 
serious among young people, and that may be the real tragedy. In October ‘83, the rate of unemployment for young 
people was 12.4 per cent, and there were actually fewer 15- to 24- year olds employed in October ‘83 than in 
October ‘82. There were fewer 15- to 24-year olds employed this October than last October. 
 
The record of leading this province from prosperity to hardship in short 19 months is all the more inexcusable 
when you consider what you took over in April, 1982. You took over the most robust economy in Canada, and my 
source is none other than Canada’s leading financial newspaper, the Financial Post. They ran a story in the fall of 
1982 which stated just that, and I still have a copy of the newspaper if members opposite want it. I sometimes think 
we used to tire people by parading these financial papers around, which said how well Saskatchewan was doing. I 
notice members opposite haven’t tried people by talking about how well the financial papers are treating 
Saskatchewan. I don’t recall the last time I heard a Conservative member quote from any financial newspaper 
about how well this province is doing, because you’re going down, and because there aren’t any such articles — 
there aren’t any such articles. And that financial strength in the late ‘80s represented a fair accomplishment for the 
former NDP government. 
 
In 1971 the NDP government took over a province that was the weak sister of Confederation. We had been 
perennially the have-not province, seemingly unable to shake ourselves out of economic doldrums which had been 
our lot for decades . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . I’ll leave the subject of leafy spurge to someone whose abilities 
extend to it. It had been our lot. The economic basement had been our lot for generations and decades, and that was 
the situation in 1971. And it was most assuredly not our situation in 1981. During the ‘70s, Saskatchewan went 
from being one of the weakest members of Confederation to one of the strongest. Some of that was good luck, Mr. 
Speaker. Resource prices did strengthen; so did markets. And as is now becoming painfully apparent, good 
management was also an essential part of that economic success, and that’s what we seem to be lacking now. 
 
We said in the ‘71 election that we were going to see Saskatchewan’s resources developed to the maximum extent 
possible by Saskatchewan people, for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. the policies of the former government 
had a constant focus. They were aimed at that goal and they succeeded beyond our wildest dreams. 
 
You took office and you foolishly tore down that structure without having any credible alternatives. I won’t recite 
all of the things that you did but I’ll give you a couple of for instances. You gave away the markets of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. You gave those away, and in doing so gave away not only a lot of Saskatchewan 
jobs, but a lot of income to the treasury. You ended Saskoil and Sask Mining’s participations in resource 
developments. Ad so you destroyed a valuable window on the oil and mining . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
In hundreds of other ways you set about destroying the economic policies which had served this  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

105 
 

province so well during the ‘70s. And the result, I may say, was sadly predictable. We see the beginnings of the 
destruction of Saskatchewan’s once vital economy in these statistics. 
 
My travels around the province lead me to believe that there is among the public a fear that Saskatchewan is going 
to return to the economic basement which it was in when the last right-wing government was in office, which the 
member from Qu’Appelle will no doubt remember. 
 
As I was saying, these statistics speak for themselves. As I was digesting them the other morning I heard the 
Premier on the radio proclaiming Saskatchewan number one. We were first in economic development; we were 
first in the creation of jobs. I wondered what kind of a world the Premier lives in. It certainly isn’t the same world 
as the unemployed, nor is it the same increasingly grim world the public of Saskatchewan live in. 
 
I say again that you will not be judged on your ability as cheerleaders. You will be judged on your ability to 
produce results, and your record to date should be of serious concern to you. These economic statistics tell the 
story. In an unfortunate way I find them gratifying; gratifying because they confirm what we have predicted since 
you took office, and that is your economic policies will lead to stagnation. I find it disheartening because in these 
cold economic statistics there is a vast amount of human suffering. 
 
The sad part of the economic failure that this throne speech highlights and perpetuates is that you haven’t learned 
your lessons. Allan Gregg may well have told you that unemployment is a problem, but he doesn’t seem to have 
told you that you ought to try something different; that what you’ve done over the last 19 months hasn’t worked. 
But what the throne speech promises is more of the same. And that’s the real tragedy; that you have failed to learn 
the obvious lesson in those statistics, and that is why the unemployed must feel a real sense of hopelessness. We 
have urged you, time and time again, to increase spending on public works, and your failure to act has been almost 
complete. 
 
More than economic stimulus is provided, however. Governments in this province, and others, need to engage in 
positive economic planning. The unbridled 19th century capitalism to which you people are slaves hasn’t brought 
us prosperity. It has brought unemployment, business and farm failures, hardship, and suffering. It’s time for you 
people to admit that the 19th century has passed into history, and that we need to use the tools available to us in the 
1980s. We need to set aside some of the prejudices of the past, such as anti-trade unionism in which you people 
wallow, positively wallow; the unbridled faith in capitalism, and admit that a new approach is called for. 
 
The former government had such an economic plan. It involved developing Saskatchewan resources by 
maximizing control by Saskatchewan people, and maximizing the benefits to Saskatchewan people form the 
development of Saskatchewan resources. it worked just as surely as yours has failed. Those policies ushered in a 
period of unprecedented prosperity. It brought Saskatchewan from the position of a have-not province to a have 
province. Saskatchewan arrived as an economic strength in the Canadian union, not under this government, but 
under the activist policies of the former government. It is not our intention to write your economic policy for you. 
You must do that for yourselves. We simply recommend to members opposite a policy born of the 20th century. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, in his remarks, correctly called the throne speech “a speech prepared by a 
government that has clearly run out of ideas.” Last March, the throne speech became better known, and more 
appropriately known, as the drone speech. Well, Mr. Speaker, drone II is no improvement. The speech was in fact a 
masterful job of double-talk. For weeks in advance, the cabinet and caucus were said to be meeting, holding 
high-level, secret discussions on the province’s number one concern — job creation and unemployment. whenever 
any reference was made by the Minister of Finance and others about the upcoming throne speech,  



 
November 11, 1983 
 
we were assured that jobs and the economy would be a number one priority. For this reason, Mr. Speaker, I think 
many people, and many of us, looked forward tot he speech with real anticipation. After all, unemployment is a 
serious problem in the province of Saskatchewan, one that this government hasn’t yet addressed. 
 
As I stated, Saskatchewan was only one of two provinces to have an increasing unemployment rate in October. In 
Regina, there were 13,283 people in October, 1983, who were formally registered with the Canada Employment 
Centre in Regina as seeking work. This compares with 5,800 in October, 1982 — a 128 per cent increase in the 
unemployed in the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear that the open for business slogans of the government opposite are not working, and when I 
heard comments made by various ministers in advance of the throne speech indicating that jobs was the number 
one priority. I was hopeful the government had finally realized that it had to address this very serious problem. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, in November of 1983 we learned that all of this was nothing more than cynical 
double-talk from a callous and uncaring government. Surely . . . (inaudible) . . . indicated that job creation will 
continue to be a top priority, but no new initiatives were announced to deal with this very serious issue. 
 
I was very disappointed, Mr. Speaker, because this government, with its attitude that government cannot do 
anything to improve the situation — it’s not government’s role — has again decided to ignore the number one 
concern of the Regina people, in fact the concern of people throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
The open for business approach of this government is creating unemployment, Mr. Speaker; it is not creating jobs. 
Open for business cost 125 workers at Intercom in Regina their jobs. I’m sorry the minister of whatever he has 
been relegated to at the moment — I forget — the member from Regina South . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I’ll take over. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, the member form Regina South and I had a mini-debate on CKCK television the 
day they closed Intercom. I didn’t feel we had long enough and I’d like to continue that debate again, and I hereby 
challenge the member from Regina South to a debate on that subject, and we’ll resume where we left of after only 
three minutes. 
 
But let’s, Mr. Speaker, review for a moment the sad tale of what open for business meant to 125 Intercom 
employees. Early June, the member for Regina South called the move to sell its shares in Intercon a shining 
example of the government’s policy to return responsibility for economic activity to the private sector. It sold a 45 
per cent interest in the company for a $6 million loss — gave $6 million to its friends. 
 
On Friday, October 28, 125 employees lost their jobs as a result and a $3 million payroll was lost to Regina. Most 
of the employees found out . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . Well, we’re going to find out how big the expansion in 
Saskatoon is in a moment, because the employees found out how big it was. Most of the employees found out that 
they’d lost their jobs when they got to the gates, when they showed up for work. Some of them heard about it in the 
media. 
 
The day after the closing, the member for Regina South said it was strictly a management decision and that the 
government didn’t know it would be closed when it sold its share in June. He went on to say, “I understand the 
employees are quite pleased with the way they have been treated with the company, concerning the severance 
arrangements.” So quoted the Leader-Post, Saturday, October 29, 1983. 
 
In contrast to the member from Regina South, John Culic, the past president of the union local speaking on behalf 
of the members, said, on November 12, ‘8, “The decision to close the plant  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

107 
 

was probably made last summer, when the government sold the 45 per cent share it held in the company for 
roughly 10 years.” And, “Revenue and Financial Services Minister Paul Rousseau’s statement that employees were 
satisfied were just plain stupid,” Mr. Culic said. He went on to say: “I haven’t found anyone who says he talked to 
Rousseau that day, so how did he know how we felt? 
 
This government has developed a speciality of listening to people in an absolute vacuum. All this time the Tories 
have had Fred Mitchell telling everyone that there were jobs at the Saskatoon plant for the former Regina 
employees. And he’s indicating very few of them have expressed interest. However, the Leader-Post in the same 
issue, November 12th, 1983, indicates: 
 
 Even the company’s claims that some of the former Regina plant employees will find jobs in 

Intercom’s Saskatoon operation don’t stand up. 
 
The Leader-Post went on to say: 
 
 While six people have been hired in Saskatoon most of those are related to someone in the 

company’s management. Others who have driven up to Saskatoon weren’t even allowed to fill out 
an application form. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the “open for business” government does not have a very good record. The facts tell as sad story. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, from January, 1983 to October, 1983, there were 254 business bankruptcies in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, businesses are closing, not opening, as a result of back for business. The employees of these 
companies know what open for business means, Mr. Speaker, and they are expecting, I rather expect, just more 
double talk from the government. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there are some important capital projects that if initiated could mean construction jobs in 
the city of Regina this winter. The throne speech should have announced an early start-up date for the rehabilitation 
centre in Regina. The most the government appears to be willing to do is something it mastered very early in office 
— study, study, analyze and study. 
 
In my opinion there have been delays in new school construction. There has been an announced delay in hospital 
construction, in a hospital that badly needs those renovations, which has been told by the Canada Hospital 
Association those renovations have to be made if it’s to remain certified. 
 
Double talk, Mr. Speaker, is really what’s behind this government’s harsh and heartless minimum wage policies. 
The government says 60,000 working people, today, large young people — many of the rest of them are single 
parents, usually women — but those employees, almost all in the service sector, must accept a frozen minimum 
wage. The same government has justified boosting salaries of its 16 top government aides and senior bureaucrats 
earning $60,000 to $84,000 by as much as $11,000. That’s 17 per cent. 
 
Apparently it’s okay for those at the Tory trough, the Staff Barootes, and the Derek Bedsons. By the way, where is 
Derek Bedson? Where did he go to? Does anyone know where Derek Bedson is these days? We miss his 
appearance. I hear that he’s developed the original retirement scheme — opened up a trade office in Austria. Do I 
understand that correctly? I understand Austria has a booming trade with Saskatchewan, as well as with Holland, 
one of the smallest trading partners Saskatchewan has. I can say one thing: you’ve done something that the 
conservative governments in Manitoba and Ontario didn’t do. You got Derek Bedson out of your hair for good. 
You sent him to Austria to run a creamery. But apparently it’s okay for the Staff Barootes, the Derek Bedsons and 
the George Hills, and the Dennis Balls, the Harold Lanes to rip off the people, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, but 
never, never, never should those 60,000 little wage-earners dare to ask more. Double standards, Mr. Speaker. 



 
November 11, 1983 
 
Double-talk is the only way to describe this government’s dealing with native organizations in Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. This government likes to assure native people they have a large voice, more independence, and yet this 
government has insulted those same native groups, Mr. Speaker. Native groups in Regina used to say before the 
last election, “The Conservatives have the ovens all ready for us.” Grim humour, but I say that this government has 
exceeded their worst expectations. The open for business government needed a way of rewarding its good friend 
Adam Niesner when he came to the trough. Their answer was to stop working with organizations such as the 
Friendship Centre, the Regina Native women, when it came to managing and leasing public housing, and it was the 
native organizations who played a major role in the leasing of Regina public housing for native people. 
 
Their answer, because Adam Niesner came to the trough, was to turn over the management of public housing units 
in Regina to their good friend, the same good friend of open for business whom they place their confidence in, the 
same good friend who came under deservedly heavy fire from Regina City Council and the community groups for 
attempting to demolish a potential heritage home in downtown Regina without a permit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite has made no secret of its approach to governing by Gregg. Its approach is to 
fly out the pollsters to ask for advice on what it should say. The failure of this government opposite will not be that 
Allan Gregg gave them the wrong advice of what to say. The failure is that they are responding to the concerns 
expressed to the public of Saskatchewan three weeks ago, and they are ignoring the opportunities of tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as simply as one can, the failure of this government is that it has neglected the real needs of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, the double-talk of the open for business government is also reflected in its 
attitude towards the women of Saskatchewan. As everyone knows the Devine government outraged a large 
cross-section of respected women’s organizations when it abolished the women’s division of the Department of 
Labour. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Women who are concerned about day-care, frozen minimum wage, social services, and 
The Matrimonial Property Act, have not been impressed by this government. I suspect the government opposite, in 
its government-by-Gregg approach, was told by the Decima polling organizations that they had lost the support of a 
lot of Saskatchewan women. I want to pay tribute to Saskatchewan women. They have done an admirable job in 
making themselves heard. Something very few groups have managed to do is to make this government listen to 
them. But Saskatchewan women managed that, and I congratulate them for their efforts. 
 
Because this government was scared it has lost the support of Saskatchewan women and, because it refuses to raise 
minimum wage, a women’s issue, to improve day care funding, a women’s issue, the Devine government has 
announced a new agency. A new bureaucracy has been established: a women’s secretariat. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, women in Saskatchewan are suspicious of this government. They’re going to be 
watching very carefully to see how the women’s secretariat is set up. Will it have the necessary financial resources? 
Most important, will it have program delivery responsibilities? Many women I’ve talked to in the last few days are 
concerned that the women’s secretariat will simply be window-dressing, Mr. Speaker. Women’s organizations and 
our caucus are going to be watching the legislation with some cynicism about the real motives of this government. 
They and we will suspect that your government is more interested in cosmetics than in substance. 



 
November 22, 1983 

 

109 
 

 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn for a moment to what I consider to be a distressing tendency in this government with 
respect to legal actions. We dwelt on this at some time in the question period. For the benefit of the member for 
Regina Sough, who is now back, I want to go over this in some detail. It’s the settling and compromising of 
disputes involving the public’s assets, by agreements which are secret, for reasons which are not explained to the 
public, whose assets are being dealt with. 
 
It is my view that when there is a legal action involving public assets which is settled behind closed doors, the 
greatest care should be taken to make it crystal clear to the public that the settlement was 100 per cent above board 
— which was done in the case of the former member for Moose Jaw North. While the Attorney General has great 
interest in the starting of that action, I say to members opposite if you have any legal memorandums which 
suggested to the former government that that action should be dropped, I say table them. I say to you, put up or shut 
up. If you’ve got it, let’s see it, if you don’t, stop referring to a document which you won’t produce. You won’t 
produce it because it doesn’t exist. You won’t produce it because it doesn’t exist. In fact, the opposite exists; the 
opposite exists. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — There is a memorandum which I saw at one point in time from John green 
recommending the action take place. If you’ve got a memorandum produce it; if you’ve got something produce it. 
If you’ve got something produce it. I say the members opposite have no such document. They are making that up 
. . . (inaudible interruption) . . . I invite the Attorney General to leave his chair and go and get your memorandum to 
the former government. We’ll table it. By all means table it. You can table it at any time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite you to explain to the member from Qu’Appelle, the Attorney General (he’s never made a 
house leader; we may now understand why) that you can table something at any time. You don’t need to have the 
floor to table something. I say to the members opposite, table it because it does not exist; it does not exist. It does 
not exist. 
 
Action was initiated, and I ask members opposite to recall the history of Dick Collver, as much of the history of 
that action . . . The problem arose in ‘76-’77. The action was initiated in that time period. It was an election in 
which you people did terribly. You kicked him out. And politically the action became really no longer relevant. He 
was no longer your leader. He was no longer your leader after 1978 — that’s 1979, actually. after 1979, he was no 
longer your leader. He was no longer your leader. So the suggestion that we kept this action frying around in the 
frying pan for six years because it would do some political good is nonsense. It was no longer relevant after he 
resigned to go and lead the Unionest Party. In fact, I suspect members opposite were as happy to see him driven out 
of the province as anyone else. Apparently, however, he left some friends behind in the Conservative Party, friends 
who owed him a million dollars, because that’s what they’ve cancelled. 
 
I say to members opposite that you are defying credibility, the public’s ability to believe you to suggest that the 
action was dropped for good and valid reasons . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . Oh well, if that’s the case, I’ll take 
your advice. We can stay on this subject till 5 o’clock and I’ll continue at 7 p.m. when they’re all comfortably 
planted in front of their televisions. It strikes me that if this is not a high audience that’s not a good argument to 
rush through it. That wasn’t intentional until the members opposite gave me that sterling advice. That wasn’t 
intentional. 
 
I say, though, your history of the fashion in which you have dealt with this matter stinks. No other word for it. It 
stinks — s-t-i-n-k-s. It stinks. The counsel was an eminent Saskatchewan lawyer, Si Halyk, a person who had 
nothing to do with the NDP — of eminent prestige within the Law Society of Saskatchewan, but certainly someone 
whose independence was unquestioned. What happened to that man of independence? The same thing that 
happened to Dennis Foley and all  



 
November 11, 1983 
 
the other people who didn’t bend to your will — they’re gone. Who do you replace them with? I’m not going to 
comment on the stature of the present lawyer, but I will tell you that he is not a person of independence. Mr. 
Shirkey’s ties with the Conservative party are well known. He made a trip to Ottawa; he made a trip to Ottawa for 
the leadership convention. But you people don’t even table a legal opinion which I assume you got from Mr. 
Shirkey. I say the fashion in which you handle this stinks, and this thing is going to plague you. Just as Gerald Ford 
was plagues with the pardon of Richard Nixon, so this thing is going to plague you. You will not be able to answer 
the allegations because there aren’t any answers for them. You can concoct answers. I say to the member for 
Regina South, you can concoct answers, but if there is no evidence of them, and there doesn’t appear to be a trace 
of evidence of what you’re saying . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Ned, there’s nothing worse than burning a U.S. flag with a Bic lighter made in 
Japan. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Oh, I can understand that the member for Moosomin might want to talk about 
something else. I can understand there are subjects he’d rather dwell on. I say to the member for Moosomin, this 
issue has a good deal more prominence in the public attention today than the burning of a flag in Manitoba many 
months ago. I can understand why the members opposite want to talk about Manitoba, and not what happened in 
Saskatchewan. Your handling of this thing leaves everything to be desired, everything to be desired. There’s 
nothing about the way you handled the Collver case which leaves anything but cynicism and suspicion in the 
public mind. The manner in which you have dealt with this has no exonerating sides to it. At least when Gerald 
Ford pardoned Nixon, at least he had something in the nature of a reason for it. He said at that time that the 
problem was plaguing the American nation and he wanted to put it behind the American nation. I didn’t know that 
this problem was plaguing the Saskatchewan society. It is now. You’ve certainly brought it back to public 
attention. But they had well forgotten about it before this incident, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I say to the members opposite that you are going to have some questions to answer. You are not going to avoid 
them, and they are going to plague you. We will answer them in this House and we will probably go through the 
circus we went through in question period today with everyone trying to protect the member for Regina Sough by 
yelling so loud that neither the questions nor the answers could be heard. That’s a new defence mechanism. 
 
Last year they had him and the Attorney General sitting side by side and he was constantly coached on every word 
he said. This year Graham is sitting by his side. This year the member for Indian Head-Wolseley is sitting by his 
side. He doesn’t seem to be as good a coach. So this year we have a new tactic. The members opposite are yelling 
at the tops of their voices so that we can’t hear his questions. Frankly, they aren’t very enlightening anyway, so you 
may be doing us a favour. But you are yelling pretty loud when we ask the questions so that the member from 
Regina South, who I’m not aware of has a hearing problem, has to ask that the question be repeated . . . (inaudible 
interruption) . . . Well, I don’t know. It all depends; it all depends. You people have some questions to answer, and 
they are going to plague you . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . We did today and you made fools out of yourselves. 
You might try in the throne speech, you might try in your throne speech providing any credible reason for dropping 
the lawsuit — a simple straightforward case. 
 
There are some law cases which are complicated; there are some which are not, and suing a guarantor after a debt 
has gone bad is not normally a complicated case. Either the debt was paid or it was not. Either the guarantor signed 
the guarantee or he did not. But they are, under normal circumstances, pretty straightforward cases. Under normal 
circumstances they are pretty straightforward cases. It’s not easy to imagine how such a case could be so dubious 
that it wasn’t worth pursuing for $1 million. 
 
It is not easy to understand, either, how a person of Mr. Collver’s substance would have no assets upon which a 
debt could have been realized. And it is not easy to imagine how Mr.  



 
November 22, 1983 

 

111 
 

Collver could be hard to find. I assume you could find him. He has always been a person of some substance, and 
the debt was fairly straightforward. 
 
Now those sets of circumstances don’t readily suggest to the member form Regina Centre why that case should be 
dropped. This case, Mr. Speaker, has a bad odour to it, a bad odour to it. It’s going to plague you. If you don’t 
answer the questions, and I suspect you’re not, because I suspect there are simply no answers to the question you 
are asking, your day of reckoning is going to come at the time of the next general election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have another subject I want to go into, and I beg leave to call it 5 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


