






















































Hansard: November 24, 1983


187 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 24, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PETITIONS 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 16,875-plus citizens in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I would like to present this petition which urges the members of the Legislative Assembly to 
consider stopping funding of medicare funds to abortion. The purpose is that it is a violation of many people’s 
conscience to have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I was not entitled to make a speech, so I’m 
wondering why I’m being allowed to be harassed as if I’m making a speech. 
 
On behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan, I would like to present this petition to stopping the medicare funding 
of abortion. The reason why the citizens wants this is because it is contrary to the dictates of their conscience to 
have medicare funds used for the destruction of human life. They want to see medicare funds restored for its 
original purpose: that of curing and caring. It is because of their great concern for medicare . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please! The hon. member is only allowed to present the petition and not to make a 
speech in its defence. Would you proceed with it. 
 
MRS. CASWELL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to clarify the purpose. I will not make a speech. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Order. The hon. member for Shaunavon will please retain silence when the Speaker 
is on his feet. 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, ladies and gentlemen. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall, on Tuesday next, move first reading of a bill, an act respecting the Department of Science 
and Technology. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS:  — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — This morning I would like to introduce to you the Hon. Speaker Jenkins, from the 
Australian House of Representatives. Mr. Jenkins is seated on the floor of the Chamber, and I would like him to 
stand and be recognized. I’m sure that all hon. members would like to welcome him to our Chamber. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: —. Accompanying Mr. Jenkins this morning, and seated in the Speaker’s gallery, are Mrs. 
Jenkins, Mr. Ian Harris, and Clerk Assistant Miss Gleeson. Would you also welcome them to our Assembly this 
morning. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Rise in Utility Rates for Farmers 



 
November 24, 1083 
 

188 
 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, this 
has to do with the rise of utility rates introduced by your government, and the impact that these utility rates will 
have on Saskatchewan farmers: natural gas rates, 13 per cent; power rates up 15; telephone rates up 19, and 
STC express rates are up 18.5 per cent. The cost of farm vehicle coverage has increased because your 
government has removed windshield breakage, and most farmers have to drive on gravel roads. In light of all 
these increases, my question is: what will these various utility rate increases cost the average Saskatchewan 
farmer over the next 12 months? What is the impact on the pocket-book of the average Saskatchewan farmer? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — I thank the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, for his question. I would remind him, of 
course, that insofar as farmers are concerned . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I thank the hon. member for his 
question, Mr. Speaker. And I think my buttons are okay. But if he likes it better, I will do them both up. 
 
But as it relates to utility costs for farmers or for home owners, I would suggest that once again this government 
has written the book insofar as having fair and sensible adjudication of rates to the public utilities review 
commission that this government established, that the people of Saskatchewan and the farmers of Saskatchewan 
asked for, for some good long time, while you were in power and never brought in. And in fact the NDP 
opposed it. 
 
And if he wants it examined further, Mr. Speaker, input costs for farmers in general, I would suggest, as well, 
and I remind the member again that this government, as well, has written the book on controlling those 
interest-input costs, because interest-input costs were identified as the biggest single source of headache for 
farmers out there. And through programs like the farm purchase program, our Crown land sales program, we’ve 
reduced those kinds of costs. 
 
The expanded . . . the new, never mind expanded, the new rural natural gas delivery system is one that is being 
very, very, very well received out there. And that is good news for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
As well, programs like beef stabilization have done a lot to assuring some sensibility and stability in what they 
receive for some of their commodities. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question I have isn’t a new question or a supplementary. It’s 
the first question. What impact is the increased utility rates going to have on the farmer? I wasn’t looking for a 
long dissertation of where the farmer can spend more money. You know, he can spend more money if he’s 
going to buy more land. What . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. It’s out of order to ask a question that has previously 
been asked. Now there’s no compulsion on the minister to answer. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I suppose we can learn to operate under the new rules that the 
minister doesn’t have to answer a question. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Order. The rules are not new. The rules have been around for a long time, 
and it states in the rules that the member can ask his question, but there’s no compulsion for the minister to 
answer, and a question which has previously been asked should not be asked again. Those are the rules of the 
Assembly. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I apologize for attempting to appear to go after the Speaker when 
I’m really after the minister. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

189 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Do you mean to tell this House, and the farmers of Saskatchewan, that the Minister of 
Agriculture and the Department of Agriculture doesn’t have any idea of the dollar impact that the additional 
costs and the production costs that will face Saskatchewan farmers, because of increased electrical rats? You 
have no answer, that a dairy producer that uses a lot of electricity, what this impact is going to have on his 
production costs? Is this what the minister is telling the House? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, I think I could quite simply say that as it relates to utility costs, 
PURC does a fair and sensible adjudication, and especially as it relates to things like natural gas. As I’ve 
already pointed out, the rural natural gas distribution system that’s going in out there has been very well 
received by farmers. And so it should be, because costs there are about 6 per cent of conventional sources of 
fuel. And that is a fairly dramatic impact on their pocket-books, and a program that is very, very heartily and 
well received, and I commend the minister in charge of SPC for the aggressive way in which they’ve delivered 
that program. And I know there are several communities . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — There are something like 37 farms in my constituency that have benefited from 
that rural natural gas distribution program. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the minister. My new question to the minister is this: 
he has 37 farmers in his constituency that put in natural gas. I’m saying I’ve got thousands of farmers in my 
constituency that can’t up with up-front money for natural gas. They’re facing a cost-price squeeze today where 
their power rates, their utility rates, everything is going up and they haven’t got the money to pay the increased 
rates. What is your government, with the generous announcement in the throne speech, going to do? And you 
don’t even know how much it’s costing them, or what this extra burden is going to help them. The farmer that 
can put in natural gas isn’t facing a cost-price squeeze. He’s got the three or four or five thousand dollars now to 
put in. what about the guy that’s facing a cost-price squeeze that hasn’t got the money for his grocery cheque 
next month? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the minister’s question, and his thousands of 
farmers in his constituency that he points out don’t have money to buy grocery bills. I empathize with every 
farmer in Saskatchewan today because of the price of wheat. But I would also like to tell the hon. member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, that there are thousands of farmers out there today enjoying the benefits of the farm 
purchase program, which has reduced their biggest input cost, and there has never been a program like it in 
Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Something like 1,300 young farmers, beginning farmers, have just had their 
rebate cheques mailed to them in October, totalling several million dollars, and that is substantive aid and is 
reducing their number one input costs. That’s the kind of help that we give to thousands of farmers in this 
province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. A farmer that can afford to get his son started on farming can 
get some low-interest money which is good to expand in already well-established unit. I’m talking on behalf of 
the farmers that can’t . . . 



 
November 24, 1083 
 

190 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Do you have a question? This is not time for speech making. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Question, Mr. Speaker. I want to ask a question on behalf of the farmers that can’t afford to 
expand their units, that can’t afford to put their families into a position to borrow an additional $350,000. They 
are facing a cost-price squeeze. How much extra is it going to cost the small dairy farmer, say in Duck Lake, 
Saskatchewan, that’s milking 70 cows? How much extra is it going to cost that farmer on a half section of land 
with the increased electrical costs? Tell me that. What have you got for him? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for his question. In fact what we have for 
him is a milk control board who looks after his best interest, and if the member will recall, on November 1st 
they just got an increase in the price of milk. That’s what they got. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — And I want to share with the hon. member some comments that were passed 
along to me by way of a letter from a recipient of the farm purchase program, showing just how valuable that 
interest rebate is insofar as helping them with their costs, and I’ll just read part of it. I’ll just read part of it. It 
goes on to say: 
 

Dear Mr. Minister. Today . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Today I received the cheque $5,038.63 as part 
of your government’s policy to reduce the interest on my loan with FCC to purchase land. 
 

And get this, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Even though my payment is not due until spring, it was a great help. Thank you. 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — 
 

I did have some concern about the way the rebate would be operated. It appeared I would have to make 
the total payment and then apply for a rebate. In the spring, with other costs, the waiting period for the 
processing would really hurt. You and your fellow colleagues must be commended for this foresight. It 
is like a breath of fresh air not to have a number of papers to fill out as other administrations do. 
 

That’s how we help farmers. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Farm Purchase Plan 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask a question of the Minister of Agriculture. I’d like to ask the 
Minister of Agriculture how the farm purchase plan is helping the many farmers that didn’t get into the plan, 
that haven’t purchased land at the 13 or 8 per cent interest rate? How is that helping them where they’re faced 
with the high utility costs of power for drying grain this fall? And the hog producers who have to keep their 
plants going, the dairy producers who have to keep their refrigeration units going. How is that farm purchase 
really supposed to help them? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Well, those same grain dryers are probably operating on natural gas, and thanks 
to the good wisdom of this government that the rates, number one, were frozen for a year; and number two, 
public utilities review commission has put fair and sensible rates, adjudicated by that commission, in front of 
the Saskatchewan public. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

191 
 

Insofar as how many farmers we’ve helped ad how many more we could help, 1,800, Mr. Speaker, is only the 
beginning. The program has just been running a mere 10 months, and we are going to be well on target to 
rebating something like $350 million in land transactions out there by the end of next March. 
 
Now if you want to bring up comparisons as to how many people this administration has helped, and how many 
people you hurt with that vicious, despicable land bank legislation, I’d be only too happy to provide you with 
those numbers. In 10 months, we have put 1,800 beginning and young farmers on the way to farm ownership. 
What was your record in 10 years? 151. Now you tell me which program the people out there prefer. Farm 
purchase by a mile, a million miles, because not only do they have the ownership of their land, but as well, the 
other fantastic feature about that program is it’s accomplishing exactly what the people out there wanted. It’s 
assisting in that transfer from the fathers, the uncles, to the nephews, to the sons, and the older fellow across the 
road who wants to sell out to the young, beginning farmer. 
 
I’m happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that between 50 and 60 per cent of those transactions are within the family 
tree, number one. And as well, 50 to 60 per cent of those transactions are for first-time beginning farmers, 
exactly what we wanted. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, I don’t think anybody objects to the farm purchase plan for those people 
that have used it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — And I think the majority of those people are probably people that have plenty of money to 
get into it. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is: how. . . And I asked you how that plan would help the farmers with their utility 
rates, and you stated natural gas that they have for drying grain. Well, Mr. Minister, how many of those farmers 
out there today that haven’t got natural gas and are having to use electricity to dry their grain with are being 
helped by your department? How many of them? 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Is the hon. member trying to suggest that the 
2,300-plus farmers out there that have been served by the rural natural gas distribution system have not been 
helped? Is that what you’re trying to suggest? 
 

Hog Marketing Commission 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Agriculture, or the minister better 
known as the minister of leafy spurge. It does not deal with utility rates, but another important matter that he 
may have some control over. I would wonder if the minister is considering setting up another hog marketing 
commission to control the mad rush to the trough that is occurring, of Tory supporters and candidate at this time 
in the Saskatchewan government. 
 
HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member to state his question again or rephrase it 
because, quite frankly, I didn’t see the question. 
 

Fibre Optics Industry in Saskatchewan 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the minister in charge of Sask Tel and 
has to do, Mr. Minister, with an industry that’s capable of being a growth industry and making a significant 
contribution to the Saskatchewan economy. I refer to the production of coaxial cable by Northern Telecom, and 
I refer to the minister’s statement quoted in the  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

192 
 

November 22 edition of the Leader-Post, in which you stated that the production of fibre optics in this province 
by that company for Sask Tel was likely to be a losing proposition, such statement given at a PC convention. 
 
My question to the minister is: does the minister think it’s appropriate to cast doubt upon a legitimate 
Saskatchewan industry for what is purely in the interests of petty partisan politics? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure that the question is worthy of an answer. However, let me put 
it in perspective. The previous government commenced a fibre optic network which will cost, by the time it’s 
completed, well over 100 millions of dollars. The fibre optic network will primarily by utilized in most 
communities for the movement of cable television signals. We run the very severe risk, with the changing 
technology in cable television – primarily direct broadcast satellites, or satellite communication, which may 
bypass the fibre optic network. Should that happen, we will probably have to write down the total investment in 
the fibre optic network, which will mean a loss of about 100 millions of dollars. That is precisely what I said. 
 
I did not in any way criticize Northern Telecom. As a matter of fact, we’ve had several meetings with Northern 
Telecoms and Northern Telecom since. As a matter of fact, very recently. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, its’ 
interesting to note that Northern telecom, since this government has taken office, has doubled its staff, doubled 
its number of employees in the city of Saskatoon. That’s the record, Mr. Speaker, not the record that’s trying to 
be portrayed by the member opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Will the minister admit that forecasting a future of high tech industries is a 
formidable task for the expert, and should have no place in the comments of a minister who has direct control 
over the industry, and who is attempting nothing other than to ingratiate himself with the delegates at the PC 
convention? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — I will be the first to admit that the changing technology, particularly in communications, 
is difficult for anyone to predict, which also may question the capital investment of $100 million of taxpayers’ 
money into the investment in the fibre optics network. However, you made that decision. 
 
So, you can’t have it both ways. You can’t stand up and say that I shouldn’t predict technology, and yet you 
make a substantial capital investment on it and say that it’s all right. I suggest to you that that is a double 
standard of the highest order, and indicates the lack of awareness that that previous government had in terms of 
dealing with the communications industry. You couldn’t keep up with cable television. If we had’ve had a CPN 
today, with the competition from First Choice and Superchannel, it would have been a bigger loser than it had. 
You couldn’t keep up with the changing technology. You couldn’t talk, and you talked about stopping beer ads. 
You couldn’t produce on that one, because you couldn’t keep up with the technology. I suggest that it’s going to 
be very difficult for any government, any regulatory agency, to keep up with the changing technologies in cable 
television, and I suggest to you that that is one of the difficulties that the CRTC is having today: that every time 
it makes a ruling, that technology changes the next day. 
 
It’s going to be very difficult for everyone to keep up with the changing technology, and I simple suggest to you 
that that’s all the more reason to be extremely cautious with major capital investments. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Let me remind the minister that that industry is in 
Saskatchewan because the former government was not extremely cautious but was prepared to take some risks. 
I remind the minister that . . . 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

193 
 

MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a question for the minister? This is not time for speechmaking. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — My question is: in light of the fact that the industry is in Saskatchewan because they 
received a large contract to produce coaxial cable for Sask Tel, and in light of the uncertainty of that industry, 
will the minister admit that he doesn’t really know what he’s talking about? Will he withdraw his remarks, and 
will he hereafter undertake to use a little more discretion when addressing the delegates at the PC convention in 
the future? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Unfortunately, the difficulty the hon. member opposite has is that I know what I’m 
talking about and he doesn’t. First of all, it’s not coaxial cable that we’re talking about; it’s fibre optic cable. 
There’s a big technical difference. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Secondly, as you produce fibre optic cable, particularly the single mode fibre which is 
now being produced, the demand for coaxial cable or copper cable being produced in Regina is dropping. You 
didn’t realize the impact of that on your decision, or if you did, it will be interesting to hear your comments 
about that. So technologically and technically, I don’t think you know what you’re talking about. 
 
Secondly, we have indicated now that that industry is there, and we have indicated to Northern Telecom and 
have made some firm financial commitments to Northern Telecom as to future development of that industry. 
We intend to honour that commitment. We intend to proceed and do whatever w can to assist in the 
development of that particular industry. Let me tell you that, with the admitted co-operation of the officials in 
Sask Tel, Northern Telecom was successful in obtaining the MCI contract between New York and Boston, 
which was the largest fibre optic contract yet awarded, of approximately $100 million, and Northern Telecom 
will be the first to congratulate and acknowledge the support and assistance that Sask Tel has given. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

SGI’s Suit Against Mr. Collver 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the Minister in charge of SGI. It has to do 
with the apparent perversion of justice created by the termination of the suit against your former leader, 
resulting, I may say, in a potential loss of $1 million to the taxpayer. And I remind the minister that several of 
the board members who made that decision . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I’m sorry. Mr. Speaker has been 
diligent enough in his duties this morning that I thought I saw you standing up. I remind the minister of the fact 
that several of the board members had been candidates under the leadership of Mr. Collver. Others had been 
campaign manager and lesser lights. My question to the minister is: did Mr. Collver’s former candidates, 
campaign managers, and other campaign workers on the board of directors show sufficient respect for the 
public trust imposed in them to declare a conflict of interest and absent themselves from that vote? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder how much respect the members opposite showed for the 
taxpayers’ dollars when they filed a claim in 1978? I want to give a little background on this, Mr. Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You asked a question. Do you want an answer? You asked a question. Do you want 
an answer? Mr. Speaker, the cause for this . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I can’t hear the minister, and I’m certain that you can’t. Proceed, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this cause for action arose in  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

194 
 

1976. The statement of claim was filed in 1978, Mr. Speaker, for the reason for political persecution of one 
individual. That statement of claim at that time, Mr. Speaker, was $1,297,303.35. 
 
If they had a case, why would they wait . . . In an amount of that size, why would they wait six years, and sit on 
it for six years, without proceeding with the case? Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the largest lawsuits ever, ever 
handled by SGI in their history, and an amount of over $1.25 million, and they sat on it in 1978 when they filed 
claim. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me add another little bit of information for the hon. members opposite. From March of 1979 
until they were defeated, in that period of time it was never once brought up at a board meeting of SGI, and I’ve 
searched the minutes of those board meetings. 
 
So all of a sudden it was so important. Before 1978 – before the election of 1978 – it was a very important case; 
it was a large amount of money. But after the election, Mr. Speaker, after the election of 1978 they forgot all 
about it. Nothing happened after that. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just to add a little more to the responsibility. The members opposite, I will remind them of 
contradictions and of political motivations, and the political persecution of this particular case. In May of 1978, 
when that statement of claim was filed . . . Mr. Speaker, that leader at the time, Mr. Blakeney, the Leader of the 
Opposition today, stated, when asked by reporters on a Friday, May 12 of 1978, that the matter had been 
brought up in cabinet several months ago. It was a political discussion. It was a political decision. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, furthermore, on that very same day, on that very same day when asked by reporters, the 
Minister of SGI at the time denied that it had ever been discussed in cabinet. I wonder who was telling the 
truth? Who was telling the truth at the time? 
 
One more thing, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order please. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that you called ministerial statements. I think . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I called ministerial statements and nobody moved. Now perhaps you couldn’t hear. With 
permission of the House we’ll revert to ministerial statements. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Job Creation Programs in Highways and Transportation Department 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I have an announcement I would like to make today to the Assembly 
that is proof of this government’s commitment to creating employment. 
 
Of late, members opposite have charged that we, as government, have done little in creating jobs in road 
construction and maintenance. Well, today I would like to refute those comments. 
 
Today the Department of Highways and Transportation has released details of a $24 million winter tender 
schedule that will create 275 jobs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — This winter tender package, Mr. Speaker, includes 25 grading, paving, and crushing 
projects, and the majority of this work will be done in the first three months of 1984. After April 1, the impact 
of the tendering program will mean as much as 600 additional jobs will be created during the summer of 1984. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

195 
 

Mr. Speaker, as this Assembly well knows, this government is committed to the private sector. I am pleased 
today to say that the road building industry of Saskatchewan will benefit directly from the release of this tender 
schedule. I know members opposite will not be pleased, Mr. Speaker, to hear this, especially the Leader of the 
Opposition. We have heard him harp of late on the need to create jobs. If his track record, Mr. Speaker, is any 
indication, that would mean expanded government work crews in the Department of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Inasmuch as some in-house construction capacity is necessary, our government work crews should not be so 
large that they threaten the market-place and the balance of the road building industry. Our road builders in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have the expertise and desire to give the people of Saskatchewan the best roads at 
the best price. The work we have scheduled for the winter months will provide the road building industry in 
Saskatchewan with the opportunity to keep people working in our great province. It will also give our road 
building industry the opportunity to plan their work schedule for 1984, and will afford them the opportunity to 
maintain an even operation throughout the winter months and the year ahead. 
 
Further, the Department of Highways and Transportation will have good supplies of crushed gravel on hand 
when the summer construction season begins in 1984. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this concludes my statement to the Assembly today. This government is committed to crating 
employment opportunities. This government is committed to a healthy private sector. Today’s announcement, 
Mr. Speaker, is positive proof that the private sector, in co-operation with the provincial government, can now 
lead the way in providing jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it very interesting that the Minister of Highways is 
announcing, in this House, in a ministerial statement, some work or some tendering that he is going to do this 
winter — work that has been budgeted last spring. The budget money was put in place last spring, and now he’s 
going to tender that work out this winter to be done next year. He is not telling this House anything new. He is 
not telling the people anything different. It’s something that’s done on a yearly basis. Every government in the 
past has done the same. They tender a certain amount of work during the winter. And yet the minister uses this 
House as a publicity chamber, rather as a chamber to produce some definite type of programs that are going to 
help the people out there in Saskatchewan. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — On a point of order, Mr. Minister, on ministerial statements. I wonder if I could 
just bring to the Speaker’s attention and that he would take the time to look at the script of the so-called 
ministerial statement made today and yesterday to see whether or not it fits within their purview and the rules of 
this Assembly, which in part state that statements by the minister in fact should be brief and factual. And I 
wonder if the statements being made in this House are in fact that, that are being made to help out the electorate 
and the population of Saskatchewan, or whether they’re being made to promote political words and political 
thoughts and political views. If that were the case, I wish that Mr. Speaker would look at it and make a ruling on 
this issue. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — I’d be very pleased to look at the two ministerial statements that are mentioned, and I’ll 
bring in a ruling on Monday. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 



 
November 24, 1083 
 

196 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply, which was moved by Mr. Schmidt. 
 
MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll continue along in the vein that I was going yesterday, when we were 
beginning to talk about the development in the oil and energy sector in this province. 
 
When we took government last year, or in 1982, Mr. Speaker, we heard the Leader of the Opposition stand up 
in this House say, in his squeaky little voice, “when will Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible) . . . the level of drilling 
activity that we enjoyed in 1980?” Now often, often in this House we’ve had people comment on the drilling 
activity in 1980, and those people in this House who are aware of the facts, who are aware of what took place in 
1980, recognize that there was an increase, a record year in drilling activity in every jurisdiction in this country, 
and in fact world-wide, Mr. Speaker. And we’re aware of that because of the future that people saw in the oil 
industry. 
 
Well, in answer to that question — when will we reach the level of drilling production in 1980? – my colleague, 
the Minister of Energy, stood up here on November 18 – a week ago – and announced that we had broken that 
record of 1980. We broke that record and set a new one at a time when every other jurisdiction in the country, 
and in fact most jurisdictions in the world, are facing incredibly tough times in the oil industry. Every day, with 
every well drilled now in this province, we set a new record. The former premier asked when we would eclipse 
that record that had been set here in 1980, in spite of the government in power at that time, and our answer was: 
within the first full calendar year that we were in government. 
 
In the area of natural gas drilling, there had been only 16 wells drilled in the 18 months prior to the election. 
There had been four drilled in the first three quarters of 1982, and what happened . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . We were busy throwing the government out of power, that’s what we were doing. In the first 10 months of 
1983 there were 1237 wells drilled in the gas industry. 
 
And what about land sales? You couldn’t give away drilling rights in this province under the former 
government. We’ve had three land sales. We are headed to a fourth on the 8th of December, and we had record 
after record after record: 15.2 million, 15.3 million, 29.8 million. It’s incredible, the interest in the oil industry 
in this province now. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How is the average citizen doing? 
 
MR. MORIN: — Considerably better. They’re working. They’re working, for a change. Already there have 
been a thousand jobs created in the oil industry; $500 million worth of economic investment. Half of that, half 
of that, fully $250 million, stays in the province. 
 
We’ve heard the opposition talk about the revitalization plan that we have, where we introduced the novel idea 
of royalty tax holidays, and they suggested that that would cost the people of this province $100 million. Well, 
to begin with, their figures are wrong. If you protract the figures that we would have enjoyed, had activities 
stayed at the same rate as it was when we took government, that tax holiday would have cost $40 million. 
 
Now compare that to what they had in place. They had in place an oil field stimulation program which allowed 
you to write off your capital cost or your expenses against your production. The cost of that program ranged 
from $40 million to $60 million per year. And what was the effect of it? Who did it help? Firstly, who did it 
help? It helped the big guy, Mr. Speaker, not the little guy. If you and I and any members of this Chamber 
wanted to get together, form an oil company, and go and drill for Saskatchewan oil, did it help us? Not a bit. 
Not if we had no production to write  



 
November 24, 1983 

 

197 
 

off our cost against. So who did it help? It helped the Imperial Oils of the world, the guys that could afford to 
punch a hole and write off the costs against all the production they already had. It didn’t help the little guy in 
Saskatchewan. It didn’t help the local oil industry, and 30 per cent, a full 30 per cent of the wells that they 
drilled were dry holes, which they paid for. They were rewarding the failure of the industry. 
 
Who benefits, and who pays the cost of our program? It only rewards success. If you don’t hit oil, you don’t get 
anything. And look at the activity that we’ve got – 1,000 jobs in the province in that short period of time, and 
the capital investment, and people working all over. There’s been talk about drilling up all over the country. 
Well that’s just not the truth. 
 
Drilling rigs in Alberta are up 12 per cent. Here in our province they’re up 123 per cent. Land sales in Alberta 
are up 48 per cent. Here in Saskatchewan they’re up 218 per cent. In Hansard on November the 18th, the 
Leader of the Opposition said that there were more oil wells drilled in Alberta, that every one is doing 
terrifically well, and they’re all doing better than Saskatchewan. And yet, in the Star-Phoenix on November the 
22nd, the headline is, “Alberta Oil Drilling in a Holding Pattern”, and I’ll read part of that article. This is out of 
Edmonton on Canadian Press: 
 

Oil drilling in Alberta held up in 1982, while drilling for natural gas continued to nosedive. The 1982-83 
report of the Alberta energy and natural resource development department shows: a release of the last 
year’s annual report means provincial government figures now are complete for the first two years of 
activity under the national energy program of October 1980. They show oil activity in a general holding 
pattern, gas activity collapsing under pressure of energy policies, and weak markets. 
 

And then the final paragraph of that article, they talk about total wells drilled in Alberta fell to 5,122 last year 
from 5,834 in 1981, and from 7,048 in 1980. 
 

Successful oil development wells, whose production not necessarily qualifies for world price, were 
down from the 1980 peak reports showed. 
 

And they go on and on talking about how terrible the industry is in Alberta. In Manitoba they show a bit of an 
increase. They’re up about 20 per cent, but that’s about like making the argument that the increase in the phone 
rates is 150 per cent. It’s still only a 15-cent argument. 
 
What about production in our province? In 1982 production averaged 140,000 barrels a day. In 1983 production 
is up to 160,000 barrels a day, and climbing. 
 
You know, yesterday morning as I drove to the legislature, I heard the news, and one of the issues on the news 
was that Ipsco (Interprovincial Steel and Pipe Corporation Ltd.) was doing quite well. There was talk of a $4 
million profit, and they related it to activity in the Saskatchewan oil industry. And, coincidentally, right after the 
newscast, what should come on but an ad placed by the member for Regina Centre saying, “why doesn’t the 
government do something to help Ipsco?” 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We did, we did. 
 
MR. MORIN: — Again, the members say that there’s nothing in major papers about Saskatchewan. There’s no 
good news. Well the Calgary Herald is a fairly major paper, particularly as it relates to all business. I’d like to 
read just the final paragraph from an editorial on the 5th of November. 
 

Alberta would be wise to consider the outcome of the Saskatchewan experiment before it attempts to 
balance the books by reducing incentives which may still be necessary to help the recovery in an ailing 
industry. 



 
November 24, 1083 
 

198 
 

Out of Oilweek, “Premier Devine’s Royalty Holiday,” talking about Saskatchewan: 
 

From 1975 until December of 1982, Saskatchewan’s heritage fund awarded grants of up to 75 per cent 
of the total cost of drilling for all oil and gas wells. The results were generally dismal. The government 
paid from 40 million to 60 million annually to companies which drilled dry holes 30 per cent of the time. 
 

Turnaround, Saskatchewan style. 
 

Overall industry and government have benefited from the changes and will continue to do so. In talking 
about Saskatchewan, the provinces crown revenues are increasing while industry is being allowed to 
earn a reasonable profit to ensure these benefits can continue through future reinvestment. The 
Saskatchewan experience is truly an example for other governments to emulate. 
 

What do we see when we read the good quality magazine, the good quality paper, that the gentlemen opposite 
read – something called the Commonwealth which most of us are not familiar with? On page 15, they’re talking 
about resolutions, and they say: 
 

Be it resolved that an NDP government in Saskatchewan would sue public sector investment in the 
resource development to get the resource industry in the province moving once again. 
 

That resolution comes out of Saskatoon Mayfair. I have a very good colleague from Saskatoon Mayfair. If 
that’s the type of resolution that the opposition can bring out of his riding, then I think he’ll hold that riding for 
as long as he wants it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — I’d like to turn for a moment, Mr. Speaker, to the riding of The Battlefords. Anyone in this 
House who has had the opportunity to travel through that region will know that it’s probably the most beautiful 
area of the province. People up there are rather unique; they’re free thinkers. They tend to stand on their own 
feet and don’t look to government for too much help. 
 
What benefit has there been to the riding of The Battlefords through the change in government, and what 
benefit is there for the riding of The Battlefords in the Speech from the Throne? Well, certainly every member 
of my riding benefited from the reduction in gas tax; 148 people in my riding qualified under the Build-A-Home 
program; 62 jobs were created through the small business tax credit in my riding; 143 jobs were created through 
Opportunities ’83 – 143 of my young people working that wouldn’t have been working under the former 
government; 59 people working under last year’s winter works program; and from January 1, 1983 until 
September 1, we had 26 new businesses open, and they employ 47 people in my riding. 
 
Now, the members opposite think that anybody that doesn’t hire more than five people, any business like that, 
that’s not worth talking about. Well, I think it is. If we had 1,000 people come into this province, and each one 
wanted to open a business, and all they employed was one person, I think that would be worth talking about. 
This is a radical change from having to build walls at the border to keep your people at home. 
 
Where would they like to take us? Who were their friends, and what did they do? You know, reading the 
resolutions to their convention just makes me happier and happier that we did what we did in 1982. We hear 
them complain about the economic policies they see around them, and around the world, and yet they seem to 
be the only people around that haven’t woke up to reality. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

199 
 

In China, they’re giving incentive bonuses to the people to encourage production; 15 per cent of the land in 
Poland is privately held, and it produces, proportionately, considerably more than 15 per cent of the output. And 
even in Russia, Mr. Speaker, where they subscribe to Mr. Marx and Mr. Engels, and their theory that, you 
know, from each according to ability, and to each according to need. 
 
I quote from Maclean’s: 
 

Andropov’s war on alcoholism is lost. On paper, the policy has a ring of fairness. (And they’re talking 
about Mr. Andropov’s new policy.) Andropov recently said of his plan to tie wages to productivity: . . . 
 

A novel idea, tying wages to productivity. 
 

. . . from each according to ability; to each according to work. 
 

Now isn’t that a novel idea? But the gentlemen down here haven’t heard about it. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, what do we really need in this province? I think we have no lack of opportunity. We are 
among the most fortunate places anywhere in the world. The real challenge that we face is the wise 
management of our resources, and the commitment to make everything that we can out of those resources, to 
see the development that could be here in this province. 
 
I’m sure that the members on the government side of the House would be happy to work co-operatively with the 
members of the opposition, if they’d just quite playing jiggery-pokery with numbers, and quit trying to score 
political points, and admit that in certain areas we have done a terrific job, that they are envious of our record. 
And, Mr. Speaker, when they are, I’m sure that we’ll be prepared to co-operate for the betterment of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure I join to participate in the throne speech debate. It’s particularly 
opportune today, as the members opposite are embarking on a foray to Saskatoon, where I gather from what 
they’ve said some very weighty measures will be discussed, debated, and argued. Mr. Speaker, all of the 
province will watch the NDP convention – except that part that’s on during the Grey Cup, or the part that’s on 
in the evenings, or the part that’s on Saturday morning, or the part that’s on Friday afternoon, or the part that’s 
on Friday morning, and many people will be watching the church services on Sunday morning. So, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s only the politicians that perhaps have an interest on what’s going on in Saskatoon. 
 
There’s some humorous events going on. We’ve heard some indication that members opposite are going to be 
involved in a presidential race, and after the debacle of a year ago, a year and a half ago, the New Democratic 
Party dug deep for someone to take charge of the Party, to lead the Party out of the wilderness and on to bigger 
and better things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well, they went and talked Harry Van Mulligen into running. Now, 
Harry Van Mulligen . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He’s not political. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Now, that’s a little difficult for the Party after, because here they have, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Mr. Harry Van Mulligen. According to what Harry Van Mulligen tells the government, he’s just a 
recent convert to the New Democratic Party. He was never involved  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

200 
 

before the government put him out onto the streets, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Here they have a newcomer – didn’t 
have a membership until after he lost his job and had to turn to the New Democratic Party for a little work. 
 
So then they found Mr. Reg Gross. He can’t keep a job in politics, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Every time he gets his 
head above water, the people wake up and throw him out of office. And then their third choice is Delaine 
Scotton, who got them to where they are today. Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are the choices that the New 
Democrats have facing them this weekend. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have another side issue that some of them over there are hoping doesn’t come 
to the fore. I gather I was threatened with lawsuits the other day because I happened to find out about a fishing 
trip – a fishing trip that the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg had in northern Saskatchewan with another 
NDP MLA. I want you to picture the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and another NDP member sitting in 
their little boat out there, with that 2 horsepower putting away in the back, a couple of cans of beers, fishing rod 
over the edge, discussing a little politics. Says the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, “I think . . . I think 
Blakeney’s got to go.” Immediately, the other member says, “I agree with you. Let’s catch some fish.” That was 
the sum total of the discussion. 
 
So then he hopped in his little aeroplane, did a little visiting to some of the MLAs. He said, “Blakeney’s got to 
go. We’ve got to get rid of our leader.” Oh, that’s what’s going on up there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that when 
they go up to their convention, they’ve got this triumvirate, triumvirate of people that can’t win elections, can’t 
keep a party membership, or don’t get one till late, or bring them to election defeat. But underneath, underneath, 
the big news that this convention is going to be to the group of MLAs over there: dump their leader – dump 
their leader, get rid of the now Leader of the Opposition and former premier of this province. Oh, yes. 
 
We look at the campaign that’s going on, and all of a sudden it’s becoming well noted during this session, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. All of a sudden we find out from around the province that the member from Regina Centre has 
been holding secret meetings, trying to get delegate support around the province, for the last year. We find the 
member from Shaunavon has got his hand-picked candidate, formerly the member from Morse, Mr. Gross, 
running for president. He’s going to lead the campaign, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
issue of the campaign, the issue at this convention, is going to be whether all of those people holding their secret 
meetings can screw up their political courage and come forward and stand up and address the Leader of the 
Opposition on where they stand on leadership. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t think they’ve got the political 
fortitude to tell him to his face what they are doing behind his back. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we take a look at what is happening to the New Democratic Party 
on the national level. We get the member from the west side, Meadow Lake, Mr. Anguish, NDP member. He 
wants to dump his federal leader. His provincial members want to dump his provincial leader. It got so bad 
down there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that Mr. Broadbent was in the hospital a week ago for a back operation. They 
said it was a slipped disc, but it was suturing his back from all the knife wounds from the New Democratic 
Party. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — And I strongly suspect that two or three weeks from now, and I hope it’s not over 
Christmas, that the present Leader of the Opposition is going to be hospitalized from back wounds from his own 
MLAs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s what’s going to be happening. It will be very, very interesting. It’ll be very, very 
interesting if we see the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who’s been touring  



 
November 24, 1983 

 

201 
 

this province saying that Blakeney has to go, whether he’s got the courage to stand up at that convention and 
say, “I’m for dumping the leader.” I’ll betcha, I’ll betcha he doesn’t. But I caution the members opposite, I 
caution the members opposite of what your party members are going to think of your activities. And I don’t 
think they’re going to be very, very happy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I strongly suspect that when the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg goes into that convention, it’s going to be spread all around – he’s here to dump the 
leader. He’s here to dump the leader. The member from Shaunavon . . . The word is going to be all around, he’s 
here to dump the leader. Mr. Gross is going to be spreading the word, “I’m not really dumping the leader.” Mr. 
Van Mulligen is saying, “I’m not really here to dump the leader, but maybe we should take a look at it.” Delaine 
Scotton is going to stand up and say, “It’s not my fault we lost the election. It’s not my fault; it’s the leader’s 
fault.” That’s what this convention is going to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I indicated that the convention was going to discuss some very weighty topics. And I think 
I’ve indicated primarily what’s going to be going on. And I’ll tell you why I can suggest that with a degree of 
authority, because I read through the list of resolutions. I read through the list of resolutions. 
 
Here is a party that is the spokesman for the left – the socialists as they call themselves. These were supposed to 
be the party of ideas. That’s what they told us. You’ll notice that so far in this session they have not come up 
with one single, new idea. Every time in question it’s been negative; it’s defeated; it’s depression. That’s what 
they want, is they want a depression. But not one single new idea has been brought forward by the New 
Democratic Party. And let me tell you why. And let me tell you why. Let me tell you, here are some of the new 
ideas in the NDP convention ’83. 
 

BE IT RESOLVED that the NDP press for controls on the import of produce, especially from the U.S. . . 
. 
 

Well, here they have a new idea. They want the kids to stop eating U.S. oranges. They don’t want the children 
to eat B.C. apples. They don’t want the children to eat bananas from another country. This is one of the weighty 
resolutions that the NDP are going to debate during this campaign. Don’t even buy orange juice, for heaven’s 
sake. Don’t even buy orange juice. They don’t want their kids to eat or drink oranges. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here’s a proposal that the NDP have. Now it’s not new, because they had it in this 
House before, but they think they made a mistake. 
 

BE IT RESOLVED as NDP policy that an inheritance be introduced . . . 
 

Oh, an inheritance tax. Succession duties. Death taxes. Death taxes will be brought back by the New 
Democratic Party. There is the resolution. Here is the interesting thing. Here’s the interesting thing about that: 
who is proposing the resolution? Last Mountain-Touchwood, the home of the former minister of agriculture, 
Mr. MacMurchy. He wants death taxes, succession duties, and inheritance taxes brought back. And we all know 
that he’s still controlling the puppets opposite at this convention, and I suggest that that will be a matter of deep 
concern to the people of this province who are concerned about increasing taxes, and particularly already have 
thrown out death taxes in this province. 
 
The NDP are also going to spend hours debating the installation of seat belts in school buses. The NDP want to 
spend a great deal of time . . . Now this is weighty. This is important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I ask hon. 
members to listen to this, because I know that this is important. 
 

BE IT RESOLVED as NDP policy that each driver’s licence have a photograph of the driver on it. 
 

When people are talking about jobs and employment and job creation, they want to make sure  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

202 
 

that each driver’s licence has a picture of the driver on it. 
 
This is also weighty. This is also weighty, very important. Very important, because I know that the hon. 
members opposite don’t like to hear this. 
 

BE IT RESOLVED as NDP policy that stricter enforcement of laws governing licensing of 
out-of-province vehicles be adopted. 
 

Also very important when we’re talking about jobs, employment. The NDP are on record. They don’t want 
fairness for the workers. They want to repeal Bill 104. Here they are, hiding behind Nadine Hunt’s coat-tails. 
They want Bill 104 repealed. Oh, but this is important. This is very, very important. We all know that the 
socialists don’t like to work. Everybody knows that. Everybody accepts that – that ‘hard work’ are two 
four-letter words that they don’t like to use. We all know that. So the NDP are proposing at their convention 
that we now drop to a 32-hour work week. That’s the NDP policy. 
 
The NDP policy don’t want the private sector in the parks. I have a resolution to that effect. Oh, they also don’t 
like government efficiency. They also don’t like government efficiency, because the NDP are going to pass a 
resolution wanting to stop this government from requesting the employees to fill out the efficiency 
questionnaire that we submitted. That’s what they think of government. If government isn’t big, fat, bloated, 
and lazy, the NDP aren’t happy, and they make that quite clear at their convention. 
 
These are some of the weighty, weighty matters. They don’t like liquor advertising, and I’ve got some 
comments I’m going to make on that, Mr. Speaker, which I think the hon. members opposite will find very 
enlightening. Oh, oh, oh – here’s a big one. Here’s a biggie. Now, the NDP in their wisdom, sitting out in Last 
Mountain-touchwood, I guess or . . . No, this is Thunder Creek. Some NDP in Thunder Creek, who’s got his ear 
to the ground of international diplomacy, has got some information that the U.S. military . . . the Korean 
jetliners was used as a spy vehicle for the military. So he doesn’t like that. He doesn’t like that, so that they are 
now going to condemn the federal NDP, which failed to condemn the United States for using this secret 
information that this prominent supporter in Morse has received from some, some, some source. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Whose side are they on? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Well, they’ve got some more. They want us out of NATO (North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization). They want Canada out of NATO. Whose side are you on? When the former premier was over in 
Russia, he never mentioned nuclear disarmament or disarmament once. When he comes here to talk and berate 
the United States, he wants the United States to fold up, give up everything, pack it up, and let the Russians take 
over. That’s the NDP policy – unilateral disarmament. 
 
So they want freedom of information. Now they were in government for how many years? Eleven long, lean 
years. They want freedom of information. Why do they want freedom of information? Because, according to the 
NDP, we live in a society in which information is controlled by capitalist interests, which manipulate it to 
promote their own ends. That’s why the NDP want freedom of information, not so that the average person can 
make informed decisions – because the capitalists are manipulating the system. 
 
I’ll talk a little later about the press and manipulation. I may have some comments, but I am sure that what I 
have to say indicates, and will give irrefutable proof, that it ain’t the capitalists that are benefiting by some of 
the press. 
 
Now here’s another one. Here’s another one. I think it’s very important that the public get an idea of what the 
NDP are talking about, because this is very, very important. We now stop the produce coming out of California, 
the apples from B.C., and bananas from wherever, and the  



 
November 24, 1983 

 

203 
 

watermelons. They don’t want watermelons in here. 
 
So now what are they going to do? They’re going to expand their horizons. They’re going to support an 
embargo on all products from Chile, South Africa, the Philippines, Argentina, and South Korea. That’s the 
international scope. If you aren’t a left-wing fascist government, you don’t get the support of the members 
opposite. That’s precisely what the members opposite stand for. 
 
Oh, oh. But they’ve really learned. They’ve really learned since the last election. The last election was not the 
fault of the previous government. No, no. Here’s the problem with the last election. They’ve analysed this now 
for 18 months, and they’ve come up with the solution in why they lost the last election. 
 
I’m sure the political scientists are going to be happy to read this one because I’m sure this is something that 
they missed. This is from Humboldt: 
 

Whereas spring elections cause a great inconvenience to the rural sector, and whereas it would appear 
that elections are more difficult to win during the spring, be it resolved as NDP policy that no more 
provincial elections be called in the spring. 
 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — That’s what they’re talking about. That’s what the next three days are all about.; Oh 
sure, that’s the reason. You know, we had some misconceptions as to why we won the election. We thought we 
had better policies, better organized, better people, and more and better in tune with the people of the province. 
But here we were wrong. Here we were wrong. 
 
Well, I’ll be very pleased to see the doctoral thesis of the former member from Wascana, talking about this 
explanation of why the previous government was defeated. 
 
But then they fine-tuned their policy. They fine-tuned it. Not only they don’t want any more spring elections 
because they’re difficult to win; they now have chosen the date. They have now chosen the date when elections 
are prime for the NDP. Maybe we should listen to this: 
 

BE IT RESOLVED as NDP policy that the provincial legislation be amended to provide an election be 
held on the second Wednesday of June every fourth year. 
 

That’s going to solve all the problems, let me tell you. Keep thinking that way. Keep thinking that way. I’m 
certainly hopeful that the political scientists that advise you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, this is NDP 
resolutions, 1983. I know the hon. member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg is a little touchy about this. Trying to 
dump the leader. He hadn’t read the resolution. He spent all his time flying around, dumping the leader. He 
hasn’t spent any time reading what’s coming out. 
 
So then we look at some of the others that . . . Oh yes, the NDP policy . . . And those that supported the former 
leader in his constitutional endeavours probably weren’t aware of the NDP policy which says that Quebec has a 
right to self-determination. That’s a great resolution in the interests of national unity, but many of us have 
known where the NDP have stood for some time. 
 
They support the right to freedom of choice on abortions. We all have known that. And then they support 
Canada’s withdrawal from NATO. They want child care centres: you know, nice little communal centres where 
they can bring their doctrine down to the children of the province of Saskatchewan beyond the school system. 
That’s what they want. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to show you how alert they are, to show you how alert and how much attention they’ve been 
paying to the session, and to the government policies that have been coming out . . . Saltcoats. The NDP 
wanted: resolved that the NDP support the senior citizens’ initiative to have  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

204 
 

foot care included under medicare – already having been done and announced in the last budget by the Minister 
of Health. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — But they want medicare expanded. The NDP want medicare expanded, because the next 
resolution says: be it resolved as NDP policy that the cost of services of a licenced masseur be included in the 
provincial medicare plan. That’s their new ideas for health. Massage parlours around the province is their idea 
for health. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Baker, we’re talking about a party bankrupt of ideas, bereft of ideas, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s gotta be a little bit depressing for the people of Saskatchewan when they get a chance to read 
through the NDP resolutions. 
 
They want to expropriate any crown corporation sold by the present government for $1. And as things develop 
over the future, we will remind the people of Saskatchewan as to their policy of expropriating back for $1 assets 
sold by this government. Because I suggest to those who have brought their land bank land back, that should the 
NDP ever be re-elected, they will expropriate it for $1. And that is precisely what the NDP policy is. 
 
Oh, but somebody out there . . . I think we missed one, because somewhere there’s a businessman, and he 
resides in Souris-Cannington. He resides in Souris-Cannington. There’s a businessman, because there may be 
one sane voice. Be it resolved . . . They decided that maybe they’re out of touch with business. They spend half 
their convention resolutions kicking business – big, small, and medium size – kicking them, wanting to take 
them over, nationalize them, wanting the workers to go out on strikes on the small businessmen. But one of 
them says: be it resolved that a committee within the party organization be selected to meet with business 
groups, such as bureau of independent business, local chambers of commerce, and trade organizations, to hear 
and discuss their concern. Someone. Someone. 
 
But are they happy with the way the NDP have run things in the past? Obviously not, because now they want 
secret ballots. Now they want secret ballots. We bring them in for the trade union movement. The NDP are 
against them. But their own party now want secret ballots because they know how they have been whipped so 
hard and manipulated in the past. A rather double standard, isn’t it? A rather double standard when this 
government brings in secret ballots for the workers of this province. The NDP have fought it and opposed it, but 
now they want a little of that inside because some of them are afraid to stand up. I’ll bet you the member from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg who’s been sneaking around the province probably had that desire for a secret ballot so 
he didn’t have to stand up and be counted. 
 
Are the NDP dissatisfied with the approach taken by their caucus members? Certainly. Listen to this: 
 

BE IT RESOLVED that the NDP election advertising be more positive and informative about NDP 
policy and platform. 
 

Mr. Speaker, their own party members are fed up with the negative approach taken by their MLAs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a couple of other topics I would like to address. One of them is the question of hypocrisy, 
and it’s going to deal with the hypocrisy of a prominent spokesman for the New Democratic Party, Mr. Faris, 
former member of this Assembly, former cabinet minister, member of the treasury benches. And it’s also going 
to deal with the hypocrisy of the stand of the New Democratic Party on beer and wine advertising. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

205 
 

I’m going to read some of the items from the Faris report, and I’m going to ask the people in the press gallery 
when they listen to Don Faris in the future, that they ask him some questions because some of them actually 
believe Don Faris is being a concerned citizen in this matter. 
 
Don Faris chaired the committee that recommended that the drinking age be reduced from 19 to 18. Don Faris 
chaired the committee that legislative provision be made to allow liquor board stores in major urban centres to 
remain open till 2 a.m. The NDP Don Faris proposed that the Government of Saskatchewan review the 
forenoon hours of opening of liquor board stores with a view to providing more convenient service. They want 
an extension of the hours of service in licensed premises. And I’m going to run through some of them. 
 
The NDP Don Faris was the one who stood up and proposed that low alcohol content beers and wines be sold in 
the grocery stores, and that’s in the Faris report. That’s in the Faris report: that beer kegs be available for sale; 
that self-service be allowed on an optional basis; that off-sale in beverage rooms and cocktail lounges and 
dining rooms be allowed. That’s the Faris report. 
 
I’m going to summarize Mr. Faris’ position. I’m going to ask those that perhaps run into Mr. Faris on occasion 
. . . You’ll see him at the convention; you’ll see him at the convention. Because what does Mr. Faris say in the 
Faris report? And this is an addendum, an appendix, appendix (f): “Reservations to the Report” by Mr. Faris. 
These are his own comments, his own views, and what he say about beer and win advertising, or what he 
doesn’t say, and I urge the hon. members to listen because Mr. Faris is going to be eating his words over and 
over and over again by the time that this government is finished unmasking him for the hypocritical positions 
that he has taken. He said there is one way and one way only to stop consumption of alcohol: 
 

Only sharp and steady price increases will reduce cigarette consumption, and alcohol consumption. 
 

Only steady price increases will reduce consumption – not advertising. He made no comment, and I urge those 
that hear Mr. Faris to sit down and unmask him themselves, and ask him is he taking his position for cheap, 
partisan, political gain, because if he’s now changed his position he had ample time to study it in the past. I 
think he needs to be held to public account. And I’m prepared, I’m prepared publicly, because he can’t be here 
to defend himself, to take that issue out to the public where Mr. Faris can defend himself before the public. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — He goes on further, goes on further, page 95: 
 

But the pricing policy to cut back on overall consumption is the most important idea. 
 

That’s Mr. Faris’ stand in 1973. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Did you read what he said about minors? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Yes. Yeah, we could talk about the extension of liquor sales to minors and access of 
liquor to minors. We know where the NDP in Manitoba stands on booze – introducing same day home delivery 
service. Their idea of rural natural gas, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to ship the booze out around the 
province by taxi. That’s what they want: C.O.D. – cash on delivery. That’s where the NDP stands, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I’ll take it a step further. I’ll take it a step further. I went back and checked some of The Commonwealth. For the 
public information, the Commonwealth is the NDP party paper published, in many cases, with out a great deal 
of relevancy and objectivity. But I found the 1955, December 21, Commonwealth. What do I see? An ad by 
Drury’s, the Manitoba division,  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

206 
 

Western Canadian Breweries Ltd., an ad in The Commonwealth, a beer ad in The Commonwealth. I go back to 
December 21. Look at page four of The Commonwealth, the NDP paper – Shea’s Winnipeg Brewery Ltd. 
advertisement. 
 
The NDP, I suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are either taking a stand that is hypocritical or they’re taking their 
stand for cheap political purposes. None of it, Mr. Speaker, none of the words uttered by the NDP and its 
henchmen have any ring of credibility when we go back and we take a look at the record of the NDP in office – 
wanting price increases; nothing said about beer and wine. Mr. Faris says the way to stop consumption is higher 
prices. We look to their colleagues in Manitoba that believe in cash on delivery, home delivery of booze, and 
then we take a look at their historical record in The Commonwealth. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the public will be 
made well aware of the hypocritical position of the New Democratic Party. 
 
The public will also be made aware of another area where the NDP have shown a considerable degree of 
hypocrisy. And I’m going to table some of these documents because I want not only the public today to know 
that these are now public records, but so that future generations, when they try and find out what caused the 
disappearance of the NDP, when they’re looking historically as to why did the New Democratic Party fall off 
the face of the political and electoral map of Saskatchewan, they can read some of these records. I suppose I 
could send them to archives. It would probably be better in archives. They won’t need them for 20 years. But 
I’ll put them on today so the political scientists can see, and so that the press, the press can see. The press can 
see . . . I’m going to table first of all a confidential letter, a copy of a confidential letter, to the Hon. Allan E. 
Blakeney, then premier and president of executive council, and members of the council, from the former 
minister in charge of SGI, Mr. Whelan: 
 

The purpose of this memorandum is to inform cabinet that the board of directors of the Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Office will be requested to appoint Don W. Cody to a position on the executive 
committee of the corporation. Mr. Cody was employed by the Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
Office from the years ’63 to ’67, and upon leaving the corporation was an adjuster in the claims service, 
stationed in Saskatoon. He was then employed by Co-op Insurance Services Limited, achieving a 
supervisory level in the claims division. 
 
He ceased to be actively appointed by the Co-op Insurance Services Limited when appointed a member 
of the executive council in 1973. 
 

For the public what that means, of course, is Mr. Cody was appointed to cabinet, obviously on a temporary 
basis. Mr. Cody couldn’t find work after he was defeated in 1974. So what did the NDP do to a defeated cabinet 
minister? A supervisor, an insurance adjuster, he got the quickest and biggest promotion in the history of the 
insurance business anywhere in North America. He went from being an adjuster to the boss, right after the 
election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Cody started in 1975 at $2,018 per month. No credentials whatsoever, except that he was a 
defeated NDP cabinet minister. 
 
I’ll read some of the other. I’ll read some of the others, and I’m going to put a list of them in. I’m going to list 
some of the others. This is what the NDP did in the office, and I caution the public to remember that because the 
NDP are trying to leave the impression that they never appointed a friend of theirs. Who do they expect the 
Tories to appoint? Harry Van Mulligen? Harry Van Mulligen? They want us to keep Harry Van Mulligen on. 
Nadine Hunt – committed to defeating the Conservative government? Are these the people that they want 
appointed? Or do they want us to appoint John Burton? Because they had hired Mr. John Burton, defeated NDP 
candidate, former NDP member of parliament, executive director of transportation agency. He was making 
nearly $63,000 a year. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

207 
 

Linda Dufour, executive officer of the provincial NDP, was supposed to become assistant chief electoral officer 
until the government changed. Don Faris. Don Faris was appointed – defeated NDP cabinet minister – was 
appointed as director of communications and education, department of co-ops, for a salary of $3,500 in 1981. 
Margaret Fern, defeated NDP candidate, appointed intergovernmental officer 3, paid $9,700 as an honorarium 
for special services, plus being hired in the government. 
 
Defeated federal NDP candidate, Jules Friesen, was hired as co-ordinator of adult education information. David 
Henley, defeated NDP candidate in the federal election for Moose Jaw, given a job with Saskoil at $2,500 per 
month, plus raises, subsequently manager of community and public affairs, $3,078 per month. 
 
Don Keith, defeated NDP candidate, appointed general manager of Sask Development fund. Jim Leggett, 
defeated NDP candidate Bengough-Milestone, given position in transportation agency. Howard Lucas, 
appointed senior industrial relations officer, Department of Labour, defeated NDP candidate 1978, Rosthern. 
Kimberley Lusney – we’ve had that name before – daughter of the present NDP member, given a job with the 
government. Gordon McNeill, defeated NDP MLA, hired as northern liaison officer, SMDC. Holly Ann Knott, 
defeated NDP candidate, hired as solicitor by the potash corporation. 
 
Louis Roy, defeated NDP candidate in Prince Albert-Duck Lake, given a job with the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan. Len Warwick, sought NDP nomination in Saskatoon Sutherland, given a job with SMDC, 
corporate affairs department. Chris Bahnman, defeated NDP candidate Rosthern, Saskatoon Nutana, appointed 
to a board commission by the NDP government. 
 
Ted Glover, special assistant to Edgar Kaeding, former minister of rural affairs, federal NDP candidate for 
Milestone. Bill Knight, former NDP MP, appointed assistant provincial principal secretary to the former 
premier. 
 
Ted Koskie, appointed executive assistant to the Minister of Consumer Affairs, brother of Murray Koskie, 
former NDP minister. Barbara Kramer, daughter of Eiling Kramer, former NDP cabinet minister, executive 
assistant to the former minister of industry and commerce. Alex Kuziak, defeated NDP member, cabinet 
minister, appointed to the boards. Allan Oliver, former NDP MLA, elected 1971, defeated ’75, appointed to the 
highway traffic board. 
 
Aden Owens, Alex Taylor, defeated candidates, appointed to various government positions. Alex Taylor 
couldn’t find a job. It’s amazing how defeated NDP cabinet ministers can’t get work in the real world, isn’t it? 
Every time they get defeated they can’t go out and make an honest living. They can’t go out and find a job 
getting their hands dirty. They can’t go out and work like the average citizen has to do. They can’t go out and 
run a small business. No, the government has to bail them out and hire them, and the NDP had to put their 
defeated cabinet ministers into full-time paid positions – not even boards. They had to put them into full-time 
positions because they can’t get a job out there. 
 
I go to Marjorie Cooper. Her son did very, very well. She was a former CCF MLA whose son was assistant to 
the minister of transportation. Helped Struthers get several contracts from the NDP. Terry Hansen, former 
defeated MLA, was given an honorarium for special services from the Department of Agriculture, Louise 
Simard sought the nomination for the NDP in Regina North West – received honorarium as the assistant 
chairman of the human rights commission. Howard Leeson, former deputy minister of intergovernmental 
affairs, was paid $65,000. He happened to be president of the New Democratic Party in Alberta – brought here 
at $65,000 a year. Don McMillan, former special adviser to the minister responsible . . . the NDP had proposed 
to make the former chief electoral officer and organizer deputy minister of communications — $63,000. Martin 
Semchuk, former NDP MLA, defeated, got employment contracts with the Department of Highways from 1971 
until 1982. I’m going to table those, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have several others. I won’t take the time of the 
House, but we will table them as well. 



 
November 24, 1083 
 

208 
 

I want to make sure that the press . . . Some of them are getting the impression that this is something new; it has 
never been done before. The NDP had more people at the political trough than any other party in the history of 
this country. The NDP did more to politicize the civil service in every province in which they have attained 
government than any other political party. Mr. Speaker, their record of politicizing the civil service and their 
record of patronage is something that other political parties learn from – not the other way around. 
 
I frankly have some reservations, quite bluntly, about the press coverage on the double standard. I remember the 
press coverage and the decision of the press that the appointments to the human rights commission were 
political. There was a herd instinct in there. They weren’t prepared to write it any other way. I do give the CBC 
a little credit because the new chairman of the human rights commission, in whom I think the public of 
Saskatchewan if they don’t already have soon will have a great deal of faith, has gone from being a Tory 
political appointment to a very remarkable individual, because that he is. 
 
We made appointments to the human rights commission because there were groups out there, disadvantaged 
groups, that didn’t have representation before. We didn’t do the political blood test that the previous 
government did, as admitted by the now Leader of the Opposition, but still the press insisted that it was to be 
political. Some of them are starting to come around, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To them I give credit. But I take a 
look at a story that wasn’t written, about the closure of Intercontinental Packers, by the Leader-Post. The 
editorial said: 
 

The government denies it had any forewarning of an anticipated Regina closure when it sold its shares at 
a loss, or that the government gave up its equity to escape the political heat the province is facing . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 

No, we didn’t have the forewarning. I’ll tell you why we didn’t have the forewarning because the NDP burned 
the records of the crown investments corporation meetings. And it wasn’t till subsequent decisions to close the 
plant that we got the information, and we got it from Intercontinental Packers. But what did the NDP member 
Mr. Shillington, the MLA from Regina Centre, say? “this is a straight betrayal of 140 workers and a straight 
betrayal of the city of Regina by this government.” Do you stand by that statement? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I sure do. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — He stands by that statement, because I’m going to table some records. I’m going to table 
some records. If there is a betrayal, the hon. member should resign his seat if he calls it a betrayal because 
here’s the truth – here’s the truth, of the Intercontinental Packers closure. I’m going to table after I’ve read it, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the record from Intercontinental Packers’ board minutes. 
 
I’m going to put it in perspective because with 40 per cent government ownership, the government, the previous 
government, had some of its appointees on the board. They were Stephan Barg and Garry Beatty, formerly head 
of the crown investments corporation. They were at this meeting. They were at the meeting which in fact 
indicated the pressures that the NDP had put on, but they also endorsed and carried the resolution, reviewed a 
report and recommendations pertaining to construction of a distribution building in Saskatoon to enable the 
current Regina operations to be moved to the Saskatoon plant. That was a 1981, November 4 meeting. 
 
The NDP . . . and we’re going to send a copy of this to every one of the workers laid off, that the NDP made 
that decision in 1981 when they were on the board. The NDP made the decision. The NDP made the decision 
and then burned the records. There should be a story as to the records that were burned by the previous 
administration. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

209 
 

I’m going to add a little more, because they may come up and say it didn’t go to cabinet, that he didn’t know 
about it even though he was in the cabinet at the time. I’m going to table a copy of a letter, a copy of a letter 
from the now president of Intercontinental packers Ltd. It’s dated November 128, 1983. 
 

I have enclosed a copy of the Intercontinental Packers Ltd. directors’ minutes from November 4, 1981 
and June 10, 1982 which indicate the former government directors agreed to the closing of the Regina 
plant as shown in the June minutes. As well, they funded, through Industry and Commerce, $45,000 of a 
$75,000 study completed on October 31, 1981, by Knud Simonsen Engineering, which recommended 
closing the Regina plant. 
 

Not only did they know about it and kept it from the people of Saskatchewan, they helped pay for the study that 
resulted in the closure of the Regina plant. That’s what the NDP did. 
 
I’m going to table as well the letter because Mr. Mitchell said we could table the letter. 
 

For your information, I personally informed Mr. Blakeney in his office . . . 
 

I think the hon. member should hear this. 
 

For your information, (this is Mr. Mitchell) I personally informed Mr. Blakeney in his office, in the fall 
of 1981, that we would close the Regina plant in 1983, and he concurred it was a right decision. 
 

That’s the truth about the NDP and Intercontinental Packers and not one of the members – not one of the NDP 
members – was prepared to stand up and tell the truth. No. What did they say? They accused this government of 
betraying the workers. 
 
The betrayal and the cover-up went back to 1981, and I suggest we’re getting very close to privilege. If that 
hon. member was in the cabinet and had full knowledge when he made that statement, he obviously misled 
certainly the people of Saskatchewan, and particularly the people of Regina, with his statement attempting to 
put the blame on the government. 
 
I am going, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to table the documents. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure I’d put the 
blame, because we didn’t have the records at that time either. I’m sure, however, that a phone call by the press 
to Saskatoon could have got the true facts. 
 
I look at some other activities in my favourite newspaper here in Regina. That’s not the Commonwealth. The 
Commonwealth’s my second favourite newspaper because I get lots of information from the Commonwealth, 
information . . . The hon. members are a little embarrassed. And it’s too bad, with colour cameras and what not, 
that we can’t have the cameras on the NDP right now because the people of Saskatchewan would see a deep 
blush of embarrassment and shame of the NDP for the records that are being brought forward. 
 
All of a sudden I see a legislative notebook. The pomp and pageantry that went outside the marble palace cost 
$20,000. I was in this House since 1971 and I never saw an article by the Leader-Post about legislative 
notebooks, and I never saw an historical record of the cost. One could get the impression that that was a costly 
venture. It was no different than any other legislative opening, and I think in fairness that that should have been 
said. 
 
I take a look as well at an article in the Leader-Post the other day about the record oil and gas: “Record oil and 
gas well drilling record set,” and it’s from a ministerial statement by the Minister of Energy – record wells 
drilled. What he said in his statement, however, because it’s an important political issue . . . Now we can debate 
it back and forth, the rightness or the wrongness, but I think in fairness that our position should have at least 
been stated, because it  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

210 
 

was in the statement. 
 
It’s a political issue as to whether we’re, as a government, giving give-aways to the oil industries, that the 
supposed cost . . . It turns out in the ministers’ statement, in the minister’s statement in this Assembly, he made 
it abundantly clear to the people of Saskatchewan that the Progressive Conservative royalty tax structure is far 
cheaper than the NDP grant program, far cheaper than the NDP give-aways to the big oil companies. 
 
Is there any mention of that in the article? No mention of that in the article. I will attribute that to an oversight, 
but I think, when the political issue is there . . . 
 
As I say, one can debate it back and forth whether it’s good, bad, or indifferent, but when the issue is so obvious 
to everyone, I think in fairness the position should have put in. I find, as well, in the Leader-Post the other day 
an article that they are now going to recommence a column called “Under the Dome.” Now that was an 
entertaining article, and it used to run in the early ‘60s, early 1970. Someone will have to convince me, 
someone will have to convince me of the independence of the Leader-Post, when shortly after the NDP 
government is elected in 1971, the Leader-Post quit running “Under the Dome.” They quit running the political 
analysis because they didn’t want anyone to start to do an in-depth look at the New Democratic Party. And 
someone’s going to convince me that it’s fate that the Leader-Post today, after the NDP are defeated, decides to 
resurrect “Under the Dome.” Now that’s obviously their right, I have no criticism. They can do what they want. 
But let’s not try and convince the public that there’s not a bias. And let’s not try and convince the public that 
that paper is doing an equal service or disservice to all political parties. All I suggest to the press is: you made 
the rules when we were in opposition; apply the same rules. I can live with them. I have no problem living with 
them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — But don’t go changing the rules in midstream. 
 
The NDP now criticize a couple of more items. The NDP criticize the deficit. Let me indicate what the NDP 
said about the deficit back in 1973. Here’s what the NDP said about a deficit. And it’s the then minister, 
provincial treasurer before he became minister of finance, at page 547 of Hansard: 
 

However, Mr. Speaker, our government (that is the NDP government) is by no means bound to a 
balanced budget. Indeed should the economic situation warrant expenditures in excess of revenues to 
create employment and opportunities for the people of the province, we would not hesitate to deficit 
finance. 
 

That’s what the NDP said in 1973 before they got lucky with the oil revenues. And today, because the NDP 
stole the heritage fund out from under this generation and future generations, this government has to deficit 
finance to create the employment, to create the jobs, to create the programs, and to maintain the programs that 
the people of Saskatchewan have indicated that they want to keep. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the record. Where do the NDP stand on deficits? It’s been stated. It was stated 
most clearly that in fact the NDP support deficits. Where do the NDP stand? The deficit – we would not have a 
deficit today if the NDP had left any money in the heritage fund. The NDP used the heritage fund — $500 
million for potash, $300 million for uranium. You threw a great deal away. You wasted a great deal of money 
under the heritage fund. But in fact, Mr. Speaker, the heritage fund . . . We were told, the public was told, the 
press was told, that the heritage fund was to be for future generations, and it was to be there for a rainy day, that 
when the economy dropped . . . And that’s what the NDP said from 1971 to ’81 and ’82, that there would be 
something there. The crops were bad; times got a little tough. There would be money there. In fact, they lied to 
the people of Saskatchewan. There was nothing in the heritage fund,  



 
November 24, 1983 

 

211 
 

and it’s that deficit in the heritage fund, that destruction of the heritage fund, that expenditure of the heritage 
fund that the NDP did, that causes the deficits today. And everyone knows it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to bring a couple of other facts to the public’s attention. I’m 
going to talk about health. The Hon. Minister of Health has indicated some of the programs, some of the 
activities. These are going to be widely distributed, so the hon. members should listen because it will do them 
good. 
 
Here’s what the former minister of finance, Mr. Smishek, said in 1976: 
 

In Saskatchewan, we have the highest hospital utilization in Canada – 220 citizens per 1,000 population 
are admitted to hospital as compared to the national average of 154. There is no evidence that the people 
of Saskatchewan are more often ill than anywhere in Canada, but we are deeply concerned about 
hospital utilization. There has been discussion about the reduction in the approved hospital beds in the 
order of five per cent. That may not necessarily represent a five per cent budgetary cut. 
 

In 1976, the NDP cut hospital beds, shortly after the ’75 election – 5 per cent. Then they took 400 positions, 
nursing positions, out of the health care system in 1976. They don’t even know today that there’s a chiropody 
program. They don’t even know it. So where’s their commitment to health? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP put their well-known moratorium on nursing homes. And I’m going to table for 
the public, I’m going to table what the NDP position was on nursing homes. And we’ve referred to it on 
numerous occasions. I’m going to table it so that no one forgets this. If anyone says, “What was the NDP 
position on nursing homes? Where do I find that information?”, we will be able to tell them, “You just go to the 
legislature. It’s sitting right there; it’s a public record.” It wasn’t public record until we took office, because 
some documents you happen to miss. But you forgot to burn this one. 
 
Treasury Board. This is the NDP in 1976: 
 

Further decision in the level of funding to be approved for this activity pending the review of more 
detailed information in all committed budgets. 
 

Committed. I’m sure that they’re referring to committed during the ’75 election. 
 

Until such time as the need for additional beds can be clearly identified and a suitable construction 
policy defined, a moratorium on further commitments should be enforced. 
 

That’s the NDP record on nursing homes . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, even today. Now, we finally have 
the admission. Even today – and I wish the cameras could shift over to the member from Pelly who just today 
said, “why build nursing homes when you don’t need them?” That’s what he said, and when there’s no need for 
them he’s not going to build them. And the NDP policy today is exactly as it was in 1976. They will not build 
nursing homes; they want a moratorium on nursing homes. They want to stop nursing homes for our senior 
citizens, the handicapped, and the mentally ill. And I say that that is the true fact of the NDP health program. 
The big myth. 
 
That is where you really stand, that in fact, in fact the NDP have finally admitted that their 1976 moratorium 
policy applies today, and I say to you that you’ve declared war on the senior citizens. I hope you go into the 
convention, and take your position, “why build nursing homes?”, because I think even some of the NDP out 
there may be very, very upset with your  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

212 
 

position of why build nursing homes for our citizens. I find that despicable, and I find it an insult. I find it an 
insult to the senior citizens of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to table as well, I’m going to table as well, a secret cabinet memorandum that the NDP 
had in 1981, April 3, 1981 – continuing care. Now we couldn’t find the cabinet document that approved this, 
but we did find the cabinet information item that reiterates what cabinet approved. Cabinet had previously 
approved a range of $390 to $500 per month charges to the residents of nursing homes — $500 a month. The 
NDP had approved charging our senior citizens, in 1981 – 1981. You hid it during the election, but I’ll bet you, 
had you been re-elected, that there would have been a catch up, and it probably would have been closer to $600 
because you delayed for the year, because you didn’t have the political courage, you didn’t have the political 
courage to stand up and tell the public what you planned in secret to do to our senior citizens — $500. I’m 
going to table for the public, both of those documents. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what have we seen during this session from the NDP? We’ve seen their secret fights over a 
leadership. We’ve seen question after question, and everyone is just pleading for a depression. They have no 
faith or confidence in the future of this province, and they have no faith or confidence in the people of this 
province. They’ve been negative. They’ve been negative. They’ve been cheering for a depression, and they’ve 
been talking about the poverty in the poverty of ideas that they have. You know, I would like to be the one that 
coined the phrase, “the nattering nabobs of negativism.” Unfortunately it’s been utilized in the past, but we see 
the prime example of that in that motley little crew that was elected in 1982, the NDP. When the NDP say that 
the public shouldn’t have spring elections, I think it really comes from an inherent dislike of the people of this 
province. 
 
Let’s take a look at the record. The positive commitment to this province by this government has resulted in 
25,000 new jobs in Saskatchewan – in a recession – in the last 18 months. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — That we’ve created hundreds of jobs with the rural natural gas distribution system – in a 
recession. We’ve created 3,800 new jobs with a $5,000 tax credit – during a recession. We’ve created 4,200 
jobs through Opportunities ’83 – in a recession. We’ve created 1,000 new jobs with record oil drilling – in a 
recession. We create 2,500 new jobs with a heavy oil upgrader, that the NDP couldn’t get – in a recession. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a recession we built a new cancer clinic, a new geological sciences building, a new Wascana 
Institute Technical School in the city of Regina. We’ve created new businesses in the private sector, a net 
increase of over 1,600 new jobs. Small businessmen who are excited about the potential of the province. We 
have new buildings going up in Regina and around the province: Pioneer, McCallum Hill. We created 
thousands of new jobs with the $3,000 Build-A-Home program – in a recession. We’ve cut taxes – in a 
recession. The cheapest gas in Canada. We’ve had record health expenditures – in a recession. We’ve had 
record education expenditures – in a recession. And record technical training expenditures for the youth of our 
province – in a recession. 
 
It’s a record of performance of which the people of Saskatchewan are proud, that every member on the 
government benches is supremely proud. The pride and commitment that this government shows in the people 
of the province is worthy of everyone supporting the throne speech motion. 
 
We made a positive commitment to the people of Saskatchewan, we made a positive commitment to the youth 
of Saskatchewan, and we’ve made a positive commitment to the workers of Saskatchewan. We’re not going to 
get caught up in the negative backward looking of the socialists opposite, Mr. Speaker. We’re for the new 
Saskatchewan, a positive commitment, and we evidence the pride that people of Saskatchewan have in this 
great province. I will be  



 
November 24, 1983 

 

213 
 

supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great deal of honour and it’s a privilege to enter this throne debate. 
I think the throne debate this session has been one that is extraordinary. I don’t think in the history of 
Saskatchewan we’ve heard speeches like we have during this throne debate, particularly from the members of 
government – particularly from the members of government. And most particularly, Mr. Speaker, the 
disappointment was when I listened to some of the cabinet ministers, the treasury benches, participate in this 
throne debate. 
 
During the opening I heard remarks from people saying that the tradition, the pomp, and the ceremony is great. 
We like it. I heard a visitor that was down visiting one of the Saskatoon members and he said that today we can 
set aside a day specially to honour democracy and to respect the traditions of this House, and I agree with that. 
But how soon the members of the government forget those traditions. How soon we let those traditions fall 
down because of the way the law, the rules of this legislation are stretched, the way we’ve missed . . . I don’t 
like the way you’re using the rules. I really don’t. We have a situation today where a questioner can’t quite 
finish a sentence that starts with what, and yet a minister can stand up and speak for 5 and 10 minutes about a 
copy . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I think the hon. member is challenging the Chair, and in the throne speech I 
don’t believe that there is any permission for that challenge. I would ask you to get on with your speech, but 
leave the Chair out of it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I apologize, Mr. Speaker, for doing that but I feel that the decorum here could be improved 
on, and I want to do my part to help raise this back to an elevation that is worthy of the tradition of the 
democratic process. 
 
I regard it as a great privilege to take part in this throne speech. This debate presents members with an 
opportunity to present the viewpoints of their constituents on the affairs of their province, and I say this, Mr. 
Speaker, because I have been disturbed by some of the things that I’ve seen in this past year and a half, which 
suggest that the government is down playing the legislative process and the role of this Assembly. 
 
The legislative process is a key to democracy and it’s a key to make democracy work in Saskatchewan. When 
the executive arm of the government, the cabinet, increasingly bypasses and ignores the legislation to serve its 
own narrow, political purposes, it hurts all the people of Saskatchewan and it hurts a democratic institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many examples that I want to share with you this morning to substantiate that argument. 
The farm purchase program was approved by the legislation this past winter. It was going to be run through the 
Farm Credit Corporation. Suddenly there was an announcement that the banks and the credit unions would be 
involved in the program. That’s a fairly major change. The legislation has no chance for a say on this matter. 
You don’t know if I’m against it or for it, Mr. Minister, because you didn’t give me a chance to debate it. You 
didn’t give me a chance to debate it. And this legislation had no chance to say or make any comments on this 
matter, even though the session had just been adjourned prior to the announcement being made, weeks after the 
announcement being made. 
 
But the government will say the FCC ran out of money and farmers would have to be left stranded. I ask: didn’t 
you have the insight to make sure that this point was negotiated with an agreement with FCC? Didn’t you get 
the assurance from them? If they didn’t, I can only conclude that this Conservative government is even more 
inept that I had previously thought. 
 
You know, there’s a quotation I could make about somebody that builds a house and doesn’t  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

214 
 

count the cost before he starts and how foolish he is, and the Speaker knows from where that quotation comes. 
 
Many changes have been made in the handling of the liquor affairs over the past year. But legislation was 
completely bypassed on these matters. The only conclusion is that the Conservative government hope to pay off 
their friends in the liquor industry with as little fuss as they could get away with, with as little fuss as they could 
muster. 
 
Just this week their Minister of Agriculture made another announcement of a new program outside the 
legislature, while the House was in session. But not a word in here. Not a word in here. 
 
But I guess you can’t expect any more of a minister when you look at the Premier’s actions. What has been his 
attitude towards the throne speech debate? In the first one, he didn’t even take part in the debate at all. He still 
had butterflies in his stomach. Last year he spoke and only very late in the debate. Each year . . . And I don’t 
know what he’s going to do. But traditionally, the Premier stands up and speaks on the throne speech. He’s a 
lead-off speaker, right after the opposition leader starts, and this procedure has been in place and has been a 
tradition for years. But this government sees fit to thumb their noses at it. 
 
It’s not just because it’s a tradition, Mr. Speaker, but rather because the Premier has a job to do. It is the 
Premier’s job to lead the government and to elaborate on the thrust and the philosophy of the throne speech. His 
speech helps set the tone of the debate. But no, he sneaks in at the last minute when nobody else can get a 
chance, and after we all spoke, so none of us can get in on the debate. That’s when he sneaks in, so that nobody 
can qualify. His speech helps set the tone of the debate. He should fill in on some of the things left out in the 
speech, and that’s a big job in the this throne speech, but apparently we have a premier who doesn’t think it’s all 
that important to provide leadership in the House and to pay an adequate role. 
 
Maybe if the Premier would have gotten involved first, some of his ministers wouldn’t have made the sleazy, 
slimy remarks they did in this throne speech . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, apparently that has hit 
a sensitive note. When a minister can stand up and call a former member of this legislation a pious hypocrite, 
that’s not a slimy remark? That’s not a slimy remark? He’s afraid to say it in the hall. 
 
One further indication of the government’s attitude to the legislation is its decision to stop the legislative radio 
broadcasts. The excuse used by the government members I that they can watch it on cable TV. 
 
But I’ve got news for you. Cable TV. isn’t in my riding. There are thousands of people in rural Saskatchewan 
that don’t get cable TV. I believe there are other constituencies. Kelvington-Wadena doesn’t have cable TV. 
And yet the radio broadcasts have been cut off. 
 
A lot of these people listened diligently and religiously to the legislative broadcasts. They didn’t miss a word. 
And they are no longer able to tune in and listen to the members opposite and the stances they are taking. They 
can say one thing in here, and go back to their constituents with another story. 
 
During the summer, Mr. Speaker, the Premier announced some changes in his cabinet. He did some amazing 
things. He did some amazing things. He appointed nine new cabinet ministers. Now we have a cabinet of 25 
members, by far the largest of any previous cabinet Saskatchewan has ever had – 25 cabinet ministers with 
small, tiny cupboard portfolios that are so small they don’t even get a cup hanger in the shelf, let alone a 
cabinet. And yet those 25 cabinet ministers need an additional 12 legislative secretaries – 12 additional helpers 
for 25 cupboard holders. 
 
And if that isn’t enough, Mr. Speaker, you need another nine chairmen of boards to help the  



 
November 24, 1983 

 

215 
 

cabinet ministers out who can’t run a crown corporation. You need nine additional helpers. You know, here we 
had . . . why such a size? Why so large? It’s only two things, Mr. Speaker. The Premier puts some people into 
his cabinet, and they can’t perform, and he adds a few more. And if they can’t perform, he adds 12 legislative 
secretaries. And if they can’t handle jobs, you bring in nine more great people to help. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Engel, don’t you worry about it. You and I don’t have to worry, right? 
 
MR. ENGEL: — The member for Moosomin says I shouldn’t worry about it. I am him didn’t have to worry. 
Well, I don’t think the member for Moosomin was left out of cabinet because they felt he couldn’t handle the 
job. I think they are afraid he couldn’t take the heat. That’s what I’m afraid of. I wouldn’t have questioned a 
modest increase in cabinet, but an increase of nine members surely shows that things are out of control and that 
the Premier is desperately trying to patch things up. 
 
I feel particularly sorry for the members that were left out, Mr. Speaker. There’s members that were left out that 
really bother me. The two members for Moose Jaw, for example, must surely feel very uncomfortable that their 
city was bypassed and wasn’t recognized. Either members like the hon. member for Melville who did a 
memorable job moving the throne speech – and I commend him for his efforts – which started this debate, and 
he thought he could get some recognition by his rhetoric against the NDP. Maybe it’s his background that hurt. 
Maybe it’s his background that hurt. 
 
I also have to express some surprise that the Minister of Telephones, Mr. Currie, highly totted before the 
election, and doing a reasonable job in education – and I think one of the best ministers, and I’ve told him so . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — But when the Premier got shuffling the cards, his almost fell on the floor. His almost fell on 
the floor. He just about got lost in the shuffle. He just about got lost in the shuffle. 
 
The nine additional members and the retainers they’re paid, and the recognition they’re getting, and the job 
they’re doing for the cabinet ministers that can’t handle the chairmanship support, don’t bother me quite as 
much as some of the real people that are in power in this party. 
 
I think in caucus we’ve maybe neglected to mention some of the people that really are holding the cards and are 
calling the shots. Quinlan, for example, brought to this government by the trained by the Regina chamber of 
Commerce – a man that came from the right place. 
 
I’m not sure what the minister in charge of SGI is indicating by his shaking of the hands and pointing to me. If 
that’s where you’re getting your advice, Paul, then I know why you’ve got so much trouble. Then I know why 
he’s got so much trouble, Mr. Speaker, because here is the man that was supposed to be in touch. 
 
The Roughriders were a part of the back-on. Here’s the man that was doing the PR for the Roughriders. Maybe 
they won three games while he was in charge, I’m not sure. And his saying with the Roughriders was, “Keeping 
in Touch.” Keeping in touch, that sounds awful familiar to a theme that the Tories used at their last convention 
– “Keeping in Touch.” If you’re going to do as good a job with Quinlan in keeping in touch as the Roughriders 
did, that’s why the telephone polls were what they were this morning. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I heard about members talking about listening to the telephone on the way in. Well, I 
listened, Mr. Speaker. The number one radio station in Saskatchewan was doing a little  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

216 
 

phone-in poll before our convention, and it just so happens that 13 people on that phone-in who were keeping in 
touch voted for the NDP. Six were bold enough to say, “We vote for the Conservatives.” 
 
You know, they were committed to the cause, unknown to you guys, no matter what. Six – one was a 
rhinoceros. And two – I’m happy that they weren’t long distance calls – that weren’t long distance calls, I want 
to show you, said they’re going to vote Liberal. Now, I kind of hope they weren’t from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 
because we’ve got Liberals down there. 
 
But Sean Quinlan’s message is “Keeping in Touch.” I think the next thing we’ll see in this legislation – and I’m 
not sure which one of you is going to have to don the uniform; I’ve got a couple of candidates that I’d maybe 
recommend to Sean – but the next thing I can see is going to be the gopher. We’re going to have the gopher 
come in and do a little advertising for these guys. This gopher is going to come in and he’s going to be carrying 
a sign that says, “Open for Business.” 
 
You know, the father of Roughrider Pride and the thousand volunteers failed you guys. Sean Quinlan’s little 
key, catchy ideas that won us three Roughrider games in his term, won you six votes out of 20. He got you six 
votes this morning out of 20. And I’d suggest you take the father of Roughrider pride, and do with him like the 
Roughriders did; do with him like the Regina chamber of Commerce did; do with him like a lot of other places 
where he tried to make it go in his high-pitch advertising campaign, and send the guy over to Austria and make 
your backbenchers happy. That baker’s dozen that didn’t get into the cabinet would really go somewhere if you 
could get rid of this guy that comes up with those great ideas. 
 
He took away your budget for advertising. He froze your minimum wage. He went over to Europe and to 
Georgia, and I wonder what he’s going to come back with his open for business campaign. I’m looking forward 
to seeing what Sean Quinlan’s got to offer this new Tory government, this aggressive government. You’ve got a 
couple of other guys in that team that’s running this party that our caucus really didn’t get too involved in. I 
could talk about Michael Leddy and his claim to fame, and why Michael Leddy made it into this operation. 
 
You know, I think the minister that gave that wonderful speech on liquor the other night and portrayed his true 
character and his golden qualities, maybe had some friendship when they were both Liberals, and this was 
arranged. This was maybe a way to bring him in. Maybe the bathroom scandal that he exposed qualified him to 
get in as your . . . (inaudible) . . . giving you the political advice. I’m not sure what it was, but as far as I’m 
concerned, I’d take the word of some of the Saskatchewan MPs. And what’s left of Leddy, I don’t think that the 
administration is gaining an awful lot from him. I don’t think there’s an awful lot to gain there. I’d suggest to 
the beer and pizza club that you take care of this guy; I really do. 
 
There’s other members, the real boys in the backroom, that I could talk about, but the Attorney General in his 
address has taken so much time that I feel that I’ve got to get onto the rest of my speech. 
 
The Premier exercised his prerogative and he made the changes, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad he accepted by advice 
and one change, when he moved the member for Souris-Cannington from Agriculture to Economic 
Development and Trade. And I’m glad the Premier listened to me when I pointed out the weaknesses and the 
disaster that that person was for Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Finally, he moved, but he kept the responsibility of the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that’s the number 
one disaster that hit Saskatchewan. That’s the disasters people are going to remind and hold over your head, and 
Devine and Anderson are going to be in the same camp. I make a little prediction backed by the little phone-in 
poll this morning that you’re going to get just as many seats back as Anderson did. I make that little prediction. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

217 
 

The former minister of Agriculture was charged with the responsibility for keeping the Crow, and until it was 
destroyed, and that will please the government’s friends in Palliser; his friends in Palliser were happy. Now he’s 
in his new post and he appears too buy re-inventing the wheel. I just hope he doesn’t get to do as much harm as 
he did in the government’s two-faced stance on the Crow. 
 
In spite of the overall situation concerning the cabinet, I can still offer my congratulations to the nine new 
appointees to cabinet. I won’t review all their names one by one, because it really gets to be quite a lengthy 
litany. I do, however, want to offer my congratulates to a former constituent of mine, the new Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Talking about constituents, Mr. Speaker, the other night, when we were having dinner, I 
knew there was a reason why one of the members from Moose Jaw South was a little bit special as far as our 
caucus was concerned. But he farmed in my riding for a long time too, and I’d like to also say that and repeat 
that I’m disappointed that you were overlooked when the cabinet was decided, because it is quality and ability 
to do a job and to do it honestly. 
 
I know and the Minister of Agriculture knows that there’s a big job to do, in view of the unfolding events 
affecting agriculture at this time. During this session we will no doubt have numerous exchanges on agricultural 
questions. I hope he accepts, as I accept, that regardless of the difference of our view that we are both working 
for a sound, healthy, agricultural industry in this province. 
 
I also want to say a special word to the member of Arm River who was appointed Minister Without Portfolio in 
charge of crop insurance. I’m sorry he’s not here. I congratulate him, as I did the others. And just one short 
comment for the minister of crop insurance. No doubt he’s looking for things to do, but he shouldn’t solve that 
problem by sticking his fingers into an operation that was running well and doing fine, thank you. He fired a 
competent manager. He interfered with other personalities, sticking his fingers into the operations, and I wish 
that the Premier would give him something a little more important to do. But it appears that even with a cabinet 
of 25, they needed to water down their jobs even more. 
 
Recently, nine non-ministerial appointments were made as chairmen of crown corporations and boards. 
Apparently this was to reduce the political influence in running of crown corporations. In part it stems from the 
wolf-pack report, but who does the Premier think he’s kidding? He appoints a non-ministerial chairman and 
then leads a pack of ministers of vice-chairmen. He hasn’t really changed anything except to reward some of his 
Tory friends. That seems to be the chief qualification for most of the recent appointments to the chairmen of 
boards. It certainly didn’t have anything to do with the qualifications for the job. 
 
For example, I see a retired urologist was appointed as chairman of Saskatchewan Mining and Development 
Corporation. That’s the corporation engaged in uranium mining. Now I don’t know how uric acid is used in 
uranium processing, but the only other credential s that this individual has is that he was a national 
vice-president of the Tory party, chief bagman for the Saskatchewan Tories and a major antagonist in the 
medical association’s efforts to stop medicare in 1962. 
 
Some of the members talked about old news. Why didn’t you tell the Attorney General that when he was taken 
back to 1955? Regardless of what Wolfgang Wolff says, or the Premier says, crown corporations are still 
instruments of public policy and were established to serve public process. Attempts to deny this fact can mean 
only one of two things. It’s either, Mr. Speaker, they don’t understand what government and crown corporations 
are about, or they are trying to undermine and destroy crown corporations which have been of immense benefit 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 



 
November 24, 1083 
 

218 
 

So now, Mr. Speaker, we have a swollen cabinet, a slew of legislative secretaries, and a raft of board chairmen. 
The member gave us a long speech the other night asking me how many there should be. Well, I think if you 
look back at the history of Saskatchewan you’ll know how many cabinet ministers it took – 19. If it takes that to 
shut you up – 19. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just said that we had a swollen cabinet, a slew of legislative secretaries, and raft of board 
chairmen. That must have hit a sensitive note. But that isn’t all, that isn’t all. Each of the nine new ministers 
will have an entourage of support staff and all of the expenses associated with the office. 
 
Each new cabinet minister has an entourage of support staff. A cabinet minister’s salary is about $27,000, extra 
on; staff salaries average over $215,000; office expenses, in excess of $33,000; other expenses, including auto 
and air travel – I have a little number here that says 26, but if you think of the new jet aircraft, should be 
$126,000 – executive aircraft and so on. And you multiply this by nine, Mr. Speaker, and you have a bill of over 
$3 million a year added cost. If you add the legislative secretaries to this cost you get another $100,000. You 
add to that the board chairmen and you get another $100,000. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a bloated government 
here that doesn’t mind spending money on themselves and on new jet aircraft. 
 
So it’s open for business . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, Jack was in this debate the other night. 
The minister in charge of the liquor board had a chance to make his speech. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order please. The House has been very unruly all morning. I’m going to ask that members 
simmer down a bit and start to pay attention. As well, I’m going to ask all hon. members to stop calling 
members by their names. You’re to address members by their constituency, and that’s not only the member 
that’s on his feet now, but rather all members have been abusing that rule. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Attorney General started that last year. When a guy gets into 
the heat of debate it’s sometimes hard to remember the constituency or the portfolio, and I apologize to the 
Minister of Co-ops. 
 
But this open for business government, this gang of 25 and their entourage, and the special plums for retired 
urologists, put . . . but they have precious little for the ordinary people – the low income people, the needy 
people, and the average worker. This is a government with a double standard. It’s open for business for cabinet 
ministers and their entourage and their highly paid staff, and their liquor interests, and the breweries, and the oil 
companies, and the friends of the Tories. It’s a different story for farmers and workers and teachers and nurses, 
and especially Northerners, especially Northerners. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the Attorney General stand up on a news report and say, “It’s been 
reported to me.” Now, I don’t know what kind of facilities the Attorney General has to spy on the members of 
cabinet or the members of this caucus, but I want to tell this House that I love going fishing with my partner and 
my seat-mate. I’ll go in a boat with this member from northern Saskatchewan any day of the year, and I enjoy 
my boat ride, and I enjoy the fellowship. But I wonder which one of you guys would get in a canoe with the 
Attorney General. I wonder which one of you guys would go in a boat with that guy. I don’t know if it’s the 
smell they don’t like, or if it’s the sleazy criticism he does of other people. All I know is that he’s a loner, and if 
anybody goes with him they’re conspiring. If anybody goes with him, then they’ve got a conspiracy going. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

219 
 

Well, I want to tell you that that Liberal’s job is on the line. I heard from a very reliable source that that Liberal 
member better get himself some friends in a hurry. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — It’s nice to see a couple of guys put up their hands, and maybe the Attorney General should 
have been looking around. And I you want me to have a show of hands again, I can ask for it again to help him 
out. But I think that Attorney General isn’t fit to shine the shoes of the former attorney generals of this province. 
He isn’t fit to shine the shoes. I’ve listened to attorney generals from Davey Heald’s days on, that as a member 
that trained this man – and I’ve listened to all the attorney generals since that time, since I’ve been following 
politics – and I’ve never heard the likes of this member. Never! Never! And he’s on the way out for a very good 
reason. 
 
There’s another member, and I’m getting to you a little later on down the line, after I get through some of this 
material. There’s another member that better watch his remarks and better clean up his act or he’ll move another 
step further, and I don’t know where you’ll end, Mr. Minister. 
 
It’s an open for business government, and the business is pretty serious when I’d want to talk to the members 
that have a track record of being Liberals. And I’d caution all of you that got a track record, if you’re an NDPer, 
or a former NDPer like the member for Melville was, or like the member that is most prominent in that caucus 
. . . If the member for Kelvington-Wadena who’s got a little trait of NDP hidden in his background, you’re in 
trouble. There isn’t another reason in the world why you were overlooked for a cabinet. And that is something 
that maybe the Attorney General is laughing about, but it’s a pretty different story. 
 
I was particularly disappointed with the treatment of agriculture in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker. True, there 
were some pious words and some tidbits. But there was absolutely nothing that addresses the central concerns 
and the problems facing agriculture in Saskatchewan. True, the Minister of Agriculture doesn’t have to answer 
the questions I put to him. True, you can stand up, and the people are watching you on TV, and you can talk 
about everything else to avoid the questions. But the people of Saskatchewan know the obvious truth that you’re 
avoiding and you want to avoid drawing attention to. 
 
The throne speech made no reference to the Crow rate and sloughed over the issue as quickly as possible. The 
government obviously wanted to avoid drawing attention to the Crow rate. Let me read this section of the Crow 
rate: 
 

The future of grain producers in Saskatchewan is clouded by the insistence of the federal government on 
passage of a bill to repeal the guarantee of the Crow rate despite the strong opposition of a very large 
majority of producers and the unanimous opinion of this Legislative Assembly. 
 

Sounds good. Sounds good. It almost sounds as if the government wanted to save the Crow. But if you read it 
carefully, it doesn’t really say that. What it really says is that the government opposed Bill C-155 as presented 
by the federal government. Opposition to Bill C-155 is far different thing than saying we want to keep the 
Crow, period. The Tory government can apply their position by expressing opposition to Bill C-155. That was 
easy. What they didn’t say is: we want to keep the Crow. As far as they would go was to say that keeping the 
Crow was better than Bill C-155. The insidious effects of this stance was that it signalled a message to the 
federal Liberal government. It told the federal Liberals we’ve got to say some nasty things about bill c-155. But 
when all is said and done, the Saskatchewan Tories agree the Crow should be changed. If anyone doubts this 
fact, they should look at the brief that the minister from Cannington presented to the government, on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, to the House of Commons transport committee. I was in Regina in August 
. . . (inaudible) . . . Page 48 of this excellent brief . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of Agriculture 
said it was  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

220 
 

excellent. Let me read into the record a paragraph from page 48. 
 

Considerations of any changes to the Crow rate must recognize that Saskatchewan’s potential for grain 
production has not yet been fully realized. 
 

Did you get that, Mr. Speaker? That’s page 48, page 49. To the baker’s dozen that are left outside of the cabinet, 
I want them to take a special interest in this one. 
 

Implementation of Bill C-155 is not only detrimental to Saskatchewan but is also detrimental to Canada. 
 

Page 56: 
 

Saskatchewan has concluded from its review of Bill C-155 that the seven principles established by the 
federal government to be used for the construction of a bill to change the statutory grain rates must have 
not been uniformly followed. We therefore conclude that Bill C-155 is not an adequate or proper 
mechanism to implement the federal government’s policy on western rail transportation. 
 

Bill C-155 wasn’t adequate, but they didn’t say, “Keep the Crow.” 
 
Page 58: 
 

Saskatchewan has concluded that Bill C-155 is inadequate to meet the federal government’s own policy 
statement regarding grain transportation. 
 

Further on page 58: 
 

We offer a substitute set of policy elements, and ones that we suggest are construed around three matters 
of concern: adequate transportation and handling capacity, reasonable producer returns, and a 
development package for Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 

Does that sound like a government that’s trying to save the Crow rate? 
 

It is essential that any changes to the existing statutory rates contain the following statutory obligations. 
 

It’s followed by a list of eight conditions. I’m not going to read them all. 
 
On page 62 they go into the conclusions. 
 

The Saskatchewan government has concluded that: (1) the current federal legislation does not need a 
great many of the policy elements identified above, and therefore Saskatchewan cannot accept Bill 
C-155. 
 

Why didn’t they say, “Saskatchewan does not accept any change to the Crow rate?” 
 

(2) Saskatchewan submits that the policy elements identified above should be the basis for any 
legislation designed to change the present statutory grain rates. 

 
A lot of fancy footwork, but not once did the Saskatchewan government say in its brief, “Keep the Crow.” The 
Saskatchewan Conservative government helped Jean-Luc Pepin put the skids under the Crow rate. They also 
know their federal party friends would have done the same thing had the Clark government survived. The 
Saskatchewan Tories’ betrayal of the Crow rate was a bitter pill served up to Saskatchewan farmers beneath a 
lot of sugar-coating. 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

221 
 

Mr. Speaker, farm indebtedness and the burden of interest cost is a major problem for Saskatchewan farmers. 
On the subject of interest rates, I notice that the throne speech contained the same sort of double talk we can 
expect from Tories – double-talk on the interest rate. On the one hand, when they were talking about their 
investor friends, they said, “A continuation of high interest rates will weaken the incentive to invest and may 
impair the strength of the current recovery.” On the other hand, when talking of agriculture, the speech says, 
“Farmers generally have benefited from a fall in interest rates and fertilizer prices.” That won’t be a lot of 
consolation to the farmers from where you come, Mr. Minister of Agriculture, when they are paying their bills 
this fall. The fact is that many farmers can barely hang on now with the level of interest rates and their costs. If 
higher interest rates are continued, many, many of the farmers across Saskatchewan would now be in 
bankruptcy. Many people anticipate a new round of higher interest rates. Saskatchewan farmers are in a very 
precarious position. 
 
Over the past year, I have urged on a number of occasions that the government undertake a study of farm costs 
and what can be done to reduce these costs. I again urge the government to look at the numbers. Today I asked 
the Minister of Agriculture what impact has had the increase of utility rates, and he talked about something. He 
talked about something else. He wouldn’t give us an answer. 
 
One specific step that could be taken by the government is to introduce a farm fuel rebate program. They 
promised it. It’s all through the legislative . . . During the campaign, the promises were made. I’ve urged them 
to keep their promises. The Minister of Agriculture anticipated that I’d urge him to keep his promises, but 
what’s he doing about it? He laughs about it. He laughs about it. The number the farmers are using down south 
. . . And I don’t know how it affects the rest of you, but any farmer I talk to today tells me it costs him about 
$1,000 a quarter for fuel — $1,000 a quarter. Now if you can farm a little cheaper than that, then you maybe 
have a Deutz tractor, but if you’ve got a John Deere tractor and average sized equipment, and you work your 
summerfallow six or seven times, it’s going to cost you about $1,000 a quarter for fuel. I can remember, since 
I’ve been an MLA, my entire fuel bill wasn’t much over $1,000. Today it’s $1,000 a quarter, and you laugh at 
the thing that we should help the farmers or the fuel bill. You laugh at the farmers fuel bill. 
 
I note that the FarmStart program is going to be changed. Speaking to the Sask Wheat Pool, the minister told 
them first that the FarmStart program is going to be changed. Further steps to help farmers are welcomed by this 
person, but I’m concerned that the thrust of the new proposals will largely help big operators and farmers, while 
the present program was designed to help the small and starter farmer. Of course it is difficult to understand 
how the government on the one hand wants to help farmers get into more livestock production, and on the other 
hand they sell off their interests in Intercontinental Packers. On one hand, they tell you to get into it and, on the 
other hand, they sell their interests, probably knowing that they’d shut down the plant before they ever sold it. 
The NDP government took an interest in this company and we took an interest in the company to ensure that 
they stay in Regina, and as long as we were in government and had a control, that company would be open in 
Regina. 
 
The minister, the Attorney General, today tried to cloud the figures and all he did is expose himself, that you 
knew they were going to move out. You knew they were going to move out and that’s why you sold your 
interests. You knew why. Those decision were brought before cabinet, but the cabinet said, “You’re staying 
here.” And that’s why we had 40 per cent interest in Intercontinental. If the Minister of Justice thinks that that is 
justice and that that is the truth, he is using a different word, Mr. Speaker. He is using a different word for the 
truth. Here we have a Minister of Justice that clouds the issue. He brought up an issue that pointed out right on 
the nose why he sold it. We were suspicious that they sold it so that their friends could move it out, and now 
today he made it evidence that they knew. And he evidenced the fact that they knew they were going to close it. 
He didn’t use his 40 per cent option and say that this plant stays in Regina, and the baker’s dozen should know 
that he did. The baker’s dozen should be aware of  



 
November 24, 1083 
 

222 
 

his trips. They should be aware of his trips . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Either, Mr. Speaker, our friends over 
there are sleeping at the switch, or they deliberately wanted to duck the responsibility. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
standing up here today and saying that they are deliberately ducking the issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The Minister of Agriculture talks about their abattoir that was built 
on the No. 2 Highway just north of Assiniboia. I compliment those young fellows for moving their abattoir 
down to that point. When our government was still involved, we were talking about locations. That plan was in 
effect long before you dreamt of running for a seat and you know it, Mr. Minister. And you’re just the kind of 
minister that would like to take credit for things that were done in ’81 and ’80 and ’79 and ’76. That abattoir 
was operating very well and they were doing a good business. I buy my beef from them people. Do you? Have 
you bought your beef locally? Or do you butcher the ones that die on your operating table? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to get to a very serious matter. I want to get to a very serious matter and I want to take a 
few moments now to review the decision made recently by this conservative government, which has a lot of 
Saskatchewan people concerned and upset. It’s a decision which points up a glaring inconsistency in the way 
this government approaches public policy. 
 
I am speaking of the conservative government to lift the 58-year-old ban on alcohol advertising in the province. 
This remarkable decision was incredibly inconsistent with the number of publicly stated priorities of this 
government. It makes a sham of many of this government’s most important policy announcements. 
 
First, it makes a sham of the conservative government’s claim that it’s concerned about controlling and 
reducing drug abuse, including alcohol abuse, in our province. How can a government make a claim when it has 
lifted the 58-year-old ban on alcohol advertising, and has now allowed the big breweries to be pushing their 
product at all hours of the day and night? It’s totally inconsistent. 
 
Secondly, this government’s decision makes a sham of the government’s claim that it plans to get tough and 
crack down on drinking drivers. It’s a sham. When this government introduced the new Vehicles Act in the 
legislature last spring, Mr. Speaker, it bragged loud and long that the new law was just he first step in the 
government’s plan to reducing drinking and driving. How can this government still make that claim, now that it 
has lifted the advertising ban and has allowed these alcohol ads to flood the Saskatchewan air waves? It can’t, 
Mr. Speaker, because the two positions are totally inconsistent. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, this conservative decision makes a sham of the government’s claim that it is concerned 
about wife battering and child abuse. The Minister of Justice suggested in this very House yesterday afternoon, 
the Minister of Justice had the gall to stand in this place and cry crocodile tears about the increasing problem of 
wife battering and child abuse and other family-related violence. He claimed that the Conservative government 
was getting tough with these kinds of violence. He told us that the government was going to crack down on the 
serious social problems, but today he stood in this House and defended his decision to push alcohol and to allow 
more alcohol advertising. This government’s actions are inconsistent with their hollow words, Mr. Speaker. I 
commend my colleague, the member for Quill Lakes, for making that very point so well in the House yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker. When the government talks about its concern for family violence, it’s talking about the symptom, 
but it ignores the cause. It ignores the cause. 
 
What are the two main causes of such family violence? The first is high unemployment and the economic stress 
which high unemployment creates, and the second is alcohol abuse – and not necessarily in that order – which 
this Conservative government is promoting through increased alcohol consumption, which is the number one 
impact of alcohol advertising. So the Minister of Justice claims to be concerned about a social problem which 
his own government has  



 
November 24, 1983 

 

223 
 

aggravated by its failed economic policies and its ill-advised decisions to allow advertising. The inconsistencies 
and the hypocrisies are really quite incredible. 
 
I want to take a moment to put on the record just how this Conservative government went about making this 
decision to lift the ban on alcohol advertising. I want to do that because its methods broke with tradition in this 
province. For at least 50 years, there have never been major changes to Saskatchewan’s liquor laws without the 
involvement of an all-party committee of the legislation. The Conservatives broke with that tradition. Instead of 
an all-party committee of the legislature, they appointed a conservative caucus committee. Instead of public 
hearings, they met behind closed doors. Yes, one-party committee did not hold any public hearings on this 
issue. If you would have, I’d have come to them. 
 
Some of the recommendations made to it have become public. I want to put some of these recommendations 
into the record today, Mr. Speaker, because this will be one of the few opportunities that Saskatchewan people 
will have to find out what this one-party caucus committee was told, and one of the few opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people to judge the kind of job this one-party caucus committee really did. 
 
Let me begin by putting on record a letter dated May the 13th of this year addressed to the Conservative caucus 
committee from the Saskatchewan Safety Council, Jack Lax. The safety council letter expresses concern with 
suggestion being made at the time that alcohol should be served at major sporting events and that the 
Conservative government is about to lift the ban on alcohol advertising. And what did the Saskatchewan Safety 
Council tell this Conservative government, Mr. Speaker? Let me quote from their letter: 
 

The increased visibility and availability of alcohol conveys a message, especially to young people, that 
alcohol should be an integral part of their future lifestyle. 
 

I could read from the entire letter, but . . . 
 

In summary, the Saskatchewan Safety Council is opposed to any measures that will make alcohol more 
available, such as mass media advertising. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that’s the opinion of the Saskatchewan Safety Council with respect to the Conservative 
government’s decision. 
 
But there are others who spoke out against lifting alcohol advertising. There were a lot of others, Mr. Speaker. I 
have here a brief presented to the Conservative caucus committee by Dr. Saul Cohen, the chairman of the 
Alcohol Commission of Saskatchewan. What did Dr. Cohen have to say about alcohol advertising and alcohol 
abuse? Let me place some of his comments on the record, Mr. Speaker. Dr. Saul Cohen, Chairman of the 
Alcohol Commission of Saskatchewan. 
 

The seriousness of alcohol abuse cannot be overstated. Nearly 150,000 people in Saskatchewan drink at 
high-risk levels, one-third of which, or approximately 50,000, are alcohol dependent. Heavy drinking 
has negative consequences for both mental and physical health (Dr. Cohen says). 
 

He goes on to say: 
 

Alcohol abuse also surfaces in the courts. There were 50,000-plus reported offences under The 
Saskatchewan Liquor Act in 1981. Nearly 40 per cent of these offences involved public drunkenness. 
Since alcohol acts as a sedative in the body and impairs judgement and reflexes (and maybe that’s what 
happened to the cabinet when they decided to lift the ban), it severely affects driving ability. It is 
well-known that half the fatal traffic accidents are alcohol related, yet people continue to drink and 
drive. 



 
November 24, 1083 
 

224 
 

Liquor policies and regulations (he goes on to say) have a profound influence on alcohol consumption, 
and attendant attitudes and behaviour. 
 

Another quote: 
 

The ban on media advertising stems from the negative consequences such as advertising is likely to 
promote, especially among young people. Furthermore, (Dr. Cohen says) media advertising of alcoholic 
beverages fosters integration of alcohol as part of everyday lifestyles and this results in an increased use 
and abuse of the substance. 
 
The Alcoholism Commission of Saskatchewan therefore recognizes the merits of not permitting the 
media advertising of alcoholic beverages (and your caucus had this information at their disposal before 
they made the decision). 
 
The result and the impact of advertising is a net increase in alcohol consumption which is therefore an 
additive effect. 
 

I have a number of more quotes, Mr. Speaker, from Dr. Cohen’s report to your caucus that I’d like to read into 
the record. I think those of you that watch some TV and watch the mass crowding of trying to buy a cabbage 
doll will agree with this one: 
 

However there is evidence that youth are the most influenced by alcohol advertising. Youth are at a very 
impressionable age and are readily influenced by their environment. In this regard, the role of 
advertising is significant. One only has to reflect on the tremendous impact that advertising of toys over 
television has upon children, especially at Christmas time. There is a reason to believe that alcohol 
advertising messages will have similar influence on people’s attitudes and behaviour towards the use of 
alcohol. 
 
Given the fact that 84 per cent of Saskatchewan adolescents drink, the potential for alcohol abuse among 
the age group is a major concern. Many young drinkers already experience problems with alcohol, as 
evidenced by problems which surfaced in schools and in the courts. 
 
Twenty-five per cent of convicted impaired drivers are 20 years and under. This age group also accounts 
for 11 per cent of addicted clients on the alcoholism commission case-load. Promoting the merits of 
drinking through advertising and its association with lifestyle activity is likely to exaggerate the use and 
abuse of alcohol, especially among young people in Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have only one more quote that I’d like to read into the record from this here, if I may: 
 

Society also has a responsibility to protect and enhance the collective health and well-being of its 
citizens. From this perspective, media advertising of alcoholic beverages introduces unnecessary risks, 
especially for young people. For it is our youth who are our most precarious resource and link to the 
future. 
 
The continued prohibiting of alcohol advertising in Saskatchewan, complemented by effective education 
programs, provide a long-term strategy in promoting responsible attitudes and behaviour towards 
alcohol use and in countering abuse. 
 

Just one final quote, Mr. speaker, before you call it 12 o’clock. He commends, as a windup of his report (and 
this is a report that’s made to your caucus, of which you were the chairman), recommendations: 



 
November 24, 1983 

 

225 
 

On the basis of the foregoing information, the alcoholism commission makes the following 
recommendations: number one, that the present legislation and regulations prohibiting the print and 
broadcast media advertising of alcoholic beverages be maintained. 
 

Why didn’t you listen to somebody on the alcoholism commission? 
 
Mr. Speaker, should I adjourn or call it 12 o’clock. I can do either one. I adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1 p.m. 


