






















































Hansard: April 22, 1983


1353 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 22, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me a great pleasure today to introduce to you and through 
you to the other members of the Assembly, 11 grade 12 students from the town of Luseland, their 
teacher and chaperon, Bernie Etcheverry. I would like all members of this Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming them on their long journey to Regina here today. I have to apologize to you. I will not be able 
to meet you for pictures and refreshments afterwards, but my friend and colleague, the Minister of 
Finance from Kindersley, will be trying to take my place. He will do his best, but when you can’t have 
number one you can take number two, so thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I wish everyone would give them 
a warm welcome to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have the Assembly members welcome 45 students from 
Waldheim High School. They are in the Speaker’s gallery. They’re here with us today. They come 
regular, their school, and we welcome them all. Have a good trip home. And I’ll meet with them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Executive Council Names and Salaries 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Premier. This concerns the 
proceedings in this House back on March 8th or 9th on the consideration of the Executive Council 
estimates, that at that time, Mr. Premier, you were unable to provide me with some pretty elementary 
information about your agency, including who worked for you and how much they were paid, and what 
their duties were. And you undertook to provide me with extensive information. It is now six weeks 
later. I have not received it. And I ask you when I may expect to receive the information you undertook 
to give me on March 8th and 9th. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker the information will be coming forth in due course. When 
we’ve put it all together we’ll be providing the hon. member with it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Premier, do I understand that it takes you six weeks to find out what the 
salary of some of your senior officials is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — We are putting together, as I mentioned at that time, the complete package of 
everybody that’s been involved during a period of transition. People were coming in, people were going 
out, some were in for shorter periods, some were in for longer, and we’re documenting all that, and it’ll 
be provided. 



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1354 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — One further supplementary, Mr. Premier. Do you think that six weeks is a 
reasonable time to prepare information on who has worked for your agency in the last year, or do you 
think it’s an unreasonably long time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I believe it’s been a standard tradition, Mr. Speaker, in this House, that when they 
ask for information the government would take the time to put it together so it is in a complete package 
and that it is accurate. And I believe members opposite, when they were in government, took a fair 
amount of time - sometimes it was even over a year - to provide information that had been requested. So 
the time that has elapsed since my estimates is relatively short. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Further supplementary. Will the Premier concede that in the Executive Council 
estimates, when similar information was asked for during the year in which you were quoting, the 
information was back within 15 hours? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if we went back and looked at the information that was asked 
for after the former government won an election in ‘71, I imagine it took some time to provide that kind 
of information. After you’ve been in power for three years or five years or 10 years, probably in our case, 
for 25 years . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . we will be able to provide the information much more quickly. This is a year 
of transition. You don’t go through a year of transition every year. We just won the election, so it takes a 
little bit of time to put that together and provide it. After we’ve had experience for a year - in another 
year and so forth - it’s that much easier. 
 

Legislation in House 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Government House Leader. In light of the 
statements made by the Premier in terms of getting information out of this government, I would just like 
to say that some information does come much quicker. 
 
My question to the House Leader is: today is day 25 of the session and to date we have seen no 
substantive amount of legislation - none of the legislation which was talked about in the throne speech, 
none of the legislation which has been talked about in the press, concerning The Trade Union Act, The 
Labour Standards Act, Workers’ Compensation Act, The Highways Act, Vehicle Act, co-op act, 
amendments to The Liquor Act - none of that is before the House. 
 
This being day 25, I’m wondering when you will get around to having the ministers get the legislation in 
the House, so the people of the province know whether or not you are serious about it, and to give as 
well the opportunity to the opposition to prepare themselves to review the legislation, so that we’re not 
forcing it through the House in the last week of the session. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was afraid the member was going to ask that question so in 
anticipation of the question, I filed notice for several pieces of legislation today. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the minister. I know in asking  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1355 

the House Leader or the Acting House Leader the other day, we had a similar answer and what we got 
were more reorganizing bills on the order paper that day. I’m wondering if you can assure us that the 
bills mentioned, affecting the various acts, will be introduced in the House today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The notice that was filed today, Mr. Speaker, will show up on the blues on 
Monday and I’m sure that the member, in his wisdom, will be able to make his own determination at that 
time. And in answer to the second part of your first question - when will the information be provided as 
asked for by the opposition? - I would say probably quicker than the exercise we witnessed a couple of 
years ago when on the last day of the session, a very long and lengthy session, three or four cabinet 
ministers came in with armfuls of returns - they had to have a wheelbarrow to get it down to the door of 
the Chamber, I’m sure - and sat it on that table, I think near the end of the session. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, final supplementary. I would ask the minister again if he will give a 
guarantee that the amendments to the acts mentioned will be introduced today or given notice of today. 
Of course they can’t be introduced today because it takes 48 hours in the process and he will well know 
that. 
 
As to his comment about information from a previous government, getting it on the last day when you’re 
asking for motions for returns I suppose is somewhat better than the action of this government who 
doesn’t give any information at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m sure that when you get the information you will wish you hadn’t asked for it 
because it’s going to be very, very positive in nature and very, very complimentary of the new 
administration . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . And we will. We will. Mr. Speaker, it’s not our intention 
to in any way hide it or delay it. We just want to have it packaged very neatly for the hon. members 
opposite, and as soon as the package is ready, it will be forthcoming. 
 
As it relates to the guarantee as to what may or may not be on the blues come Monday, I would urge the 
hon. member to read the blues come Monday. 
 

Custom Combiners and U.S. Immigration 
 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Premier. The Premier will be aware that United 
States Department of Immigration has effectively closed the door to custom combiners and their crews. 
And as you should know, that will affect about 700 Canadians, most of them young Saskatchewan 
farmers. My question is: what representation have you made, or your government made, to the 
Department of External Affairs in Ottawa to convince the Canadian government to officially protest this 
unfriendly act on the part of the Reagan administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is my understanding that combines are backed up to some 
degree in the province of Manitoba because of actions by certain people in the province of Manitoba that 
have upset many Americans. And, Mr. Speaker, when there are certain debates going on in the 
legislature in neighbouring states about the performance of certain activities in the province of Manitoba, 
it does tend probably to have some impact on their decision whether they’re going to invite certain 
people from Manitoba down into the United States. In our province, the minister has been dealing with it 
directly, and very successfully, in terms of dealing with it in Ottawa and dealing with it in terms of 
Washington, and we have a higher success rate than I think  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1356 

you will find in the province of Manitoba. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Premier. He didn’t answer the first question. 
My question was: the U.S. Department of Immigration is effectively closing the U.S.-Canada border in 
the first major battle since the Second World War over who will harvest North American grain - 700 
workers, and I suggest most of those are Saskatchewan combiners. Most of them . . . I’d say 80 per cent 
of them are young farmers from Saskatchewan. This press release says nothing about Canada-U.S. 
relations. It says the U.S., and they named the states, are closing the border to Canadian customers 
because of their cut-back in seeded acreage. Are you taking this information to Ottawa and asking the 
Department of External Affairs to have the Americans reconsider this action? It doesn’t say anything 
about Manitoba. Those are Saskatchewan combiners. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, maybe I have to be a little bit more specific. When cabinet members 
. . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — NDP. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — . . . NDP cabinet members in the province of Manitoba are involved in burning the 
American flag, it makes Americans upset. I’ve talked to American politicians in the province of 
Saskatchewan recently. I’ve talked to Manitoba farmers and council men in the riding of Estevan 
recently - terribly, terribly upset about that incident. So it wouldn’t surprise me, or anybody else across 
this country, if Americans are having some second thoughts about inviting Manitoba farmers into the 
United States to custom combine or, frankly, anything else. 
 
In our province, we are working very hard to have very positive relationships, in a relationship with our 
neighbours, the Governor of North Dakota who has been invited to speak on the floor of the legislature 
next month. I was the first Premier in the history of Saskatchewan to speak in the legislature in North 
Dakota. We’re doing . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — So what I would suggest is that you write and you talk to your colleagues in 
Manitoba if you want better relationships between Canada and the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question to the Premier. Let me say the question one more 
time. Several combiners have called me already. One young fellow had one combine down in the States. 
Last year he traded it in on two new combines. He spent $250,000 to prepare to go combining in United 
States next week. He can’t go to United States because they’ve effectively closed the border in 
Saskatchewan. They are not allowing Saskatchewan combiners into North Dakota. 
 
If you have this good of relationship with North Dakota, and if you’re saying it’s the Manitoba 
combiners that are excluded, will you make representation that the Saskatchewan combiners can go 
through North Dakota and go down to the States to start combining - next week? It’s now that they want 
to go. And they’ve effectively been  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1357 

closed. Yes, the Canadian director of U.S. immigration, Gerald Coyle, says, ‘It is not a total surprise 
because we’ve held back American combiners in the past. U.S. combine operators were exempt,’ he 
said, ‘and they don’t have to have any application to come to Saskatchewan.’ Are you either going to 
take reciprocal action, or are you going to ask that our boys can go down there combining? This . . . 700 
are affected. 700 Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, this government is very much aware of the value of the United States 
to our livelihood. Our biggest customer for potash is the United States. Our biggest customer for oil is 
the United States. A major customer for cattle is the United States. A major customer in terms of tourism 
is the United States. We are actively involved in dealing with Washington, in dealing with Ottawa. 
Representative Orlin Hanson from North Dakota is working on our behalf lobbying people in Ottawa 
and in Washington to make sure that the relationship between this province and the United States stays 
first-class and world-class. 
 
What I want to remind the member, when we have so much at stake in trading with the United States, 
it’s a little bit difficult for this side of the House to understand why they don’t thinking burning the 
American flag is important. Even in terms of debating it here, you question whether it was relevant. Our 
biggest trader, our biggest neighbour, and will be for decades and years to come, and you question 
whether it’s relevant. 
 
I’ll say it once more: if there’s a problem, it’s originating with your colleagues out of Manitoba and 
certainly not in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the premier. Mr. Premier, this article indicates 
that the American government has effectively closed the door to Canadian combiners because of 
cut-backs in seeded acreage and because of pressure from American combiners saying that they want to 
keep their combines busy. Are you planning to use your good influence and your friendship with the 
Governor of North Dakota, and with the Department of External Affairs, to allow these 700 people . . . 
or are you going to avoid the issue completely? You haven’t answered and addressed the issue of 
combiners in your answers this morning yet. People are watching you. They want to know if their 
combiners are going to have a change to go combing. And if not, are you going to reciprocate by not 
allowing American combiners into Saskatchewan? That’s the alternative. 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, we have been, and the minister has been, actively involved in 
pursuing the issue in Washington, in Ottawa, on that issue. Our counterparts in the United States and 
North Dakota are actively working for us and combiners here in Ottawa and in Washington, as a result 
of what the minister’s doing. And I can only reiterate again: their attitude about the Minister of 
Agriculture here, and the Deputy Premier here in Saskatchewan is head and shoulders over the same 
counterpart in Manitoba. And that’s what’s causing so much of the problem and the difficult relations, 
because the NDP like to burn the American flag, and we like to hold it up as being good neighbours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — The Premier has alluded to actions you’ve taken with your American  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1358 

counterparts, and with Ottawa. Can you suggest what you’ve done since this announcement has been 
made? Just name two or three things, or one thing - specific action that you’ve taken to give our young 
fellows a chance to combine down in the States. What action have you taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Specific actions. I will ask the Deputy Premier and the Minister of Agriculture, 
who’s dealing with it hourly on that issue. I’ll ask him to respond in specifics, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I received a phone call from a constituent of mine who 
was having problems getting into, Mr. Speaker, United States through the Port of Antler, which is in 
Manitoba. And once it was realized that he was my constituent and from Saskatchewan, the problem 
seemed to be alleviated somewhat. But aside from that fact, Mr. Speaker, I immediately called Ottawa 
through my member of parliament’s office, Alvin Hamilton, got in touch with the immigration people, 
explained the problem to them, and they, in turn, got in touch with Washington. We got in touch with 
Senator Mark Andrews’ office in Washington, who’s one of the senators from North Dakota, and he 
represented our cause in Washington. We got in touch with the office of the state representative, Orlin 
Hanson, representing district 3 in North Dakota. He is lobbying for us in Washington. And we also got 
in touch with the Department of Labour in Denver, Colorado, where the applications have to be made to 
get custom combiners. And this has been a long-standing procedure, by the way, Mr. Speaker - to make 
applications through the Department of Labour. It just happens that it wasn’t enforced before because 
there was a great demand for custom combiners in the United States. Now, as a result of the 
deteriorating relationship between Canada and the United States, for reasons that have already been 
explained, the Department of Labour is, in my view at least, enforcing these things that weren’t enforced 
before. 
 
Those are some of the things that we’ve done yesterday and today, Mr. Speaker, and I think the situation 
will improve over the next day or so. I would urge members opposite to call their counterparts in 
Manitoba as I have done. I’ve got a message off to the opposition in Manitoba asking them to ask the 
Premier in Manitoba if he wouldn’t make similar representations and perhaps find it in his heart to 
apologize for past actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of Souris Valley Mine 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier, and this concerns the announced 
closure of the Souris Valley mine by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation; and it refers to the April 
20th edition of the Estevan Mercury where the Premier is quoted as having advised a union 
representative representing the employees of the Souris Valley mine, and I quote: 
 

We will do all we can to ensure that you and your fellow workers continue to hold your jobs and 
are able to live in the community that you wish to live in. 

 
My question is: is that position still the position of the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Yes it is, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of fact I’m going to be meeting with those 
individuals that are involved. There are several positions right in Sask Power as I understand it - I think 
the minister could comment on it in more detail - Sask Power itself. There are new positions and 
openings in Coronach, but to the extent  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1359 

possible I’m going to be looking for all alternatives to keep those people and their families employed in 
or around the area of Estevan; and certainly, if there are any alternatives I’m going to be exploring them 
in detail. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to direct a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation, as a follow-up of my question to the Premier and his answer. My 
understanding, Mr. Minister, is that there are some 26 to 30 positions where employees will lose their 
jobs because of the closure of the Souris Valley mine. My understanding is that there re perhaps as many 
as 24 vacant positions at the Boundary Dam power station - positions which might well be filled by the 
persons who are being displaced at the Saskatchewan Power Corporation Souris Valley mine. I am 
asking the minister whether or not the corporation has looked into the possibility of some of the miners 
being able to take some of the vacant positions at the power station, so that they would not be forced to 
move, and so that their families would not be uprooted. As you know, the mine has been operated for 
many years by the corporation, and as a result thereof people have long-standing, some 20-25 years, 
connections with the corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Well, Mr. Speaker, all I can do is confirm what the Premier has said. And our 
personnel department and human relations department in SPC is monitoring it. The people are meeting 
with the families to see what we can do. No one is going to lose their jobs, as was our announcement in 
the first place that there would be no loss of jobs in the closure. There will be jobs available at Coronach 
for those that wish to move, and we’ll do everything we possibly can to accommodate the employees in 
the Estevan area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister in charge of the power corporation. 
It is my understanding that the power corporation offered employment to the displaced miners in the 
power corporation’s operations at Coronach. And some of the miners who were approaching me 
suggested that they would very much prefer to have some of the vacant utility positions or welding 
positions or other positions which are vacant at the Boundary Dam, understandably, since they have 
spent their life in Estevan. The question which I specifically direct to you is whether or not you will ask 
the corporation to review its previous decision to make offers of employment at Coronach, and instead at 
least consider the possibility of making offers of employment at the Boundary Dam power station for 
these people who have worked in Estevan for many years. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we are already doing that and we’re looking at all avenues 
to accommodate the workers and not cause any more upheaval than we possibly can. We are not going to 
guarantee that we can do it totally, but the options will be there for them to maintain a job, whether it’s 
Estevan or Coronach. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. It is my understanding that the employees have 
been advised of the options of employment at Coronach. Would you now ask the power corporation 
officials to advise those employees individually of the possible options of employment at Boundary 
Dam? I know it would ease their minds. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have already said that we’ll follow all avenues, and I’m 
sure my SPC officials in the human relations department will be talking to everyone concerned. 



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1360 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Tusa: — It is my pleasure to introduce to you and to the House, on behalf of my good friend 
and colleague, the MLA for Kinistino, Mr. Ben Boutin, a group of students from Crystal Springs School 
in Crystal Springs. They are a group of 18 grade 10, 11 and 12 students who are here today, along with 
their teachers, Garnet Elason and Bryon Wiley, and their bus drivers, Joey and George Weber. I would 
like to ask the House to welcome them here this morning, and I would like to inform them that I will be 
meeting with them at 11 o’clock for pictures and for a short discussion. I wish them a very enjoyable day 
in Regina. I’d like to ask all members to please welcome them at this time. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

Annual Report of Saskatchewan Computer Utility Corporation 
 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I’d like to table the 1982 annual report of 
SaskComp. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Consolidated Fund Budgetary Expenditure 
 

Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I just want to say at the outset that the understanding 
that we had on this side of the House was to resume initially this morning with the Department of 
Highways estimates, and somewhat or other it’s quite confusing. There’s just no consistent planning on 
that side of the House, it seems. 
 
With respect, Mr. Chairman, to northern organizations, I’d like to ask the minister at this point in time: 
what is expected in terms of grants to organizations, particularly the Saskatchewan Trappers’ 
Association, at this point in time? I’ll just begin with the questioning in that line. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I would suggest to you, you ask the Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources 
because that comes under his department - trapping and wildlife and so on. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does that include, then, fundings reported from government to 
the fishermen’s federated co-operative? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes. 



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1361 

Mr. Yew: — With respect to the various other organizations then, Mr. Minister, such as the existing 
parent organizations of, say, the Northern Contractors Association, for one, the Northern Outfitters 
Association, for another, and various other organizations in northern Saskatchewan . . . if in fact you 
have any support and encouragement from your department to such northern organizations. Can you list 
me, you know, the number of organizations that you will be supporting? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, you mentioned some specific organizations. They would come under the 
. . . You mentioned the outfitters; they come under other departments. What I would say to you, under 
DNS in the estimates that we’re considering here today, we have the economic development grant fund. 
Organizations are able to come forward to us with proposals for certain funding, but if they’re funded by 
other departments they certainly wouldn’t be considered by us. But most of the ones that you refer to are 
covered by the Department of Parks and Renewable Resources or by Tourism and Small Business and 
other departments. 
 
Mr. Yew: — With respect to the North East Community College, Mr. Minister, what is the status of 
your proposed facility for the North East Community College? Is it still the intent of the department to 
establish this community college facility in Sandy Bay, or has it been now transferred to another area on 
the east side? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we went through this last night. And we talked about the 
various departments that are . . . You know, and I was, I believe, rather patient with the whole thing, and, 
you know, I will continue to be. But I would say that I answered this specific question about community 
college, and the jurisdiction for community colleges in the North are with the Department of Advanced 
Education and Manpower. That’s well understood by everyone here and, in fact, well understood by 
people in the North who are involved with the east side community college. So I don’t see why those 
questions are being advanced to us in DNS estimates. I don’t understand it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I just want to reiterate to the minister again that you are responsible for the northern 
administration district, and surely communities in northern Saskatchewan recognize the fact that they 
have now a new minister responsible for social, cultural, and economic conditions up north. I made that 
special, specific question to you, realizing the fact that you, as the minister for that department, certainly 
must be informed about the progress being made with respect to various programs and proposals in 
northern Saskatchewan. I thought that you would have a spirit of co-operation, like the phrase you used 
in Prince Albert the other day, and an open mind to discuss openly with this Assembly what the plans are 
for such projects. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I say once again the exercise that we’re in, the committee 
of finance, dealing with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan . . . Our responsibility is to answer 
questions dealing with the budget of this government. It is the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, 
from page 59 to 63 of this blue estimates book, and I would ask the hon. member to refer himself to that. 
I will be willing - as I have been and as I was last night for some three hours in answering questions 
pertaining to the responsibility of this department - I’m more than willing to do that. 
 
In fact, I don’t mind referring to, and I understand as well that in this transition year that there can be 
some confusion where there are some grey areas, but some of these areas are very clear that the questions 
are under other departments. So I am just asking you,  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1362 

where it’s very, very clear, like community colleges under Advanced Education and Manpower, then I 
would ask that you reserve those questions for that minister. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I only have a few questions regarding the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan, as my colleague has covered pretty well all aspects of the 
department quite thoroughly last night. And I will just take a short while. 
 
My first question, Mr. Minister, would be regarding the surface lease and the agreements of the surface 
leases. Do I understand that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan still has jurisdiction of the 
surface leases in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Yes, we do still have that jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay then, a couple of questions on the surface leases. At this time, are you 
negotiating, or renegotiating the surface lease at Key Lake, or are you anticipating renegotiating the lease 
at Key Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, we are at the present time not renegotiating the surface lease, and as I said 
last night to your colleague regarding the Amok lease at Cluff Lake, there may be a possibility that we 
would reopen those surface leases, but we’ll wait until a request comes forward from the companies and 
I will give you the assurance that we won’t rush into it with any kind of, you know, major changes. But, 
certainly, there could well be some changes, and I make reference to the Eldor Resources lease that we 
signed just recently. We believe it breaks some new ground in terms of protecting the communities, and 
of the employment of people in local areas, and so on. It breaks some new ground in the method with 
which we would attempt to accomplish the goals that I think we all have, and we would perhaps use that 
as a bit of a benchmark. But other than that, at the present time we are not negotiating with either Amok 
at Cluff Lake, or Key Lake mines. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The second phase of the Cluff Lake mine is now going 
ahead, and my understanding is that when that second phase is in operation that it will provide probably 
400 to 500 more permanent jobs. And I think that the original Cluff Lake mine, and the original surface 
lease that is in Cluff Lake right now, has been a real success story in northern Saskatchewan where the 
50 per cent of the labour force is from the North, and 50 per cent from the South. 
 
I would just urge the minister, due to the fact that you have that under your jurisdiction, to continue with 
that surface lease as it is. I would not want to see that surface lease renegotiated for the second phase of 
Cluff Lake. I really see no reason why we would want to renegotiate that lease. It’s been a success story, 
and I want to say at this time, also, that I fully support that expansion at Cluff Lake - the second phase of 
it - and I would sincerely hope that your department, and under your jurisdiction that the surface lease 
would continue the same as it was at Cluff Lake. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, I’d say to the hon. member, we have had contact from Amok regarding the 
second phase, and regarding the surface lease that would be in effect for that second phase should it take 
place, and we believe it will, and I appreciate the remarks of the hon. member about the number of jobs 
that this kind of project will create in the North, and we’re excited about that as well. 
 
And I would just give you the assurance as I have done before, and to your colleague as  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1363 

well, that, yes, we’re interested in - very much interested in preserving benefits to local and northern 
communities from some of the projects that are going on in there, and then certainly from these major 
projects. So, I would say you can rest assured that we are very cognizant of the benefits that must derive 
for local people, but I won’t go so far as to say that the same terms that are under the present agreements 
will remain in effect for ever and ever, amen. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Another question, Mr. Minister, regarding the possible development of a limestone 
deposit and mine in the Pinehouse area. Do I understand that if that development goes ahead . . . And I 
want to also say that I sincerely hope that that development does go ahead for citizens of the Pinehouse 
area. I think it’s a very important development and I fully support that development, regardless of what 
has been said in the press. Would the limestone mine at Pinehouse, if that goes ahead, would that also 
fall under your jurisdiction and would a surface lease be negotiated regarding that development, possible 
development? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, the mine itself would be under Energy and Mines but we may well be 
looking at some type of surface lease, that kind of thing. Those kind of negotiations are under our 
jurisdiction. I’m pleased to hear the hon. member say . . . and I know that this mine that he’s talking 
about, a potential mine, is in his constituency. As the hon. member also knows, there have been some 
problems with what I would call a couple of radicals in the community there that have caused some 
extreme troubles for the mining company in getting on with the surveys that they needed to do last 
winter while frost was in the ground and it may well now have been delayed for some time. But we 
appreciate the . . . You know, I say we, but I think the people of Pinehouse as well will appreciate the 
support from, certainly from our government and also from their own MLA in this. 
 
Just like I say, I appreciate your support there because there has been some bit of confrontation with a bit 
of a radical element there. But I’m sure that can be solved as well. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you. Just a couple of questions. I want to touch just shortly here on the new 
municipal bill that you’ll be taking in, the new municipal act. You have indicated that once that act has 
been brought into the House and passed, then we will proceed. Is it my understanding that we will then 
proceed with some of the planned development that you have planned projects to solve some of the high 
unemployment that we have, and indicated by your executive assistant in this last report? Do I 
understand that that municipal act will have to come into the House and passed before you will be 
starting on any of the economic development projects in northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — No, the economic development activities aren’t contingent upon the bill. The bill 
is to do with the development of local government. Economic development is something different. So 
the bill will not hold up economic development initiatives and we will see the results of some of those 
soon. 
 
But one of the things the bill will do is open the gates for the flow of capital grants, of the 
revenue-sharing capital grant funds and so on, which will allow the communities, the individual 
communities, to get on with their own economic development projects or the various projects that 
they’re doing within the community. So to that extent some activity in the North, a good deal of activity 
in the North, is contingent upon the passage  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1364 

of that bill. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, in closing I want to say to the minister 
that I urge him to take immediate steps into solving the serious problems that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan. They are most certainly severe at this time and I think that we’re heading into the summer 
months. And I know that with the projects such as the expansion at Cluff Lake, and what’s going on in 
Key Lake right now, and hopefully the limestone deposit at Pinehouse. All these developments are going 
to help solve our problems, but we do have to make some major steps in putting capital into projects. I 
think that forestry is important. We have the resources up there in forestry. We also have the human 
resources to handle these types of projects. I sincerely hope that you will take immediate steps to solve 
these problems, and I look forward to this summer to see some of these projects that will lessen the 
burden on the citizens of northern Saskatchewan who were hit severely hard this last winter. And this is 
the type of a situation that, you know, we just cannot tolerate in this province. 
 
With them few remarks, Mr. Chairman, if my colleagues have no more questions on the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan, and if you would like, we could just take these by number and finish it off, and 
the officials could then proceed back to La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I have a considerable concern in respect to the cost to 
the taxpayers in respect to the personal staff that each minister is building up. The other day, in an 
estimate, I went through, and the minister was unable to provide the actual salaries of his personal staff. 
And I estimated that it was somewhere between $150,000 to $200,000 over and above all the staff and 
the deputies in the department. And I look at your personal staff, and I see that you have a Mr. Pat Jarrett 
as an EA; you have Mr. Gordon Sonmore, EA; you have a Mr. Dan Stephens, special assistant; and you 
have a Jerry White, EA. And I would like to know: can you provide us with the salaries of each of those 
individuals on your personal staff? 
 
I want to say that the size of the personal staff of this government is of a major concern to the taxpayers 
of the province. As we look across and see the number of EAs and assistants and special assistants and 
Legislative Secretaries, I am indicating to the people of Saskatchewan that there’s somewhere around 
$150,000 to $200,000 for sustaining political activities of individual cabinet ministers. And I think that 
it’s only fair that this minister, and all ministers, be prepared to stand up in this legislature and provide 
that information as to their personal staff. And what I’m asking you is to provide me with the names if 
there’s any additions, and I want the particular salaries paid to all of these individuals - this large 
network of political hacks that you are paying with the taxpayers’ money. I’d ask you to detail to us . . . 
Can the minister provide us with that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I concur with my colleague, the Attorney-General, who was 
saying to me, you know, we could take that from almost any other member over there, considering the 
record of that member, and his association with the former government and the party of the former 
government, and all of the relatives that he had that came into the service of the former government, and 
so on. And I know he had a brother in SGI, and a sister that he brought back from B.C. for Social 
Services. I’m not sure if he was the minister at that time, but somebody was. On and on. And now he’s 
saying that it’s justifiable to bring his whole family in. He had a sister in the Attorney-General’s 
department, a sister in Sask Tel. You know. And here’s the same old . . . (inaudible) . . . standing up and 
telling us the whole family was in the service of the government. 



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1365 

But certainly I’d be more than pleased to answer the specific question as it relates to the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan, because my predecessor, the minister of northern Saskatchewan, had three 
assistants and two secretaries. And I have, I believe, three assistants and one secretary. So we have less 
than the former minister had, and we’ve been going through it, and I must say we’ve been going through 
the transitional period of DNS and one of the reasons that we have been able to make that as smoothly as 
what was agreed to by your colleague last night . . . He agreed right here in the House that it was a 
smooth transition, and it’s gone well, and I would just say that it really doesn’t hold any water. 
 
You argue about this proliferation of staff over here, and in fact if you look at the global numbers in 
terms of the number of assistants and the numbers of family members and all of those things that you 
people used to hire, and then the people that we have are far less. Far less. Far less. So, Mr. Chairman. 
But I’m certainly willing to supply the information because we in this government have nothing to hide 
in that area. Are there some other family members that I missed? Oh, I have maybe a question just in 
return. I’m not sure if this is the format, but I would ask the hon. member who is asking that question: 
did he have any family members who did not work for the former government? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Very funny, Mr. Chairman. I want to tell you, Mr. Minister, that you can laugh all you 
want about the extraordinary expenditures of personal staff in your office. I want to say that you have no 
less than four people, or four political hacks in your office: a Mr. Pat Jarrett which you haven’t provided 
the salary of; a Gordon Sonmore is in your office as an EA. You have a Dan Stephens as a special 
assistant, and you have a Jerry White. What are you trying to hide from the people of Saskatchewan? 
Why don’t you in fact have that information? Why don’t you give us the qualifications of those 
individuals and their salaries? Do you have that information here today? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, I’ll certainly provide that. And I heard the hon. member say he wants to 
peek to hear this information. Now, I can tell him, what I did in coming into the cabinet and the service 
of the province is: when I had the department of tourism and renewable resources which replaced your 
former colleague, Mr. Gross, who is no longer with us, and your former colleague, Mr. Hammersmith, 
who’s also no longer with us . . . Those two departments, one minister replacing two - that’s a saving to 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. I should say to you - and especially when you look at those two ministers 
and a staff, a proliferation of staff that they had around them. 
 
I believe, and I’m not exactly sure, but I believe the former minister of tourism and renewable resources 
had four, five, six people in total in his office - six, well, possibly seven, I’m told, in his office. And the 
minister of Northern Saskatchewan had in his office a total of five people. Now, that makes 11, I 
believe. And I believe in my office I have six. So six replacing eleven doesn’t appear to me - and at least 
with the arithmetic that I’ve grown up with, and I know I’m from northern Saskatchewan and so on, and 
I know the hon. member thinks something less of those of us from the North and people from the North 
and so on - but I can tell you that six staff, six staff to replace eleven staff is a very good bargain for the 
people of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to make a comment in respect to that. I want to say that the  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1366 

people of Saskatchewan are readily becoming aware that the deal they got on April the 26th was not a 
very good deal. In fact they are coming to the conclusion that they were misled. What I have asked you 
specifically, Mr. Minister . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Do you want to get into the debate? Yeah. 
What I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: do you or do you not have the salaries of the individuals on your 
personal staff? Can you provide that to us here today and read it off? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — For the department of DNS, I certainly can. And I take pleasure in providing that 
because, in all of these cases, I believe they’re less money than what was paid to the 11, I make that 
point. You say it was a bad deal for the people of Saskatchewan on April 26th of 1982, and I say to you 
that six staff members to replace eleven staff members in two departments is a good deal for the people 
of Saskatchewan, and any of the people of Saskatchewan. It’s a good deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And I would say that the people that work in my office under the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan . . . I have Dan Stephens; Pat Jarrett, who you’ve mentioned; Tom Roy; Ruth 
Schindel. And their stats are as follows: Dan Stephens, $42,000; Pat Jarrett, $29,148; Tom Roy, 
$24,768; Ruth Schindel, the minister’s secretary, $27,684. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I note in your resume of assistants that you have a Mr. Pat Jarrett . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, I know you did. And I’m asking you specifically what is his assignment? Because 
it’s designated as constituency. Is that . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — He’s an executive assistant to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. He 
handles inquiries, research at the request of the minister, liaison between the minister and the deputy 
minister. He has a Bachelor of Commerce degree in marketing from the University of Saskatchewan. 
He’s a very bright young fellow, and I must say, he, himself could replace three or four of the people that 
were in the other two ministers’ offices that I mentioned earlier. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to say, Mr. Chairman, really a wonderful revelation that the minister puts forward 
with totally misleading the people of Saskatchewan, trying to compare the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, which they have destroyed, literally destroyed and wiped out of existence, comparing that 
with the Department of Northern Saskatchewan under the New Democratic Party. I want to say that is 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan, and you know it is, because precisely now you have none of the 
services to the North because it’s put out into the line departments. And accordingly, what you’re doing 
is trying to compare apples and oranges. You know it, and I’m telling you the people of Saskatchewan 
are getting sick and tired of your misrepresentations. 
 
I want to say in conclusion here, with a reduced-down Department of Northern Saskatchewan, with a 
reduced-down activity of this government, when we take a look at the personal staff of this here 
minister, it’s costing the taxpayers an exorbitant amount of money, in the neighbourhood of $150,000 to 
$200,000. And that is the case throughout this government. Go to minister after minister, and I say that 
it’s cost the taxpayers money for political hacks in the offices, that the work is not being done by a 
professional civil service. Decisions are being made by political hacks in the offices of  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1367 

the minister, and this is no different here. I want to say that under the previous administration, under the 
previous administration, I’ll tell you individuals that were hired went through the civil service and they 
were qualified for the position or they were not hired. That is the situation. Today we have office after 
office of minister after minister costing the taxpayers money to build their political machine. And I want 
to say that this message is going out to the people. And I want to say that they are concerned with the 
waste and the expenditures made by this government at the taxpayers’ expense. And I think that it’s a 
regrettable fact that this situation is allowed to exist. And I can tell each and every minister that I want an 
accountability of the political machinery that they have put in their office - minister after minister getting 
a press communication officer to try to shore up their public image. And I know after a year in 
government they’ll need more than a press communication officer to shore up their bad public image. 
 
So I want to say that we’re very concerned that what is happening here is that there’s a shift from the 
decision-making process of this government from a professional civil service into the political hackery 
of all the appointments that they have made in their departments. And what they have is a group of 
people that have been hired and expanded, not to just communicate with the public but to carry on the 
campaign for the Tory party at taxpayers’ expense. And I think this is unprecedented in the history of 
this province. It is; it’s unprecedented. And you can laugh, but I’m telling you there’s a concern when the 
public is looking at minister after minister’s office costing between $150,000 to $200,000 for individuals 
doing nothing but carrying out political messages on behalf of ministers. 
 
We have cut professional staff. We have decimated a wonderful civil service in this province. We have 
cut qualified people out of the civil service and crown corporations and what have we done? We have 
displaced them with political hacks to try to keep this inept group of people in power. That is the extent 
of the direction of this government. And I want to say that 150,000 to 200,000 an office is a very high 
price that the taxpayers of this province is committed to maintain that government in office. 
 
And certainly, I say in conclusion of my remarks, that this practice, I’m telling you . . . You can laugh, 
Mr. Minister, laugh all you want - laugh at the taxpayers of Saskatchewan; certainly laugh at them, 
because that’s precisely what you do. And I want to say that the direction that they have taken is one of 
total arrogance and disregard for the public and the public purse. 
 
And that is a concern, Mr. Minister. You have a reduced-down department, reduced to the extent that 
when you are asked questions you have no jurisdiction any more, and you still have a large staff doing 
political work for you. And you have cut key people throughout your departments - cut them adrift - and 
have substituted a large array of political staff. And I think that performance needs to be addressed and I 
think that the people of Saskatchewan have to be notified of the extravagance, of the arrogance and the 
cost of this government for a short 11 months for their political benefit, rather than designing programs 
for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1368 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure that many of the remarks of the hon. member . . . I 
notice that he was having a great deal of difficulty keeping a straight face while he was presenting his 
remarks and his arguments. 
 
I have made the argument and pointed out to the member, as well as to the committee, that if I had filled 
the positions that were there when we took office on May the 8th, in the offices that I inherited or that I 
was appointed to . . . if I had filled the positions that were there that were filled by order in council by 
the former administration, I would have filled 11 positions, Mr. Chairman - 11. And because we came 
into this government and the people of Saskatchewan had confidence in us that we would exercise cost 
efficiencies, as we have done in the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, we said, ‘Well, what do we 
need?’ And it was determined that we needed six people to replace those eleven. 
 
What more do we need than those kinds of hard facts to point out the absolute ludicrous nature of the 
comments that were just made by the member from Quill Lakes/ 
 
As far as him saying that we were comparing the Department of Northern Saskatchewan that we have 
now to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan under the New Democratic Party, and he says there is 
no comparison: I certainly concur with that. And so does everybody out in Saskatchewan concur with 
that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — There is no comparison between the Department of Northern Saskatchewan that 
was administered by that former government, that all-encompassing, large, unmanageable department, to 
the department that we have now, that is manageable, that is targeted at the real concerns of northern 
people, as his colleague who was serious about this estimate was suggesting last night - his two 
colleagues from the North, who understand the North. They were serious about it, and they were serious 
in expressing concerns about these social problems that exist there. I was serious in my replies to them 
last night, as I was today, in that we all have a concern for those various problems. And those particular 
areas that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan (the much-reduced Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan) is targeted to deal with, we can now deal with those problems in a much more realistic 
way, as I pointed out in some specific questioning last night to your colleague. 
 
So, I don’t know what more can be said, Mr. Chairman, except to say that we have seen through some of 
the other estimates that member from Quill Lakes . . . I don’t know what he thinks his role is there as 
whip of that party: that he should whip people up to some kind of fervour and bail out some of his other 
members, or whatever he sees as his role there. But I would say he doesn’t do service to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan to misrepresent the staff in this office, when, in fact, there’s six people replacing eleven. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to make one closing remark to set the record clear. The minister tries to allude to 
the fact that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan today is the same size, and therefore he has a 
reduced staff. If you want to take a look at the expenditures alone, the expenditures in the 1982 budget, 
the last budget brought in by  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1369 

the New Democratic Party, was over $100 million for Northern Saskatchewan. That has been reduced 
down to $14 million this year - $14 million under the jurisdiction of the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan as compared to $100 million when all the programs were in there. And still he tries to 
mislead the people of Saskatchewan that he is still running the large department. I think that that is 
totally misleading the people. And to make comparisons with the previous is ludicrous, and he knows it. 
It’s the same type of thing that they’re doing here: is cutting major and important civil servants, 
long-time and skilled individuals. 
 
Positions are being lost throughout this government at an unprecedented level. But I’ll tell you, the 
number of political hacks in their offices are not decreasing, it’s increasing. That’s being paid by 
taxpayers’ money and you know it - and you know it. It’s being paid. Individuals that were hired before 
were hired through the civil service and the Public Service Commission. I want to say that I am 
concerned, and I don’t want the minister to think lightly of it, because I am concerned and so are the 
people of Saskatchewan, and well should they be. 
 
I want to ask one other further question and that is: you indicated that you had a particular economic 
development policy for northern Saskatchewan, the general framework of your economic policy. What I 
would like to do is to ask you once more to outline the basic premises of your economic policy for 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I can’t believe what I hear from this member, when last 
night we went through that in a great deal of detail with the member from Cumberland. That member 
from Quill Lakes, Mr. Chairman, was not here. We went through for three solid hours the estimates of 
this Department of Northern Saskatchewan. The member for Cumberland asked specific questions 
regarding the economic development strategy and we gave some very specific answers. We talked in 
very broad generalizations, as well as some specific detail about the department with the economic 
development strategy of the North. 
 
That member that was representing your caucus last night, and the critic for the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, understands the people of the North, understands communities of the North, as I do, and I 
take his remarks seriously. For you to say, repeat exactly what I said here last night, over and over and 
over again - now I would say with respect, Mr. Chairman, with respect, the member should have been in 
his chair last night to hear it. He may well have been detained elsewhere for some other very unforeseen 
reason. If that’s the case, I would urge him to read Hansard. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to say, Mr. Chairman, that I have asked for the broad, general policy 
statement in respect to the economic development of northern Saskatchewan. And if the minister is 
saying that he is afraid to set forth that economic policy because I want to be able to compare with what 
he gave me the previous year . . . And certainly I think we’re entitled to ask that question - the broad 
statement of principle of economic development for northern Saskatchewan. I’m asking the minister 
what his broad economic policy for the North is. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know. We had a three-hour session, as I said, last 
night. We’ve gone through the Department of Northern Saskatchewan estimates in a very great deal of 
detail last night and earlier this morning with your colleagues who understand that department, and 
understand that part of the province, I would say in respect. And for you to say . . . We’ve brought our 
officials from La Ronge, we’ve brought them down here, and they’re here. We’re ready to answer 



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1370 

questions. Went through it last night. And for you to say, repeat everything we went through last night, 
and do another three hours and hold it up again as . . . to me makes no sense. You stand there is a very 
sanctimonious way of 10 minutes ago or 15 minutes ago, whatever it was, and talk about the taxpayers 
of the province, and the serving of the taxpayers of the province. I say you don’t serve the taxpayers of 
the province by asking us to repeat everything that went on in here last night. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, you are not going to tell me what questions I’m going to ask 
for the taxpayers and the citizens of Saskatchewan. And you’re not going to tell me how long we’re 
going to stay here either. And I’m going to tell you if I ask a question, you’re not going to tell me that I 
have no right because I don’t understand the North, because I understand the North. And I want to tell 
you I’m going to ask you questions, and I’m not going to take no for an answer. 
 
I’m going to ask you what is your . . . In a broad principles I’m asking you: what are your broad 
economic policies for the development of the North, the broad principles of economic development? 
How do you intend to bring to the northern Saskatchewan . . . an area of our province, as my colleagues 
have indicated, where there are up to 85 per cent unemployment? And I stand in this legislature and ask 
you, and you say, ‘Well, I’m not going to keep my department officials here to answer these questions.’ 
I’m asking you today: what are your basic economic philosophy, your economic principles, that you are 
espousing for northern Saskatchewan? And I ask you, I want to know what your basic overall economic 
policy . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, you know, the member says that I’m not going to tell him 
what he’s going to ask, and so on. I was very respectful in my comments to him. I say that it’s a . . . I 
can’t believe that if the member is as interested as he tries to show the committee this morning, as he 
tries to show whatever TV camera he’s smiling at this morning . . . If he’s trying to show them his 
concern and interest, then why wasn’t he here last night to ask the questions, or at least to listen to his 
colleague who was going at it? And I would say that’s fine. That’s fine . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! Order! Allow the minister to make his comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And just in a broad type of way, Mr. Chairman, I say that on behalf of the 
northern part of the province, and the part of this province and the people that live there that this 
department has some jurisdiction over and for, it’s unfortunate that the estimates of the department have 
deteriorated now into this. But I would say that sure, while I will not get into all of the detail and 
answering the same various questions that came up last night, I will give him the broad sort of outline of 
the way that we see developing the North. And if that’s the question that he wants answered, I’ll say we 
see a role for our government and our department in business development in the North. We see a role 
for us in employment opportunities. I talked to your colleague from Athabasca this morning about the 
surface lease agreements and how those will impact on northern communities, and the benefits to 
northern communities, and the way in which we will negotiate those. So we see that as a positive role for 
our department. We have a loan fund; we have a grant fund - economic development - geared towards 
economic development, loan fund and a grant fund as well, and we see our department having a role 
there in dealing with the people of the North for feasible and viable projects. 
 
We as a department see a role for ourselves, for our officials, to give management  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1371 

support to fledgling businesses in the North. We don’t see business and profit and those kinds of things 
as any kind of an alien type of an idea in the North any more than we do in the South. And that’s where 
we get into some philosophical differences with the gang of eight. But I’ve said that before, and here we 
are. So I’ve given the member the broad outline of the kinds of things that we see our department having 
a role in in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And like I say before, I really think that the committee deteriorates . . . In the estimates under 
consideration, this department deteriorates substantially. We go through every single detail that we went 
through last night once again. That doesn’t make any sense to me. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Again, it doesn’t matter to this in carrying on the business of the government, whether 
you think it makes sense to you. And I want to make that perfectly clear, Mr. Minister. I want to say that 
there is a great deal of concern for the people of northern Saskatchewan, as I said, where unemployment 
is rampant and welfare is increasing. And I ask you that you have outlined in a general way what you are 
intending to do, and certainly employment and employment opportunities is indeed the major concern 
for Northerners. 
 
I want to ask you: what are the specific actions that you took during the past year to create employment 
in northern Saskatchewan - the specific items that you have developed which created employment? And 
I want you to indicate the number per the project that you initiated. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, here we go with the things that the hon. member for 
Cumberland . . . I would say those specific things are in Hansard from last night’s proceedings. They 
are, but I will just give it without going into the details of them: the extension of a hydro project, the 
major extension of a hydro project in the communities of Patuanak, Dillon, Michel, St. George’s Hill, 
Pinehouse, at a $3.5 million cost, through SPC, and SPC with cost-shared money and the federal 
government - 50 jobs. 
 
We’ve negotiated a new surface lease, as I talked to your colleague from Athabasca this morning while 
you were in the House, dealing with the Eldor Resources, the mine expansion, formerly Gulf Minerals 
mine up near Wollaston Lake. And we are in the process and very, very near an agreement, and the 
development of a wild rice processing plant that was talked about for a long time by your administration 
- nothing ever happened. It’s happening under this government. 
 
And all of these things are positive steps. And all of these things are the positive steps that I talked about 
last night in these estimates with the members who were asking specific questions for specific 
communities and specific economic development activity. And I take exception to you coming in here 
and trying to raise a big tirade and changing the tenor of the estimates, because really, as I’ve said before, 
I don’t understand why you would do this when Hansard is there for you to read. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to take the opportunity of finally getting some information from the 
minister. And I want to say that what the details of all the projects which he was able to put forward here 
in helping employment opportunity in the North . . . was the SPC hydro project, which created, he says, 
50 jobs, and they’re doing something with a  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1372 

surface lease in respect to Gulf Mineral mines. And, of course, that is our concern, Mr. Minister, that you 
are in fact doing nothing for northern Saskatchewan - nothing. And that’s why we have 85 per cent and 
90 per cent unemployment in community after community. 
 
You dismantled northern Saskatchewan, and you had no economic and no design for the North to help 
the people of the North help themselves. And this is very obvious. And I thank you for taking time to at 
least indicate that you are doing nothing for the North, that there is total inactivity. 
 
I want to say that the North, during the 11 years under the New Democratic Party . . . As your Minister of 
Education indicated, that when he visited them that there was a spark in the eyes of the northerners when 
he visited the schools. They had some hope, and I tell you that that spark in the eye of the northerner is 
growing dim, because community after community . . . And talk to my two colleagues, there is no hope 
left. Hope is drawing to a close for Northerners. 
 
And I tell you that it has been a scandal, a scandal, as to the inactivity of this government in addressing 
people in northern Saskatchewan which we felt needed special assistance. We gave $100 million to 
northern Saskatchewan under our administration. You have reduced it to $14 million. You have no 
economic development for northern Saskatchewan. This government has taken the hope that the people 
of northern Saskatchewan were developing during the program, initiated through the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan, and you have left them a vacuum. 
 
And, of course, it’s very clear, Mr. Minister, that you don’t want to get into your economic strategy. Of 
course you don’t want to get into the specifics because you don’t have a plan. You have deserted the 
people of northern half of Saskatchewan. I mean, we certainly have money to give to the oil companies. 
First thing, $130 million to the oil companies right off the bat; they needed help. But I’ll tell you, for the 
thousands and thousands of people unemployed in northern Saskatchewan, this government doesn’t have 
money. And I want to say that this is a despicable direction that this government is taking. 
 
And I’ll tell you, the people of Saskatchewan were proud that northern development was going on in a 
planned and organized manner: the participation of the crowns and the private sector; the participation of 
northern people which the member from Cumberland talks about. This was the direction that we were 
going in the past. And today, today the north lies in the shambles, in the shambles, under this Tory 
administration, and it took them less than a year to do it - less than a year to do it. And I want to say, Mr. 
Minister, whether you can add, or whether I am to take that this is your total project alignment . . . And 
can you indicate whether you have any other major projects which will help employment in northern 
Saskatchewan, or am I to take it and believe that this is the extent of the development of programs and 
job opportunities for northern Saskatchewan? Do you want to add to the list, or do you want us to 
distribute . . . The question I asked you is: outline your economic strategy. And then I indicated to you, 
secondly, that employment is a big problem. And I ask you to outline to this House, and to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and northern Saskatchewan, a list of projects, and the name of the project and the number 
of jobs you created. A whole list of them, and you gave me two. So I think we can send to the people of 
the North your answer, unless you want to add to it. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the member I believe said a mouthful when  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1373 

he used the term, ‘We gave.’ And he’s talking there of his former administration - ‘We gave northern 
Saskatchewan $100 million. We gave’ . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . You said you gave. 
 
Mr. Chairman, when the hon. member reads Hansard, which I have urged him to do already this 
morning, when he reads Hansard from yesterday, I would urge him to also read Hansard from today. 
And in his comments, he said, ‘We gave $100 million.’ And also when he reads last night’s Hansard, he 
will know that I had indicated to the member from Cumberland that the expenditures of this government, 
the investment of this government - we will be investing in northern Saskatchewan $102 million. The 
difference there, Mr. Chairman, is that they gave: here’s the money; no plan; no investment in future or 
long-term development. And our 102 million is there from the point of view of an investment in the 
North and the people that live there and the communities that are there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — And I mentioned to the hon. member the power grid. I mentioned the Eldor 
Resources lease. I mentioned support for the wild rice plant which is going to be a reality because we 
also looked at another end of the wild rice equation, as I indicated last night as well, marketing, which is 
something which hadn’t been looked at. 
 
I indicated last night as well about the operation of sawmills and of the northern farms and sewer and 
water construction and revenue sharing and northern capital grants that will be there under the new 
northern municipalities act. All of those things - investments in northern Saskatchewan and the 
development of northern people. 
 
What more can we say? I just would say - and I think it’s obvious to anyone who had observed the 
proceedings here this morning - I would ask the committee, Mr. Chairman, to make their own judgement 
on terms of watching the proceedings here this morning, to say just who really has an understanding of 
what’s necessary in northern Saskatchewan, what people need, and who is being responsible in terms of 
addressing the problems that are there. We don’t deny the problems, and I’ve said that as well before. 
We don’t deny the extreme unemployment problem and various social problems that go along with 
unemployment. 
 
But then I would say also that those are not new problems. The department that he mentioned before, 
that large former DNS, those problems were there as well then. So I don’t know what more can be said 
except to say that, yes, we are addressing the economic development of the northern part of this province 
and we have welcomed them to full citizenship in Saskatchewan. What I hear from people in the North 
whom I know personally and very, very many of them, as those two members, who represent that area do 
as well, they are not unhappy with the developments that have taken place in this last year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I listened with interest to the minister try to 
explain how these people welcomed the 85 per cent unemployment. It’s reminiscent of the Minister of 
Highways who tried to tell us how happy the 139 people that he fired were with his administration. 
 
I find it difficult to understand how this government is expecting people of the province, who are being 
asked to suffer the consequences of ill-management and bad decisions,  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1374 

to be happy with the new government. 85 per cent of the people in the North are now unemployed. What 
we need is an emergency plan to go into the North to help create jobs, rather than welfare for the people 
of the north, and that’s what they’re receiving now. 
 
And what I would like to ask the minister is how many people he will employ with the projects he has 
announced, and what he expects to happen with the unemployment rate and the number of people on 
welfare over the next six months, as a result of this program. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, as well, the member from Shaunavon should be reminded . . . We talked 
about in terms of the numbers of jobs that are projected in some of those projects we’re talking about. 
The unemployment rate - and I know you keep talking about 85 and all these kinds of percentages - the 
unemployment rate across the northern Saskatchewan, for everyone in the committee’s edification, is 
about 36 per cent. It’s extremely high. It’s extremely high . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m not proud 
of it and I don’t say that we are proud of it. 
 
The unemployment rate, Mr. Chairman, in northern Saskatchewan, before this government took over, 
when the former . . . was also in that range. It’s a long-standing problem, certainly. We know that. It’s a 
long-standing problem in northern Saskatchewan. We are addressing it. 
 
The hon. member comes with a typical NDP answer or suggestion: ‘An emergency plan,’ he says. An 
emergency plan that’s going to run in with a whole army of bureaucrats and say, ‘Here’s an emergency 
plan to alleviate a long-term and long-standing problem for a short term.’ On a short term. You can’t 
operate like that and we don’t believe that it’s responsible or reasonable to operate with that kind of a 
time frame. 
 
So what we’re saying is it’s a long-term plan and it will need some long-term solutions. And those 
solutions must have a foundation and that foundation has to be on something solid that people can build 
on, where jobs can be there and created over a long term. 
 
I indicated to his colleague last night: economic development to a socialist is a government taking some 
money that comes from somewhere else and regenerating tax money around and handing it here. Well, 
that’s not economic development. That’s just moving the money around. And in times of recession and 
so on, there’s less and less of that, as we all know. 
 
So what I would say is in order for jobs to be created in northern communities, somebody must build 
something; and in order for somebody to build something, they must have ownership of the property on 
which they build it; and in order for that to take place there has to be a coming-to-terms in northern 
Saskatchewan by a number of people and many, many people, as was indicated by the member from 
Athabasca today - people of Pinehouse, a community in his constituency. The average people of 
Pinehouse, not the radical element - and I mentioned them this morning - but the average people of 
Pinehouse are very concerned about the jobs that were lost because of some problems at the potential 
limestone mine. 
 
What the people in northern Saskatchewan are realizing and know, is that they need  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1375 

those jobs. Something has to be built in order for those jobs to be there. They see that at Cluff Lake, they 
see that at Key Lake, they see that at Rabbit Lake, and at Midwest Lake, and so on - the various large 
projects that are going on. So it’s not reasonable that these members should paint an absolutely black 
picture about what’s happening in northern Saskatchewan because there are many very large projects 
going on, and there are many people within the communities that see some light at the end of the tunnel. 
 
The hon. member from Quill Lakes talked about my colleague, the Minister of Education, going to the 
North and reporting about how he saw some hope because he saw some light in the children’s eyes in the 
schools. That’s true. That’s true. One of the things that that light was about and that many of the teachers 
in the schools were saying to us, and I happened to be with the Minister of Education on that particular 
tour, was that when there was one minister of Northern Saskatchewan to cover all the whole gamut of 
government in that large area, when did schools, that are strictly dealing with education and the training 
of young people, see the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan when he had all of this all-encompassing to 
do? But now that schools are under the Department of Education, where there’s expertise to deal with 
education and training, and caring people who care about schools, the Minister of Education goes to 
their schools. That was something of what the light in the children’s eyes was about. And that’s what the 
light in people’s eyes across Saskatchewan - north and south - has been all about since April 26, 1982. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would like to challenge the minister on some of his figures 
even though he goes on at length to say that the unemployment rate is only 36 per cent in the North. I 
would challenge the minister to tell me that that is not one of the highest areas of unemployment, not in 
Saskatchewan, but in fact in Canada, and you’re saying that it’s not a problem. But even that number, 
Mr. Chairman, I don’t believe is accurate. I have here a letter from his executive assistant, one by the 
name of Thomas T.J. Roy, executive assistant to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan - a recent letter. 
And I would like to quote from it: 
 

(a) Unemployment. Unemployment is running rampant in the North. It is unemployment which is 
the root of many northern’s other problems. Northern Saskatchewan is unique and special case 
where it comes to provision of government services, and chartering future developments. The 
majority of the west side communities are faced with soaring unemployment, and statistics 
indicate that at least 85 per cent of every individual community in the west side is crippled with 
unemployment. The social service department out of Buffalo Narrows have doubled their 
case-load since January of this year, and more applications are expected and anticipated for the 
remainder of this year. North Sask Native Outreach is an autonomous incorporated body 
established to assist native Northerners in seeking employment and training. 
 

Mr. Chairman, when the minister talks about the development and the projects which he has developed, 
and talks about how terrible it was under the previous administration, I would challenge him to say that 
he is doing a better job, whether it’s through the private sector . . . And if that’s what he believes is the 
tool to use to develop the North, that’s fine. But to do nothing, which is what you have done since you 
took over that department, in fact take away from the North, is morally irresponsible for you  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1376 

as a minister, and morally irresponsible for your government and the Premier of this province. When 
even your own people, your own EAs, are writing to you, telling you that unemployment is 85 per cent, I 
think it is irresponsible of you to come here and attempt to explain to us that it’s only 36 per cent, when 
in fact documents of your own people - your hired political people - are telling you what a terrible state 
northern Saskatchewan is in, and even since January the 1st of this year. This has nothing to do with the 
previous administration. This has to do with inactivity in tourism, inactivity in housing development by 
your department and Sask Housing. 
 
It’s my understanding that in 1982, the summer of 1982, not one house was built in the North by Sask 
Housing. And if you’re saying that the private sector is going to move in and do the job for you, that’s 
fine. But tell me the private sector developers who are in the North doing the job where you have pulled 
your operation out? And I’m not fighting against free enterprise; if that’s what you believe in, then get it 
up there and get it to work. But don’t condemn us for the job that we were doing in creating houses, 
because you have two options: one is to do it through the public sector, through Sask Housing, and the 
other is the road you have chosen and that is to do nothing. And that’s an option; and you have chosen it. 
 
But I’m saying the attempt that we’d had to build houses . . . And there were problems, and I’ll readily 
admit there were problems. But the choice that we made was to do something, even given the mistakes 
that were involved. Your choice, Mr. Minister, is to do nothing. And I say that a government’s choice of 
doing nothing is irresponsible and will not be accepted by the people of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure that the comments about doing nothing . . . In all of 
our discussions here last night and earlier today we’ve talked about some of the things that we are doing, 
and they are substantial. They are substantial. So for the hon. member to say we’re doing nothing, well, I 
guess we really . . . For the sake of the time of the committee and so on, there’s no reason to get into a 
debate about that. Because we are doing something, and we are doing substantial work in the North. 
 
As far as the housing starts go in northern Saskatchewan, you talk about 11 years of having your stamp 
on the things that you did, and that when we’ve gone a different direction . . . You have even now agreed 
that it’s fine to do that. And that’s wonderful. But I would say that . . . And my colleague, the minister 
who’s in charge of Sask Housing, Mr. Hardy, had a tremendous problem with cleaning up a good deal of 
what went on with the housing branch and all of that sort of thing. That’s one year ago. But we’ve taken 
over the administration there, and I can tell you, it goes back to what I said earlier to your colleague from 
Quill Lakes when he said, ‘We gave, we gave.’ 
 
I would say that the philosophy of the former department and the former administration was: where 
there’s a problem and there’s some heat involved you just go and pour money on and try to put the fire 
out. And that’s exactly what you did in northern Saskatchewan, and you can’t deny that. And we do not 
believe in throwing money at problems in order to try to solve them, because you don’t solve problems 
by throwing money on them; you don’t throw any money. There’s no development, Mr. Chairman, no 
long-term development can take place . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman: — Excuse me, the minister is trying to answer the question and make comments. 
With the noise it’s very difficult to hear him. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — So there’s no long-term development, Mr. Chairman, in our  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1377 

view, that can take place with that type of a philosophy of just throwing the money on the problem 
without identifying the long-term methods upon which you can solve them. 
 
In answer to some of your specifics, I would say: I don’t deny, and nobody that’s being honest with 
themselves or with the people of the province or with their colleagues, would deny that unemployment is 
a serious problem in northern Saskatchewan. I’ve said that - how many times? It’s a serious problem; 
certainly, it is a serious problem. But it’s a serious problem in northern Canada. It’s a serious problem 
across northern Canada. In the isolated communities of northern Canada, unemployment is a serious 
problem. There’s no question about that. So I don’t think we will gain much by carrying on the 
discussion of that, because basically I’m agreeing with him: unemployment’s a problem. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I suppose we can all agree that unemployment is a problem because anyone who 
would suggest that it wasn’t would be anything but being honest with themselves and the people of the 
province. The point is, is what we are doing about it. And I say that very little is being done by this 
government, and you’re not the only one who is included in this blame. 
 
I know the Minister of Highways, in this area as well, had $6 million in the budget, when he came to 
office, for northern highway development. He cancelled that totally, and then a few months later sent out 
a news release as if he was a great hero, announcing $1.5 million for northern highways. And I say that 
that kind of playing around with politics, and playing around with the taxpayers’ money, and playing 
around with the people of the North, is not acceptable. 
 
When I talk about Sask Housing and their problems in creating jobs and building houses, that’s not the 
only problem. I have heard that many, many people in the North have been sent notices from Sask 
Housing that they are being asked to move out of their houses, Sask Housing houses, because they 
cannot pay the rent - which has been raised once or twice since this government came to power. And the 
suggestion is, is to kick the people out of the houses and board them up. 
 
Now, if that’s the Conservative government policy for solving the problems in the North, I say that it’s 
ridiculous and something that you should take a look at and your cabinet should take a look at. Because 
in developing the North, whether you choose to do it, as I mentioned earlier, through the private sector 
. . . 
 
If you’re saying public sector, putting of money into is wrong, I’ll agree with you. I’ll not agree with you, 
but I’ll allow you that privilege to say that public investment in the North is wrong. That’s your 
philosophy. But then you have a responsibility as a free enterpriser and a capitalist to see that your 
capitalist friends go to northern Saskatchewan and carry out the development, because to do what you’re 
doing, which is nothing, is not acceptable. 
 
Therefore when we see the fact that in dealing with throwing money at issues in the province, I can tell 
you you’ve thrown money at the oil companies, and I’ll mention Imperial Oil who had profits of $600 
million in 1981, and you can explain to me how they were the most likely people to throw money at. But 
I’ll stand on our record that where we put money into people in the North was far more moral than where 
you put money the day you came to office - $130 million to the oil companies - every one of  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1378 

which showed profits for the past 10 years. 
 
And what I would like to suggest to the minister, that he look very carefully at the priorities of this 
government because I say they’re on the wrong road. Politically you may be wise in what you’re doing, 
but morally you are terribly wrong because there are many people suffering as a result of your politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, this is very tempting. If he missed . . . This member talks to be 
about, politically this is wise. Well, I’ll say when you talk about something that’s wise, politically or 
whatever, you’re talking about what the people of Saskatchewan told that group what they wanted done 
with northern Saskatchewan and with many other things that they’d been doing, under the guise of what 
that member would so sanctimoniously stand here . . . (inaudible) . . . about morals. That’s something 
that I take a great deal of offence to, coming from the member from Shaunavon. I will not have him 
stand there and talk to me about what’s morally right and what’s morally wrong. 
 
We are accepting responsibility for the social problems of northern Saskatchewan. My colleague, the 
Minister of health, has been better accepted in northern Saskatchewan by people involved in the health 
services than any other minister of Northern Saskatchewan ever was. And my colleague, the Minister of 
Education, as has been admitted by several of your people over there, has been well received by people 
in northern Saskatchewan who are concerned with education, with retraining and with training, which is 
the basis, and one of the basic things that must be done. 
 
And our budget of March 29th pointed that out, Mr. Chairman, that the important problem and economic 
development of the North, as well as across this province has to do, as much as anything else, with 
training, with training of our young people, with education so that people can be ready for the jobs of the 
‘80s and the ‘90s and into the future. Those are long-term solutions; that’s why the money goes into 
those long-term things. That’s why the Minister of Education and continuing education in this province, 
in this government, is well received in the North by people who are concerned with education and with 
their families. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — That’s why that Minister of Health is well received when he talks about the 
health concerns of northern people. That’s why I’m well received in communities in northern 
Saskatchewan, because I’ve addressed the problems that are serious . . . (inaudible) . . . And that’s why 
this ridiculous sanctimonious preaching to us about morals in this House is so ridiculous, and appears 
ridiculous to everybody who is watching through that television camera, and everybody who would ever 
watch you in this committee. You are being absolutely ridiculous with this approach - absolutely 
ridiculous. The people of northern Saskatchewan have no time for it either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — May I have order? The member for Quill Lakes has a question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I think it is a moral question. I think unemployment is a moral question. I 
want to say that the Catholic bishops in their social program said that  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1379 

society has a moral obligation to see that people receive employment. And you’re going to stand up and 
indicate that we have no right to address you in respect of our concerns for hundreds of people in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say that you criticize our program as being handouts and what you have substituted is a vacuum 
of nothing. You are able to give welfare to the rich, the oil companies, $150 million, $130 million, 
without blinking an eye - without blinking an eye. But to the poor, the undertrodden of northern 
Saskatchewan, you have left deserted, Mr. Minister. You have left them deserted, and you know it. You 
have no economic program in place. And it’s rather interesting, members of this Assembly, that as soon 
as someone wants to discuss what is going on in northern Saskatchewan, they are branded. 
 
There are two classes, I guess, of citizens, according to the minister, because if they stand up and want to 
discuss northern issues, he calls them ‘that radical group.’ They are northern, my friend, Northerners, 
and they have a right to speak out and to participate in what’s going on. I would like to ask the minister 
if he, in fact, can define that group which is so-called radicals. Will he define to the legislature who in 
fact is this great radical group which is opposing him, apparently - opposing his plan to do nothing? 
Opposing his plan to do nothing, and they’re called radicals. So I want to specifically ask the minister: 
will he, in fact, designate who these radicals are in northern Saskatchewan, these undesirable citizens of 
northern Saskatchewan, as he has designated? So, for the record, will you indicate to us: who are all the 
radicals? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe if you would ask your member from Athabasca he 
could tell you every one of them. They were the people who were out after his nomination with the - the 
last time within your party - under the auspices and with the help of the member from Cumberland at 
that time, and on and on. But, anyway, I won’t get into that. The radical group that I made reference to, 
and just in a comment regarding some of them, and there are one or two in each of these communities - 
not in each of the communities, in several of the communities. But I would say that the . . . when I’m 
speaking about Northerners and northern people, I’m talking about the solid folks that are in every 
community, the majority, by far the greatest majority of northern people, that are well represented by 
people like the member from Athabasca, who will also identify that same element that I talked to you 
about, by the way. So why don’t you ask him about it? He’ll tell you about who they are and how they’re 
cutting down on the proposals for development in his constituency. Now there’s a Northerner, if you 
want to talk about Northerners. 
 
And it’s just such a strange thing when you stand here - and I would say, in a very sanctimonious way - 
and talk to us, and I include the member from Athabasca in that, to us who have lived in northern 
Saskatchewan about that. And I would say you have every right, sure, get up and ask these questions all 
you want and continue this committee in the venue that you have now and continue to dig yourself a hole 
even deeper than the one that you found yourself in a year ago. And you’ll find yourself with no 
members in this House, if you continue this kind of thing. How will the people of Saskatchewan ever, 
ever take you seriously with this kind of an approach to the long-term development in northern 
Saskatchewan or anywhere else? So don’t preach to us about morals. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to indicate here, Mr. Chairman, that I think what we should look at clearly 
here is the priorities of this government - the priorities here in northern Saskatchewan, where more 
attention needs to be directed than anywhere in  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1380 

Saskatchewan because of the high unemployment. And this government says, ‘We can’t do anything; it’s 
long-term.’ That’s the essence of the minister’s statement. 
 
Here we are today, concerned with up to 85 per cent unemployment in community after community. And 
I would think that that is a relevant discussion for this legislature - very relevant. But I would go on to 
say that what, when we had an opportunity to discuss the crisis of Saskatchewan, the members opposite 
brought in a flag debate a month old, from Manitoba. 
 
They had an opportunity here to discuss an issue of burning concern to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, and what did they do? They went and dragged out an issue which, for political purposes, 
tried to use for political purposes. Here they had an opportunity, an opportunity to deal and to show and 
to demonstrate to the people of this province that this government has concern, has compassion, has a 
direction for the people of this province. But not that. They didn’t deal with any issue which was of 
concern to the people of this province. They dragged something out of Manitoba - a month old - not even 
relevant, shouldn’t even been in this House. 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman: — I’d like the member to stay on the subject. We needn’t get carried away off on 
some other tangent. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I understand what you’re saying. I take your comments. There’s a lot of members, Mr. 
Chairman, who do a lot of talking from their seat, but I certainly don’t hear them getting into the debate. 
And I could name a few of them, because they want to talk from their seat because they aren’t allowed to 
talk from their feet. 
 
So what I want to say here is that the evidence that has been put forward by the Minister of Northern 
Saskatchewan is one that he is opposed to what the previous government was doing in respect to 
development of the North. We ask him: what is his policy to replace that? And he says some very 
long-term plan. And when we ask him, tell him that there’s 85 per cent unemployment in this province 
in northern Saskatchewan, we ask him what he has done during the course of 11 months, and he 
indicates two or three small projects. He has not indicated to us an economic plan of development in 
order to create jobs. 
 
Certainly, in the South here, what we have done is to put into place a program for the hiring some 
students, and hiring some who are unemployed. But specifically the North is an area quite different from 
the South. And I want to ask the minister: has he any immediate plans in order to alleviate the heavy 
unemployment in northern Saskatchewan? What are his immediate plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Chairman, the member talks about 11 years of all that they did, and the 
problems are still with us. What I would say to what we have done in the last year: by and large has been 
an extremely frustrating exercise but a very necessary exercise in clean-up, and it’s under way and it’s 
ongoing. And we remember, and I hope the hon. member will remember clearly what a judge of the 
Provincial Court of Saskatchewan said, Judge Noble, that DNS had become a bureaucracy run amok, 
which is a very strong statement coming from a judge in a series of fraud cases. 
 
We talked earlier about some of the problems that my colleague, the minister of Sask Housing, has had 
with the housing developments, and what was northern housing, and all of those projects. A clean-up. 
And I can tell you, Mr. Chairman, and I tell the committee today that there were some serious problems 
there. And so we don’t  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1381 

apologize for that, and we will never apologize to the people of Saskatchewan, and I will certainly not 
apologize to this committee for undertaking a clean-up of something that had run amok as the judge said. 
Never will we apologize for that because we believe those are the kinds of things that were going on 
under the former administration - some of those same sanctimonious people involved in the 
administration on their cabinet benches. And we don’t apologize for cleaning up what the people of 
Saskatchewan said: ‘Boys, you’re gone because of those kinds of acts.’ And they are gone, and most of 
those . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — So, if they’re trying to get me apologize for spending a year in attempting to 
clean up the department . . . We’ve started with a clean-up of the department, and I’m sure that it’s under 
way, and it’s gone very well, and it’s been well received by an awful lot of people in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well I don’t know, Mr. Chairman, if there’s any reason to carry this on any 
further, but it’s beyond me when I look at the members who represent that area. And last night we 
carried on this debate on these estimates for three hours. Excellent. An excellent debate in the sense that 
we went to the crux of the issues. We talked about what’s there in northern Saskatchewan, and we talked 
about the problems that are there and agreed that they have to be addressed, and they are being 
addressed. And in fact the member from Cumberland on several occasions last night commended the 
department, and commended the government for some of the things that we’re doing - specific things. 
That’s the kind of co-operation that we would look for from responsible elected members of this 
Assembly. That’s the kind of co-operation that I urge the . . . and I believe have received from the 
members who represent northern Saskatchewan. 
 
In a sense, we’ve said, ‘Look you do no service to your people,’ is what I was saying last night. You do 
no service to the people that you represent in the constituencies that you represent by coming here and 
adopting the gloom and doom type of negative attitudes that comes totally as a result of sitting in caucus 
with some of the other members who have seen fit to enter into this debate today. And so now we have 
some positive members who have identified some real problems, and have come and said, yes, we’d like 
to talk about these things in a positive and co-operative ways. But they’re being tainted by some of the 
doom and gloom stuff and I would say the Opposition Whip is probably the best example of that, that is 
in that group of eight over there. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I don’t want to belabour the points that are being 
made here; I simply want to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues for verifying and supporting 
many of the points that I raised here in the three-hour debate over the estimates being discussed today. I 
take exception though, Mr. Chairman, to the fact that the hon. member for Meadow Lake has stated a 
figure, quoting the unemployment rating in northern Saskatchewan as being 36 per cent. That is, Mr. 
Chairman, grossly, grossly misleading the people of this province. That is grossly misleading this 
Assembly in terms of the disparities in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman. 
 
People in the North, themselves, elected members of the northern administration  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1382 

district, including various organizations like SLANG (Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local 
Governments) and SANC (Saskatchewan Association of Northern Communities), and the native 
organizations, AMNSIS (Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan) being one 
official representative of the native people in the northern administration district, have voiced a 
tremendous amount of concern with respect to the high unemployment in northern Saskatchewan. There 
is unemployment in northern Saskatchewan, at the very minimum 85 per cent, and at the maximum at 
least 98 per cent, at the maximum in many of the northern communities. 
 
Now, when the minister comes here, when the minister that is responsible to advocate for the people of 
northern Saskatchewan, when the minister is here doing estimates with the official opposition of the 
province and states to this Assembly that employment in northern Saskatchewan is only 36 per cent, I 
have to take exception. I have to take exception because that is grossly misleading the House, as well as 
misleading the people of this province. 
 
I attended a meeting with the minister present on the 24th of March, where we had representatives from 
various local communities - from the east side, from the far northern regions, and from the west side. 
People were represented there by elected officials at the community level. They were also represented by 
various native groups, and they wanted to get some direction, some answers from the minister that is 
supposed to be responsible with advocating for the people of the northern half of this province. They 
came in there with an open mind. They came in there with an open spirit of co-operation. And they 
wanted to discuss the serious issues that relate to their community, to their environment, to the top half 
of this province. I took exception then, and I take exception today, to the performance of that minister 
that is supposed to represent northern Saskatchewan, because when the minister was asked at this 
particular meeting, with reference to various serious issues, he perpetuated confrontation to the extent 
that he did not respond in a manner that was expected from a minister that was responsible for the 
people of the top half of this province. He did not respond to the serious questions regarding local 
government; he did not respond to questions regarding training and education; he did not respond to 
questions regarding the housing programs and the housing problems in northern Saskatchewan; he did 
not respond to questions raised about the surface lease agreements that were of prime concern to that 
particular group of people. 
 
There were people there, Mr. Chairman, there were people there - elected officials - that were arguing 
with respect to serious issues related to . . . One, for example, I’ll use: the surface lease agreements. 
Those surface lease agreements are very important for the people of northern Saskatchewan, because it 
gives them a bit of recognition, recognition to the extent where at least there is emphasis and special 
consideration given to that group of people because of the disparities that exist in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When the minister was asked with respect to the surface lease agreements, and I also raised the question 
in this House with respect to the surface lease agreements, the minister stated at the time that they were 
looking, they were looking at possibly revising the surface lease agreements. I can’t remember exactly 
the words that he used at the time. I believe it was ‘retention of rate of employees’ or something. That is 
the first time that the people at this particular meeting ever heard of that expression. Later on, at this 
House, in this Legislative Assembly, I got up and raised the question during question period and asked 
the minister whose advice he was taking in terms of changing that policy. Well, he responded back 
saying that he had consulted some individuals. I got  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1383 

back to him and I asked: ‘Did you have a formal submission or proposal given to you by any group or 
organization or elected leaders in northern Saskatchewan?’ And his response was no. 
 
I ask the members of this House, the government of the day: where are they taking their direction from? 
Because the fact remains - I’ve stated it before - the North is shrinking. The province is shrinking. The 
North doesn’t exist with this administration. The top half of the province no longer exists. I’ve stated it 
before and I’ll state it again: members of this government seem to think that the province ends in 
P.A.-Duck Lake, the province ends at Meadow Lake. Well I’ll tell the members again, and I’ve told them 
before, that people exist, communities exist, north of Meadow Lake and north of Prince Albert. 
 
That northern administration district, Mr. Chairman, is a vast area. It’s a vast area and it has 46 
settlements. It seems to me, Mr. Chairman, that possibly the only time that this administration, that this 
government, will recognize northern Saskatchewan is when the private sector - the multinational 
corporations - will be prepared, when this government will be prepared to give away the valuable 
resources that we have in the northern administration district. It seems to me that is the only time that 
this government will ever recognize the disparities in northern Saskatchewan. The only time they’ll 
recognize the North is when they want our valuable resources. That is about the only time that they’ll 
ever come to recognize northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I point out again, and I’ve pointed it out before during one of our recent debates, that we have a lot of 
disparities in northern Saskatchewan - a high unemployment rate. We have, Mr. Minister, 85 to 98 per 
cent unemployment. We have a high welfare dependency roll. I have figures here compared from 
February of this year to February of last year which indicate to me that there has been a 30 per cent 
increase in the welfare case-load in northern Saskatchewan from 1,400 up to 1,826. Now that was, the 
figures that I took our were two months old. I would assume now, today, that you have quite a 
substantial increase since February. 
 
I take exception with what the minister has stated as well, with respect to the well-received program that 
he has for northern Saskatchewan. He mentioned a while ago that he has a program that his government, 
that his administration has been accepted by residents of northern Saskatchewan. I want to say to the 
minister, last night during our three-hour debate on estimates I asked you about a letter that you wrote on 
July the 16th, whereby you referred to this master plan of yours to resolve the problems that exist. 
 
You pointed out that you had a plan regarding a self-sufficiency economic development program. You 
also had a plan for local government. I asked the minister last night, and I’ve asked him before, and I’ll 
ask the minister again - where is that plan? When can the northern administration district and the people 
in those various communities that I’ve mentioned expect to receive some indication as to what your 
economic development plans are to alleviate the high unemployment roll, the high welfare case-load that 
exists in that northern administration district? 
 
I just want to go on, Mr. Chairman, and show the members of this Legislative Assembly the memo that 
he wrote on July the 16th. I’ve kept it, and I’ve discussed it, and I’ve raised questions with respect to this 
memo. And I will continue to raise questions with respect to that memo. 



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1384 

One of the things that I’ve noted with respect to this government, Mr. Chairman, is the fact that they 
neglect to consult, to involve, and to have public participation in many of their programs and many of 
their policies. When the minister wrote, for an example, this memo, he directed this memo to the staff. 
He didn’t direct it to the people that were affected at the community level. That is why I say people at the 
local level are confused. They are being kept in the dark with respect to this government’s approach for 
northern development. They don’t know what the minister is doing, what this government is doing, to 
help alleviate many of the disparities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The memo was written and directed to the civil service component. Now I have no qualms with the civil 
service component in La Ronge, but at the same time if the minister was sincere in his public 
participation talks, in his consultation talks, in his public involvement talks, he would have directed that 
and his approach to northern development would have involved northern leaders, northern leadership. It 
would have involved the LCAs, the LACs, the three incorporated centres, the two native organizations - 
the FSI, AMNSIS (Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of Saskatchewan). It would have 
involved the Northern Lights School Division. It would have involved many of the representative groups 
that live in northern Saskatchewan. But at present, to this point in time, Mr. Chairman, people are quite 
frustrated. They still don’t see what this government has in terms of services, programs, and major 
initiatives in respect to social and economic programs for northern Saskatchewan. They still wait and 
hope that we will have some form of direction provided to us. 
 
With respect to the estimates in front of us, Mr. Chairman, I want to raise a question with the minister 
again. You have . . . And we discussed economic development time and time again, last night, and prior 
to that, and again today. With respect to your allocation of $1.4 million, Mr. Minister, what is the criteria 
for clients at the community level? What is the criteria? What is your policy with respect to the 
distribution of this fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I think, Mr. Chairman, I’ll be pleased to answer the question. There’s no 
problem with that. I would make this comment to the hon. member, and I mentioned, as well, that we 
went through that and he will know, as well, that we went through many of the same questions last night. 
I do notice that the hon. member has got a little audience of some of the folks from the North today, and 
now he’s repeating the questions, and that’s fine, and I’m glad it’s a . . . But anyway I would say to the 
. . . I would say that the criteria under item 15 that you mention, that the people would be able to come 
forward, and if the project is feasible and is demonstrated to have social benefit and various other things 
like that, then that money would be available for certain grants. But certainly we would be very careful 
to look at the feasibility and viability of it, and we’re not there to just throw money onto more money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’d like to ask the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan a couple of questions because 
of the issue raised by the opposition that . . . their allegations that the government had a moral obligation 
in northern Saskatchewan to continue the practices of the previous government. And I would like to . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Order, order, order. The Attorney-General is making a statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m sure that the public is well aware of the allegations made by the opposition. And 
I wonder . . . And I will preface my question with a few examples. This is the policy of the New 
Democratic Party when it was in government. This is Northern  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1385 

Saskatchewan loaning policy: $2,500 loan to - I’ll give the individual’s name if the members opposite 
want - $2,500 loan; purpose: pool room; purchase, two professional pool tables - one Brunswick 
Ranchero pool table, one Brunswick AM 130 pool table, and one Bob Wood shuffleboard table. This is 
the type of business enterprise that the NDP promoted. What happened, of course, was that it 
immediately went into default. It was not viable in the first place. It was strictly the handout, the 
demeaning handout give-away, which I think is a greater moral wrong than anything the hon. members 
could come up with. 
 
Let me give you another example: $4,000 for a hockey school. The individual was unsuccessful. After 
getting the money, immediately after getting the money, was unsuccessful in establishing the hockey 
school due to his lack of management experience in limited population base, as well as from heavy 
drinking. 
 
I give you some other examples. I give you some other examples that . . . $50,000 loan. Nothing ever 
came about it. Nothing ever arose from some of these examples, even a start-up to let individuals go into 
business. Some questionable financial transactions were made by the client leaving him in an unenviable 
cash flow. Problems arose immediately. 
 
Here’s another one, a clothing store. This is before it even opened up and the money’s handed over. 
Like, it didn’t even start up. The individual soon realized that the project was uneconomical due to, 
primarily, underfinancing and a lack of management expertise. Attempts to refinance failed, so she 
decided not to proceed any further. 
 
Here’s one, Mr. Speaker, where they didn’t even put the purpose of the loan down. The individual was to 
go into the theatre business, I gather - a $1,100 loan, for someone to go into the theatre business. So they 
got an 8mm projector and an 8mm screen (an 8 x 8 foot screen). Someone’s to go into business with 
these two items. With these two . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Let’s have some names. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m prepared to give them. I don’t think it serves the individual any benefit, but I’m 
sure that the hon. members opposite would love to have these peoples’ names dragged before the public. 
 
So here’s why the business failed, Mr. Chairman. The NDP don’t want to hear this, but here’s why the 
business failed. Because the client was not fully set up to run a commercial venture, the fact that he had 
his 8mm projector and an 8 x 8 screen, and believe it or not one of the reasons for the failure is that he 
could not compete with television. He couldn’t compete with television, that’s one of the reasons for the 
loan default. No regular show dates, and very poor films. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I give these by way of example, or Mr. Chairman. I give these by way of example, because 
nothing is more demeaning to an individual than a straight handout, pouring money on some slipshod 
excuses. We’re far better off . . . I believe the hon. minister is quite correct when he said that the 
problems are long-term, that the problems have to be dealt with in a constructive and a substantive 
nature. The idea of just throwing money for pool halls and pool tables and shuffleboard tables, that is the 
demeaning attitude, and I say morally sick attitude of the New Democratic Party when it ran Northern 
Saskatchewan. And I ask the minister responsible for Northern Saskatchewan if he sees any morality, 
any morality, and any benefit in the type of loan programs brought about by the New Democratic Party 
when it was government? 



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1386 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, in answer to the hon. member’s question, certainly not. When I indicated 
to the committee before . . . When I indicated to the committee before . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The Minister is trying to make a statement. I need order, we can’t hear him through 
the noise. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — When I indicated to the committee before that a good deal of this past year, Mr. 
Chairman, has been spent in a clean-up operation, and the examples that the Attorney-General has raised 
here are a few, a very few of many, many, many examples - and many of them much more substantive 
than those, in terms of dollar cost as well. But when I indicated that we do have a grant program for 
economic development in northern Saskatchewan, the hon. member from Cumberland asked about what 
would be the criteria. Certainly we would look at feasibility; we look at viability; we look at something 
that can have some long-term benefit. And that’s just the difference. The kinds of examples that are 
raised by the Attorney-General are the kinds of examples that the people of Saskatchewan said to us, 
‘Clean that up and let’s go at this thing in a reasonable way,’ and that’s what we’re doing in our 
department now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had no intentions of getting into this debate again 
today, as I indicated I was through with my questioning the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, but I 
see that the Attorney-General has decided to get into this and to slur all the business people in northern 
Saskatchewan, and the ventures that were going on in northern Saskatchewan. And that’s nothing new 
for the Attorney-General, Mr. Chairman. I go back to when we talked about the youth camps for young 
offenders in northern Saskatchewan, the dirty camps, and the type of insinuations that he brought before 
Northerners in this legislature, and I’m not really that surprised that he would get up here today and 
bring Northerners down the way he has brought them down today. 
 
Mr. Chairman, he talks about businesses in northern Saskatchewan, and small businesses such as 
poolrooms, and clothing stores that never got started, and theatres. And as I indicated in the House the 
other night when I spoke, when I asked that a committee be formed to travel into northern Saskatchewan 
and just see what the conditions are in the North . . . And then he would realize that in these small, 
isolated communities a poolroom is a viable source for an individual to start up, and it’s also part of the 
social life that individuals in that community need, and we address them. 
 
But when he got up and spoke today, he spoke of the poolrooms, and he spoke of the theatre with the 
wrong projector, but, Mr. Chairman, he omitted to talk about all the other loans that went into northern 
Saskatchewan and successful ventures that were carried out. And I also want to point out that when the 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan set up that loan fund in northern Saskatchewan, that the citizens 
of northern Saskatchewan, not only were they isolated, but they had no way of borrowing any money. I 
ask you, if you’re living in Camsell Portage and you’re 600 miles away from the nearest bank in 
Meadow Lake, how are you going to borrow any money to start a poolroom? And I ask you, if you’re in 
La Loche and you’re 300 miles away from the nearest bank in Meadow Lake . . . And that’s what 
Northerners had to go through. There was no banking institutions for them to borrow any money. And 
they are still not there. 



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1387 

And sure there was going to be failures, but for the Attorney-General to get up in this legislature and 
point out that the failures were the poolrooms and some of these businesses that went broke, I tell you 
there’s a lot of people have gone broke in southern Saskatchewan. Not only did they go broke just in the 
last few years but they went broke for many, many years, as long as this was a province. But to zero in 
on the citizens of northern Saskatchewan and to omit the successful operations that are going on there 
and I ask you . . . That’s why this committee should go into northern Saskatchewan and take a look at 
some of the successful ventures - some of the successful cafes that have started up with money from this 
government, and are paying back their loans, garages that have paid back their loans. The fishing 
industry is going ahead, and a lot of them loans are being paid back. Trapping loans are being paid back, 
bush operations, and they’re being paid back. 
 
Naturally, there had to be chances. There’s high risk. But I tell you, this government that sits on the other 
side of this House is taking high risks when they will guarantee $32 millions to Batoni-Hunter to build 
an arena in Saskatoon - I think that’s high risk. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — And I don’t think that the Attorney-General has the right to stand up in this House 
and create the type of slur that he has on the citizen of northern Saskatchewan and their businesses. And 
like I said before, I could expect that from him because of the fact that he has made them slurs before on 
the types of dirty . . . (inaudible) . . . and dirty hospitals, and that type. 
 
But I ask the Attorney-General to think this over again before he gets up in this House, and if he wants to 
bring out some of these cases, let’s hear about some of the success stories that we have. Let’s not zero in 
on things that are all bad. 
 
I want to also say that when you take a look at northern Saskatchewan today, and you take a look at what 
it was like 10 years ago, it’s quite a difference. With the types of housing and roads and schools and 
everything we have in northern Saskatchewan, it’s there now. The only thing now that we’re lacking is 
that economic base. I ask you to address that economic base, and not stand up in this House and slur the 
citizens of northern Saskatchewan. And if you’re going to get up and do it, give us some of the success 
stories, don’t zero in on the failures. 
 
Mr. Chairman, as I said before, I did not want to get back into this debate. I had indicated that I was 
through questioning the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, and the only reason I’m up on my feet is 
because the Attorney-General decided, in his wisdom, to take part in the estimates of DNS. And with 
that, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I think, Mr. Chairman, the points that were made in reply to this question 
regarding economic development grant fund, and so on . . . There’s no question, there were some 
successes. But what has been pointed out, and what I want to very clearly point out, is that there were 
some failures, and they were based on the fact that the criteria regulations left a great deal to be desired. 
During this clean-up process that I referred to earlier, we have addressed that. We have addressed it 
responsibly, and I don’t know what more can be said about it. And we continue to address those kinds of 
things in a responsible way because we take it very, very seriously, when we as a government spend or 
reallocate taxpayers’ dollars in this  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1388 

province. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, I want first of all to say how little the contribution to this estimates here today was 
made by the Attorney-General. As my colleague indicated, he picked out two or three individual items to 
slur northern Saskatchewan. Clearly does it indicate the disrespect that this government has. A man 
holding one of the highest offices in this province will stand up and give examples of failures. 
 
What I want to point out, Mr. Minister, we have banks - commercial banks - which borrow money, and 
many of those loans which they make, there is a failure of payment, no doubt about it. We have Sedco 
(Saskatchewan Economic Development Corporation), which we have established to assist business 
communities, primarily in the South. And I want to say, there are failures there also. 
 
And I want to say, in respect to your grant program, I ask you: can you give to us, since your criticisms 
seem to be based on some failures, I ask you, can you give us a guarantee that in respect to your 
economic development loans and the grants which you put forward, can you give us the guarantee that 
there will be no failures? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I can’t give you the guarantee that there’ll be no failures, but I certainly have no 
hesitation in giving you the guarantee that there’ll be far less failures than there were under your 
administration. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And I want to say, very glib answer, Mr. Chairman, because obviously he’ll have a 
lower rate of failure, because obviously he’s doing nothing in northern Saskatchewan. And if one does 
not venture out to do something, it’s very difficult to fail. And that is exactly what is happening with this 
government. 
 
And I want to say that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and I’ll say it just as soon as when I feel like it, just 
as soon as I like. The member from Moosomin, who seldom enters the debate, stood up while I was on 
the floor . . . Never gets into any debates. All he can do is sit there on his seat and heckle. I want to say, 
Mr. Minister, that you have demonstrated to this House that your government has essentially deserted the 
northern part of this province. You have clearly indicated in your response and the goodness of your 
approach that you have no economic program for the development of the North. 
 
And I want to say that if your criticism merely is against the progress that we have made in the North, 
that you will not indeed receive the support of the people of this province. 
 
I want to close in saying that you believe in welfare for the rich and the oil companies - no problem 
there. There’s a new welfare taking place in this province: welfare for the rich, the friends of your party. 
But I’ll tell you: nothing for the people in northern Saskatchewan. 85 per cent unemployment, and the 
minister contradicts that and says there’s only 36. 
 
I ask the minister in closing, I ask the minister: have you done a projection of what the projected 
unemployment rate will be next year? Have you done any surveys and analysis as a result of your 
economic policies in the North, whether or not you will likely be able to decrease . . . use your figures, 
36 per cent; use mine, 85 per cent . . . What are the projections of addressing the high unemployment in 
northern Saskatchewan, where people are losing all hope for the future? What are your projections in 
respect to next year? 



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1389 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, as I have said, Mr. Chairman, we are addressing the problems. I would ask 
the hon. member if he has any projections for all of Canada, for the western world in unemployment for 
the next year. So to put that question that he’s asked me into perspective, does he have any projections 
for all of Canada, for the rest of the world, what the unemployment rate will be? I would say to you that 
the unemployment rate in northern Saskatchewan is being addressed and we believe in a long-term way. 
I don’t want to get into this in any more detail because we’ve talked about it before, last night, and on 
and on and on. 
 
I was interested in one comment from the hon. member and it was almost unbelievable to me. I believe 
he said something like, ‘You must venture out,’ and ‘to gain something.’ Which goes back to the old 
adage of nothing ventured, nothing gained. And that’s the first time that anyone in Saskatchewan or 
anywhere in Canada has ever heard a socialist using the motto: nothing ventured, nothing gained. It’s 
really strange. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I am shocked. I am absolutely shocked at the way in which this minister 
wants to dismiss the problems of northern Saskatchewan, with the callousness of his answer. He says, do 
I have the statistics for Canada, the unemployment statistics for Canada for next year? And I want to say: 
of course. The federal budget was brought down and it is expected to only decrease, in spite of the 
infusion, about half a per cent, from about 12.5 per cent down to 12. Here is an area of the province with 
85 per cent unemployment, and the minister says, ‘Well, we are going to look at it in the long term. No, 
we haven’t looked at unemployment,’ and he asks me a question. 
 
I’m asking you: have you done any analysis of what the unemployment is going to be relative to the 
economic development that you’re proposing for northern Saskatchewan next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, I would say that we haven’t done a detailed analysis and you don’t need a 
detailed analysis of unemployment when you recognize, as I have said many times in this committee, 
when we recognize that unemployment is far too high. We know that. So why would you want to spend 
a whole lot of money doing detailed analyses of the potential unemployment for next year? 
 
I’ve admitted to you, and everyone in Saskatchewan who’s a thinking person at all know that 
unemployment is too high in northern Saskatchewan. We know that it’s too high in all of Saskatchewan, 
even though in this province it’s the lowest it is in all of Canada. But we know, in this government, that 
it’s still too high. Okay. Why do we need an analysis of that? We know that that’s a problem. What I 
have said to the committee last night, what I’ve repeated to the committee today is that we are addressing 
it with some long-term solutions and we’re talking about retraining people for jobs. And that’s the crux 
of dealing with unemployment in any society. You know that if you search yourselves for it. And we 
know that. And we will be addressing it in an outcome. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I, again, am mystified at what the minister is saying. He says that here is the northern 
half of Saskatchewan. And he says he has done no analysis on employment or job projection for the next 
year. But I want to tell you that when they were dealing with Batoni-Hunter, the Premier came into this 
Assembly and he indicated all of the potential development of employment and benefits to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we have here in the whole northern half of the province, and we have a minister in  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1390 

charge of Northern Saskatchewan who, one, has not analysed the project of unemployment for the next 
year. Secondly, he has not, in fact, taken an analysis of the projects which he’s putting into place, and to 
give us the statistics as to the impact it will have on the employment. 
 
Are you telling us that you have no analysis of what the expected unemployment is to be next year? Are 
you telling us that you can give us no analysis of the economic thrust that your government is supposedly 
giving to the North, the impact insofar as creating jobs in the North? Are you telling us that you can give 
us neither the projected unemployment, nor the projected jobs, because of the economic development 
which you say is coming? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I said to the committee, unemployment in northern Saskatchewan has been high 
for many years,. Unemployment in Saskatchewan this year is high and is recognized by this government. 
It’s recognized to the point that this government has determined that we must act in that area. I’ve said 
that, and we’ve been through it, and I can give you the projection that next year unemployment will be 
high in northern Saskatchewan. Unemployment will be high, too high, next summer. Next year 
unemployment will be too high in northern Saskatchewan. No question about it. We will be addressing 
it, and we’ll be moving it, and we’ll be moving to economic development. 
 
And I’m interested in the member’s comments. When he stands here and talks about unemployment and 
what it means to the northern people, at the same time makes comparison - and now it’s interesting to 
hear from the member from Quill Lakes that the opposition caucus is against the development of 
Coliseum Holdings and the NHL franchise to Saskatchewan and all of the jobs that that will create for 
Saskatchewan citizens. I’m interested in his comments about that. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to indicate clearly that I want to object to the minister indicating where I stand in 
respect to the entry of the Blues. Certainly, I’m totally in favour of the development. I am totally in 
favour - I’m unqualified support of the Blues being located in Saskatchewan. I am, however, concerned 
by the government’s list because they have tabled no reports that we, in fact, could look and see . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Get off the topic. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — No, he raised the issue, and I want to say that it’s unfair, Mr. Chairman, and I think he 
should be called to order on a subject matter that isn’t even a . . . 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman: — I think that was mentioned . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Order! You 
mentioned the position with Batoni when you were making your statement before . . . (inaudible) . . . and 
then the statement . . . (inaudible) . . . so I would suggest to both members that we go ahead and get back 
to the Department of Northern Saskatchewan which is the topic on hand, and let’s get away from 
straying off to other departments or other things. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to indicate first of all that I don’t want the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, 
because he is unable to answer any questions in respect to his department, to try to side-track the 
attention by trying to establish where I stand on the project which has nothing to do with northern 
Saskatchewan. But why I raised the issue of Batoni-Hunter project in Saskatoon is that precisely the 
supporting documentation that came into this House by the Premier were all of the benefits and the 
employment  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1391 

accruing from it. And that is all well and good - very good. But I say here we have northern 
Saskatchewan, the northern half of this province, and today in estimates we can’t even get the minister to 
stand up and indicate what are the economic projects which he is proposing. And we cannot get him to 
indicate the likely job creation of the projects which he intends for northern Saskatchewan. Can you give 
that information, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we have gone through the projects that we’re proposing 
and that we’re talking about, and that we see as having some long-term benefits, certainly. We’ve gone 
through those this morning; we went through them last night, as I indicated earlier in this morning’s 
deliberations. We went through them once the member from Quill Lakes was in here as well, and already 
this morning, and it’s clearly on the record. So I don’t see why we should repeat it now for a third time, 
when I couldn’t see the sense in repeating them for the second time. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I said a while ago, a few days ago, that this government, the 
Conservative government of the day, will certainly leave its mark in northern Saskatchewan. I stated at 
the time that there is neglect, that there is ignorance, on behalf of the Conservative government, to the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. Facts and figures can’t . . . We can use the facts and figures and the 
performance of that administration. I told members of this Assembly that this government will leave its 
mark. That mark will be a high welfare dependency rate in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
It will have a lot of problems, a lot of social problems, alcoholism. It will leave its mark in terms of a 
higher unemployment rate in northern Saskatchewan. It will leave its mark of social unrest; that is what 
it will do. 
 
Now just a while ago the Attorney-General - and I take exception on behalf of the people that I represent 
- that he slurred northern residents. What he in fact did was jeopardize and distort potential people that 
may make an application for an economic development loan, for an economic development application 
pertaining to some local industry or other. What the Attorney-General has done today is a disgrace. It is a 
disgrace and it’s an embarrassment made on behalf of the members of this government. It’s an 
embarrassment. It’s a public embarrassment. 
 
I, for one, would never stoop so low as to bring out individual loan applications and smirk and slur the 
people that were involved in such transactions. 
 
I stated, a few days ago, to the minister responsible for DNS, that they should go into northern 
Saskatchewan and see the problems in the North themselves. And my colleague from Athabasca 
introduced a resolution here in the House asking for a committee to be assigned and to go into northern 
Saskatchewan and look at the disparities that exist. But that resolution was rejected by members of this 
Assembly. 
 
Well, I challenged the minister before, and I’ll challenge the minister and the cabinet again to go into the 
northern administration district and see for yourselves the problems that exist in the North. In fact I may 
put forth a resolution calling for a commission to study the social problems that we have in northern 
Saskatchewan: the high unemployment, the alcoholism problem, the high welfare dependency roll that 
we have in northern Saskatchewan. I believe, in all sincerity, if this government has any commitment 
whatsoever, if it has any understanding for minority groups, if they have  



 
April 22, 1983 
 

 
1392 

any confidence that they can do a job and hold up their heads and take on a responsibility as government 
of this province, they ought to be able to do that much. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I could, in reply to that, just respond to the hon. member in 
this way: it is my intention, and our intention as a government, to have many more of our members of 
this committee more aware of the problems of northern Saskatchewan. and there will be some trips into 
northern Saskatchewan this year by members of our caucus, and I would invite both members who 
represent those two constituencies, in some of them at least to be involved in meeting with our people, 
and showing the members of this caucus, of this government caucus, that is very concerned about social 
problems in all parts of the province. And you can certainly have the opportunity this summer to show a 
great number of members of our caucus the northern part of this province. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’ll certainly look forward to that meeting, Mr. Minister, and I hope that you will not hold 
these particular meetings that you talk about on an individual basis. I hope that you will go into northern 
Saskatchewan and hold a full-fledged northern area meeting, where you can, yourselves, the cabinet, will 
see for yourselves and hear for yourselves the serious issues that face people in northern Saskatchewan. 
And I’ll take you up on that offer, Mr. Minister. And for now, to close debate, Mr. Chairman, I have no 
further questions, and I suppose we can go into detail on the estimates. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 12 
 
Mr. Yew: — A brief question, Mr. Chairman, to the minister responsible for DNS. In terms of project 
management, Mr. Minister, what is the status of this branch? Is it still intact, or has that been dismantled 
and done away with entirely? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — What was project management is split between Sask Housing, I believe, and the 
Department of Highways. And the sewer and water construction, as I think we indicated to you last night 
in detailed questions about the various sewer and water projects in communities, still remains within 
DNS. 
 
Item 12 agreed to. 
 
Item 13 agreed to. 
 
Item 14 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — In the area of day care, I just want a point of clarification from the minister, 
whether he can inform me: do the same provisions apply to day care in what was DNS, apply to 
residents up there as southern Saskatchewan now, as a result of that change? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — The jurisdiction for day care in the North is under the Department of Social 
Services, as the hon. member will know. If you . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Do you want the 
answer? You want the answer to this . . . okay, day care in the northern part of the province is now under 
the Department of Social  



 
April 22, 1983 

 
1393 

Services, and the same rules apply as they do in southern Saskatchewan, I’m informed. 
 
Item 14 agreed to. 
 
Item 15 agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Capital Expenditure - Vote 27 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 27 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Vote 69 - Statutory 
 

The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:54 p.m. 
 


