



















































Hansard: March 08, 1983


2557 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

March 8, 1983 
 

The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 

Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Public Accounts Committee 
 

DEPUTY CLERK: — Mr. Glauser, from the standing committee on public accounts, presents the 

second report of the committee. The reports will be distributed immediately to members, and the full 

text will be printed in tonight’s Votes and Proceedings. 
 

MR. GLAUSER: — Mr. Speaker, it seems that the opposition are not prepared to go with this today, 

and have asked that it be put off till tomorrow. 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, point of order. I believe there is some confusion existing 

about whether the report from the public accounts committee should be recorded at this time. The 

opposition is in agreement that the report should be moved at this time. What we were asking for is that 

we be allowed adjournment of it because the chairman of that committee is not present, not that the 

report not be moved at this time. 
 

HON. MR. LANE: — Speaking to the point of order, my understanding was that we simply were going 

to move it tomorrow, I’m sorry that was my understanding, at the request of the opposition, and that’s 

fine with us. 
 

MR. GLAUSER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by the member for 

Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: 
 

That the report be taken into consideration tomorrow. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, Regina North is my constituency, just as an observation, because my 

young guests today are also from the constituency of Regina North. They are sitting in the west gallery, 

and I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to this Assembly, my grade 7 and 8 

students from St. Gregory School. They are accompanied here today by their teachers, Ted Zurowski, 

Roxanne Pelletier, Dan Folk and Peter Bresciani. Hopefully, they will find their visit to the legislature 

here today informational and educational. I look forward to meeting with them a little bit later, 

determining how they enjoyed our question period, and I ask all members to welcome them to this 

Assembly. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2558 

Recession in Saskatchewan 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier. I note in the press that he 

is quoted as giving an address in Toronto to a Toronto audience, in which he is directly quoted as 

follows: 

 

To heck with the recession. Saskatchewan has decided not to participate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with a 100 per cent increase in bankruptcies, a 62 per cent increase in unemployment, and 

a 44 per cent increase in employables on welfare since you took office, when will you agree that we 

have a recession? How many bankruptcies? How much unemployment? How many employables on 

welfare do we need to have before you will concede that we have a recession? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, it seems to me that the opposition is anxious to have a recession. 

If you would have had the opportunity to listen to my address in Toronto, you would have heard me 

talking about a positive attitude for Canadians, because we believe there is so much more we can be, not 

only in the province of Saskatchewan, but indeed across the country. I was very proud to stand in 

downtown Toronto and say, “This is the only province in the country with a net increase in jobs, because 

of the kinds of things that we’re doing.” 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — What about the gas tax? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — And gasoline tax, and 13 per cent mortgages, and a farm purchase program, 

and a rural gas distribution system. And the only province with substantial gains in housing starts. When 

the country is down by 52,000, we’re increasing. So, Mr. Speaker, all I did yesterday was share the 

positive attitude about, yes, we can make a difference if we don’t preach doom and gloom and wait for a 

recession, if we take the bull by the horns and create some economic activity, and that’s what we see 

here. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a supplementary to the Premier. He suggests that we 

would have enjoyed listening to him in Toronto. May I suggest and ask him why he does not give his 

speech to the CP Air people in Saskatchewan, who are shutting down their operations — not opening for 

business but closing for business? Why don’t you give the speech there and convince them? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — I’m not sure I understand the Northern Telecom. I thought they just signed a 

large contract, and they’re doing very well — $100 million . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The 

Saskatoon community seems to be quite happy with the expansion in Northern Telecom, from what I 

understand. 

 

With respect to Ipsco, I talked at length about Ipsco the other day with respect to the national energy 

program, our Ocelot application, the things that we could do in oil and in energy that have a major 

impact. Certainly our proposal for somewhere between $35 million and $50 million on a water pipeline 

over the next 10 years . . . Fairly major things that they were glad to see and are not condemning us for. 

They’re saying that it’s a very substantive offer. If the communities want to pick it up, certainly they 

could be 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2559 

putting people back to work. 

 

So those industries, like many others, would like to see the oil industry extremely strong in 

Saskatchewan. As you know, we’ve improved it dramatically, but there’s still so much more we can be. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, would the Premier care to comment on why, if the oil 

industry is improved so dramatically and there’s so much more we can be, the unemployment figure in 

December of 1982 in Estevan was twice what it was in December of 1981? Can he explain that in the 

context of “There’s so much more we can be”? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, if I have the correct figures here, Mr. Speaker, the provincial population 

is estimated to have grown by over 5,000 in 1982, 3,500 of which was due to net immigration into the 

province of Saskatchewan. Now, clearly, while a lot of these people were expanding in the oil patch and 

the oil industry in the province of Saskatchewan, they are coming from other parts of the country as 

well, and some of them bring their own people in. So all I can say is that, while we’re increasing jobs in 

a net fashion, the population is also going up, because this is a popular place to live. So as a 

consequence of the activities that took place in April of 1982, everybody wants to move to the province 

of Saskatchewan. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier. Not only do we not have 

recession, in his words, but we don’t have any facts. Will the Premier concede that the population of 

Saskatchewan is growing less rapidly in the last 10 months than it did in the previous year, and will he 

concede the fact that employment is growing far less rapidly? Will he concede the fact that in fact no 

new jobs have been created, or possibly on one calculation 2,000 new jobs, but that a normal year is 

11,000 new jobs in this province? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, despite the rest of Canada saying that they’re in a recession and 

not creating jobs, we decided to create jobs. So we’re the only province in the nation with a net increase 

in the number of people employed. Now that is statistically significant. It is politically significant. I 

would think it is significant in terms of the attitude of the members opposite versus the attitude of the 

members here. We say that we’re going to do something positive about employment positive about 

agriculture, positive about energy, and we have, and people appreciate it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. We all are in favor of positive attitudes. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a new question. Unfortunately, positive attitudes can’t be eaten, and they can’t be worn on 

your feet. I say to you, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Premier, and I ask this question: do you deny that between 

1971 and 1982, 11,000 new jobs were created January to January, and in the last 12 months, January to 

January, no new jobs have been created, on your own figures? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — No, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t concede that. I would go back and take note to 

get the information, but in 1982 there was a net increase in the number of 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2560 

jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, not a decrease. That much I can tell you for sure — about 1,000 

new jobs. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Short supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Will the Premier concede that the 

figures put out by the Department of Labor indicate that the employed workforce in Saskatchewan was 

415,000 in January 1981, and 415,000 in January 1982? That sounds like no increase to me. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — I’ll take note. 

 

Minimum Wage 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Labor, who is also the minister 

in charge of the status of women. Last week you issued a news release which you declared today to be 

International Women’s Day in Saskatchewan. My question to the minister is whether or not he will do 

something more than the empty rhetoric which this government is becoming so well-known for. In light 

of the fact that about 60,000 workers are presently on minimum wage, many of them women, can you 

announce today that you will be increasing the minimum wage to take care of the 50 cents an hour they 

have already lost, and some additional to make up for what they are losing day by day in face of the 

freezing of the minimum wage in Saskatchewan? 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, to answer the member’s question: no, I cannot announce 

today if there will be an increase in the minimum wage. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I wonder if the minister has any time frame 

that he is working in in order to give the people who are facing desperate times — increase in telephone 

rates and on and on — who have had their minimum wage frozen, have you got a timetable that you’re 

working on to let them know now when they can expect an increase? 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we are working on the minimum wage and I expect I’ll have 

an announcement to make within the next few days. 

 

Department of Labor — Women’s Division 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I find it interesting that the minister tells us again that he will 

have an announcement in several days. I think that’s the third or fourth time we’ve heard that. New 

question to the Minister of Labor. I wonder if you would do another thing for the women of 

Saskatchewan in order to help us celebrate this day you have proclaimed, and that would be giving a 

guarantee that the women’s division in the Department of Labor will not be cut as has been announced 

and recorded in the Leader-Post. 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot comment today on the press release that showed up 

in the Leader-Post yesterday. We will be discussing it and if there’s anything that the Premier wants to 

pass on about that in the reorganizational part of it, I’ll leave it up to him. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Short supplementary to the minister. Are you then saying that you will not 

give a guarantee to the women of Saskatchewan that the women’s division will not be eliminated or 

severely reduced as a result of the reorganization? Is that what you’re saying? 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2561 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, if I could respond to that. I will be making the announcements 

with respect to reorganization when the final decisions have been made on reorganization, and I will not 

comment on any more speculation and I will not make guarantees in terms of any particular 

departments, whether they grow or increase or whatever. When we are ready to make the 

announcements, I’ll make them. 

 

Economic Policies for Northern Saskatchewan 
 

MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll direct my question to the Premier. My question has to do with the open 

letter sent to the Premier on March 1 by the Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local Governments. 

The letter is a stinging indictment of your government’s economic policies for northern Saskatchewan 

and it talks of the frustration and despair that has resulted from attempts to work with your government 

over the past 10 months. The association, in its letter, seeks a meeting with the Premier and your cabinet 

within the next few weeks to talk about problems related to northern Saskatchewan. My question is: has 

the government responded and will you be meeting with the northern local governments within the next 

week or two? 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I have not seen the letter. It may have been received into the 

system, but I have not answered it or addressed it or whatever, so all I can do is take notice at this time. 

 

Corporate Boundaries in the North 
 

MR. YEW: — This is a new question to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. The minister will 

remember that he offered, in his deliberations with the Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local 

Governments, to assist the local councils in terms of setting up corporate boundaries. He offered and 

assured the local councils that, in conjunction with his government, they would assist in the setting up or 

planning of corporate boundaries, setting up a negotiating committee to determine those corporate 

boundaries. Will the minister advise us at this time whether or not he has met with the associations 

mentioned and if, in fact, he has set up the negotiation committee? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I’m surprised that the hon. member is asking about the setting 

up of corporate boundaries under a piece of legislation that the hon. member will be very aware has not 

passed yet. Bill 61, which is before the House and which will be, I understand, reintroduced just in a 

matter of days to put it into the other session, certainly will be dealt with this spring. The hon. member is 

very aware of that. It provides for the establishment of corporate boundaries for, I believe, 36 

communities. The Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local Governments that the member refers to 

is very aware of that. I don’t understand why the question is coming at this time. 

 

In fact, my understanding is, from the extensive negotiations and consultations that I have had as 

Minister of Northern Saskatchewan with that group — and I might add with other local government 

groups in northern Saskatchewan, because this group that the member mentions is not the only 

organization representing locally elected people there — my information is that they’ve been pleased 

with the consultation process up till now. 

 

I heard your comments to the Premier about a stinging indictment of our policies and so on. That’s not 

the information that I’m getting from that same association. I’m 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2562 

wondering where you’re getting your information from. It’s certainly not what they’re saying to me, and 

it’s certainly not what they’re saying in the press in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

MR. YEW: — Question to the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan. I go back to Bill 61. Last fall you 

promised the Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local Governments that before you proceeded with 

Bill 61, you would again negotiate through your department a way to determine the corporate 

boundaries of 23 local communities in the region. Since then, and I reiterate, nothing has happened. 

Nothing has happened. Now one community — Pinehouse Lake, the local community authority of 

Pinehouse Lake, is being threatened with legal action by a mining company because it is trying to delay 

exploration work on a limestone pit and mine nearby until those negotiations can be completed. My 

question is: when will those negotiations get under way? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, I’ll reiterate once again, Mr. Speaker, the corporate boundaries for the 

various communities in northern Saskatchewan will be developed under the auspices of legislation that 

has not been passed. When that legislation is passed and we have a northern municipalities act under 

which corporate boundaries will be a part, we will go about the negotiation. You mention a particular 

problem of Pinehouse Lake. I know there is expectation, there is extreme expectation with some of these 

communities. That one, for example, has an expectation that their corporate boundaries would be 

something in the order of 25 miles or depending on which day you are talking to them, 50 miles around 

the community. So what I would say to you is we’re going to approach the corporate boundary 

negotiations after legislation is passed. We’re going to approach it in a realistic way with each individual 

community, to deal with realistic boundaries for those communities. And that will be done when the 

legislation is passed. 

 

MR. YEW: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Just for the record, the bill has received first reading and is 

in the process of being passed by the legislature. I just want to put that in the record. Okay. What then is 

your government doing to prevent a confrontation between the mining company and the community of 

Pinehouse? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, it all depends on what the circumstances are that are causing some 

potential confrontation, as the hon. member says. Our position on the thing is that corporate boundaries 

of Pinehouse will be established when the legislation is passed that will deal with corporate boundaries 

for Pinehouse (if you want to talk about that particular one), as I said before. And that will be done after 

the legislation is passed, which is not now the case. We don’t have any particular plans for dealing with 

some perceived confrontation because very often when I hear the word “confrontation” from northern 

communities, or groups in that area, they use the word very loosely and I’m not so sure that what they 

would call confrontation ever comes to pass, or always comes to pass. So let’s wait until something 

develops before we start pushing the panic button. 

 

MR. YEW: — Final supplementary, Mr. Minister. My question is: will you ask the mining company to 

delay its work until the Pinehouse LCA has its boundaries set and established and it knows definitely if 

it will have a clear say as to how the project can proceed henceforth? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, the mining company has its mandate. Pinehouse Lake, as a 

local community authority, has its mandate at the present time. The Pinehouse situation, as I have said, 

is as it has been for a good number of years. Until 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2563 

the passage of this legislation there will be no negotiation of the corporate boundaries. That’s where it 

sits at the present time, and that’s where it will continue to sit. 

 

MR. YEW: — Again I ask the minister: will you approach the mining company in question and ask 

them to delay their work until the corporate boundaries can be firmly established, so that the community 

knows for definite purposes that it has jurisdiction within that realm? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — I will say, on the record, Mr. Speaker, that I am not sure of the distance from 

the actual community of Pinehouse that the mining company is carrying on its exploration. I haven’t 

been informed by anyone, by any officials in the department, or in fact anyone from Pinehouse, that 

there is a major problem. I know there are a couple of individuals in Pinehouse that would like to have 

probably all of northern Saskatchewan under the jurisdiction of Pinehouse Lake. But I don’t buy that, 

nor will I buy it when negotiations get underway in earnest. No, I will not approach the mining 

company. 

 

MR. YEW: — For the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, have you received the open letter that was 

directed to the Premier and yourself, in particular, from the Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local 

Governments? Have you received and have you seen a copy of this memo? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — I am not sure if I have. At this point I couldn’t say for sure that I have. I have 

received a number of letters and correspondence from the association you make reference to — the 

Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local Governments. I am not sure if I have the one that you 

mention or not. So I would have to take notice on it before I would answer directly. 

 

MR. YEW: — It is right here, Mr. Minister. It’s dated March 1 — an open letter to the Premier, Mr. 

Grant Devine, Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. It talks about neglect. It talks about abandonment of 

government programs and services by your administration. 

 

I just want to ask the minister: will you meet, will your cabinet meet with the northern communities in a 

full-fledged northern area meeting to discuss your economic development, your social, cultural and 

economic development plans for the northern communities? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — I will not commit right now that we will meet at any particular date or at any 

particular juncture. Certainly we’re open to talk to individual communities or individual associations. I 

want to reiterate what I said earlier: the Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local Governments is 

one of several associations that represent locally elected people in northern Saskatchewan. They don’t 

like to think that; they believe that they are the association that’s all-encompassing, that represents all 

elected people in northern Saskatchewan. I don’t happen to buy that, although I do recognize them as 

representing some communities. 

 

MR. YEW: — A supplementary. The open letter to the Premier states, and I quote . . . The open letter 

quotes one of your government’s public servants, who is reported to have said, and I quote: 

 

The people don’t need any help. You people don’t need any help; you’re all on welfare. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2564 

My question is: will you please state clearly that this is not the attitude of your government with respect 

to northern people? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — I’ll state that very, very clearly, Mr. Speaker. It certainly is not the attitude of 

our government toward northern people. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

Inquiry Centres in Swift Current and Lloydminster 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce. I’ve 

had a complaint or two from my constituency about inquiry centres in Swift Current, as well as 

Lloydminster. Sedco apparently used to have offices there, which people are telling me are now closed. 

Can you inform the Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan whether or not these inquiry centres, 

Swift Current and Lloydminster, are in fact open or closed? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of any offices having been closed for 

Sedco or industry and commerce, however, I will take notice of the question. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if in taking notice the minister would as well find 

out how many employees are on staff and report back whether or not they have been terminated or just 

transferred out of those two cities. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Which? Industry and commerce or Sedco? 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a little difficult when the minister doesn’t know what 

inquiry centres he has under his jurisdiction, but my question was, in dealing with Sedco, whether or not 

the inquiry centres in Swift Current and Lloydminster, whether the employees there have been laid off 

or transferred out of those two cities. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — As I said, Mr. Speaker, I have no knowledge of it. I will take notice of the 

question. 

 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

International Women’s Day 
 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, as minister in charge of the status of women, I’m pleased to 

announce that a proclamation has been signed by Premier Grant Devine designating today, March 8, 

1983, as International Women’s Day in Saskatchewan. This day has been celebrated in many countries 

around the world since 1910 as a time to acknowledge the work and effort of women as they strive to 

achieve justice and equality. International Women’s Day serves to focus our attention on the tremendous 

contributions and accomplishments of Saskatchewan women over the history of our province. 

 

This past year was a particularly great step forward for Saskatchewan women in that five women were 

elected to the provincial legislature, two of who are now my colleagues in cabinet. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2565 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — However, International Women’s Day also acts as a reminder that much 

more needs to be done if women are to have the opportunity to participate equally in the economic 

political, social and cultural environment and development of this province. 

 

I know that the members of the Legislative Assembly will join me in acknowledging the hard work and 

effort of the women in Saskatchewan as they strive to deal with issues that are of concern to women, not 

only in Saskatchewan, but throughout the world. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to comment on the ministerial statement made 

by the Minister of Labor, and join with him in the recognition of the work and effort of women in the 

workforce and elsewhere in our community. I suggest to the Minister of Labor that what this legislature 

needs to do is, yes, to show recognition, but also to be sure that we have policies in place that assist 

women in the workforce — certainly, women who work for the Government of Saskatchewan, but just 

as certainly, women who do not work for the Government of Saskatchewan but work generally in the 

workforce. I urge all hon. members and, particularly, members opposite to institute and strengthen 

policies which will assist women to gain a more appropriate place in the workforce and in our society 

and, particularly, ask all hon. members not to agree to any steps which will make it more difficult for 

women to achieve their quite proper objectives. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Economic Policies of Government of Saskatchewan 
 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I welcome this opportunity to be involved in a debate on the 

Saskatchewan economy under rule 16, an opportunity that all members have of speaking out on an issue 

of importance at the present time. In light of the fact that the government has announced that they will 

be bringing down a budget over the next few weeks, I think it’s important that the considerations that are 

being discussed today are taken into consideration and given the due consideration in the final strokes 

that are being put on the budget to be announced later this month, or early next, when the government 

gets around to doing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on November 24 of last year, the finance minister of Saskatchewan introduced a budget 

which was known as a mid-course correction. It was, indeed, a Tory mid-course correction which the 

province still has to recover from. I think these last couple of weeks are an indication, and probably the 

roughest period that Saskatchewan’s economy has seen since the great depression of the 1930s, and I 

think not a coincidence, but at that time we had a Tory government in Saskatchewan as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that I keep asking myself, and the members on this side keep asking and I’m sure 

many people in the province: what has happened to the economy of Saskatchewan? What other bad 

news awaits us and what else can go wrong? And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see many bright lights in the 

planning of this government to indicate that we are out of the rough times or, in fact, on an upswing. I’ll 

have more to say on that in a moment, but I would first like to review briefly the last couple of weeks. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2566 

Mr. Speaker, not since the dying days of the old Liberal government in the 1970s, and not since the 

bankruptcy and going-out-of-business signs outnumbered the help wanted in the windows of our 

businesses along the main streets of our cities and towns, has the economy of Saskatchewan been in 

such tough condition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to think about it. First, the conference board predicts that the 

Saskatchewan economy will grow less than any other provincial economy in Canada — 0.2 per cent less 

than Quebec, and I think that all members do not have to study very hard to realize the tough shape that 

Quebec is in at the present time. Mr. Speaker, I believe that most members would respect the institute, a 

renowned group of individuals who are listening and watching very closely, and I believe maybe aren’t 

listening too closely to the Premier’s speeches this last while, and are dealing in hard cold facts. They 

are looking at a common-sense approach, and I think they’ve given the Premier’s open for business 

rhetoric a failing mark. 

 

Then we witnessed last week here in the House the minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of 

Saskatchewan admit that he is driving that once proud crown corporation into the ground. Well, not in 

that many words, Mr. Speaker, but I think if you look at what is written in Hansard the fact is that the 

$141 million in profit which we enjoyed in 1981 will be something less than that. In fact, the minister is 

unwilling to tell us now whether or not in fact there will be a profit. As well, the tradition of a $50 

million dividend to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, which has become known in Saskatchewan in 1980 

and ’81, I don’t think that he’s saying that that will be there either. That’s not all. The minister went on 

to admit that the potash sales of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan have been decreasing relative 

to the total amount of sales that Saskatchewan has been able to garner. Mr. Speaker, I know that the 

sales of potash have decreased, but that’s not the issue. The issue is that our portion of the sales, the 

Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, has been shrinking both off-shore as well as in the North 

American market. 

 

As well, last week we saw the request of Sask Tel to increase their rates by 19 per cent — the largest 

single rate, I believe, in the history of the province that I can find. And this at a time when minimum 

wages are frozen; farm income is down by 10 or 20 per cent. Mr. Speaker, many senior citizens are 

being controlled in their increases in OAS and GIS. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the same time as the Premier is preaching about inflation minus one, we have the crown 

corporation with the board of directors asking for a 19 per cent increase. And many people in the 

province are asking: what about the utility freeze, and what about the free phones for senior citizens 

which were promised during the election campaign? The very same day 120 people were fired from the 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance, and at that time the minister claimed that he was just trimming 

the fat. Well, I think there were other reasons that he was doing it. In the desperate dash for cash of the 

Devine government I think that we will attempt to sort out how they are attempting to keep out of an 

even larger deficit, and they are doing that by literally gutting some of the crown corporations, putting 

SGI in a straight jacket to open it up for private corporations, many of them large multinationals. 

 

We wonder why they are doing that, but I don’t think we have to look too far. If you look at the number 

of insurance companies who donate to the Conservative Party, it becomes clear and obvious why there is 

a direct attempt to do away with, and do in SGI. 

 

Just for the record, I would like to quote some of the statistics from 1980 of insurance 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2567 

companies who have donated to the Conservative Party, and it’s an interesting list. 

 

Canada Life Assurance 4,500; Confederation Life 6,200; Royal Insurance 2,608; Mortgage Insurance 

2,480; Monarch Life Assurance 3,000; Imperial Life Assurance 5,240; Great-West Life 10,000; 

Excelsior Life 1,000. Mr. Speaker, the total for 1980, 42,828. 

 

I think the people of Saskatchewan will be interested to know that one of the main reasons that this once 

proud crown corporation which was built by the people of the province is being done in is not only 

because the Conservatives need the cash that is involved, but also the Tory coffers will be much better 

served by having private insurance companies involved in Saskatchewan rather than a crown 

corporation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we at the same week shared with the minister of SGI rate increases which he announced to 

be 6.7 per cent, but under scrutiny we found out that there were other increases which the minister 

hadn’t talked about. There were other things being done to cut corners, which included dismissing 120 

people. Mr. Speaker, the deductible was being increased, or trying to be increased from 350 to 500, 

which would have been an increase of over 40 per cent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go on to another issue that occurred that week, which was the closure for a 

certain number of months in the spring of 1983 of the P.A. pulp mill. This came only eight days after the 

P.A.-Duck Lake by-election, at which time the promise was made not to close or even to limit the 

amount of work being done there, but in fact, a promise to expand that facility. Mr. Speaker, I think that 

the people in P.A.-Duck Lake will have a very close look at that record next election. 

 

Last Friday as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Ipsco announced that they were closing their doors 

indefinitely. Because of the government’s inaction on the Diefenbaker pipeline and the lack of incentive 

being given by the provincial government, 1,200 people who were working at Ipsco at this time last year 

now find themselves out on the street. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let the Premier go to Regina, the northern part of Regina, and give his speech to the 

unemployed Ipsco workers, and tell them that Saskatchewan is open for business. Let him go up to 

Prince Albert and tell the families of the unemployed PAPCO workers there’s so much more we can be. 

Let him tell the 41,000 who are looking for work and the 59,000 who now find themselves on welfare, 

that Canada is in a recession, but Saskatchewan has decided not to participate. Let them go and do that, 

and I suspect it would not take the Premier long to figure out that the hands-off, 

let-the-private-sector-do-it economic policies are not working very well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in November the Minister of Finance talked about the Conservative government’s new 

economic policies as a mid-course correction. The problem is, when the government made the 

correction, they abandoned the bridge. Our economy has been left to drift upon a sea of clichés, and run 

by a group of middle-aged cheerleaders, but no one is at the helm. Mr. Speaker, that’s the government’s 

job. It’s the government’s job to lead the way, to show initiative, to maintain economic activity when the 

private sector cannot do it. It’s a big job; it’s a vital job; it’s the single most important obligation of any 

and every government. 

 

Today more than ever, Mr. Speaker, that job must be done, and done well. Unfortunately, it is a job that 

this government has failed at miserably. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2568 

That is why, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg: 

 

That this Assembly regrets that the Saskatchewan Government’s economic policies have failed to 

sustain a high level of economic activity and performance, and have in fact aggravated the economic 

pressures upon working people, farmers, northerners, and small businessmen, and, further, that this 

Assembly calls upon the Saskatchewan Government to abandon its negative policies and to exercise 

positive economic leadership by embarking upon a full range of public and private sector programs to 

create stable productive employment and to stimulate and support economic activity in Saskatchewan. 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to enter into this debate this afternoon, 

and I think, a pleasure to have the opportunity to maybe set a few of the misconceptions of the member 

for Shaunavon straight. 

 

I’m proud to stand in the front benches of probably the most innovative and popular government in 

Canada today. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — A government, Mr. Speaker, headed by one of the most youthful and 

dynamic premiers to come upon the political scene in Canada for many years; a man whose capabilities 

are admired throughout North America, throughout this continent, admired because of the way he 

explains and packages the way that this government will lead this province, not in this decade, but I 

predict until the turn of the century, and perhaps beyond that time. And ladies and gentlemen, and 

members, that is not just because of mere speculation; that is because of a proven track record: a 

government that has led the nation in a mortgage plan, one that has been adopted and copied by virtually 

every other government in this country; a government that said we did not believe in the land bank and 

state ownership of farmland, but a government that came forward with a farm purchase plan that is 

putting the farms back into the hands of the young people of Saskatchewan. And I can tell you, a very 

popular plan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — A government that quickly adopted a housing program of a $3,000 grant to 

help people own and construct houses — along with the federal program, another popular move by this 

government. A government that has come forward with a solution to an age old problem, a problem of a 

pipeline from Diefenbaker Lake; a problem that was there throughout many years of the government 

opposite and the government knows it; a problem that was left by the other government, as I recall, in 

some of their documents, to let the heat build a little more. Let the people of Regina and Moose Jaw 

drink that water. Don’t come up with a solution. There is a solution that is there, put forth to the local 

government, for them to act upon and perhaps that will get going and the problem of water in these 

cities, and also the problem of Ipsco, will be solved by that water pipeline. 

 

Decisive action taken to critical issues where the government, previously, took the ostrich approach and 

stuck their head in the sand. 

 

I want to say that it is refreshing to be a part of that type of a government and not listen to the prophets 

of doom and gloom on the other side, who, as the Premier said earlier 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2569 

today, are bound that there is going to be a recession, and I think are most welcoming one because it 

gives them something to talk about, because the people of Saskatchewan know that they are starved of 

ideas. 

 

I want to point out on ideas . . . I will give the Leader of the Opposition some credit for this. I remember 

back, and my colleague the member for northern Saskatchewan remembers this too. I remember being a 

rookie politician in this House, in the opposition, and on the first set of estimates doing some 

questioning and asking certain questions. I remember the Premier at that time saying, “Why don’t you 

come forward with some positive alternatives? There is more to legislating than always being negative.” 

I remember you giving me that advice, sir, and that was good advice, because my colleagues took that 

advice and we came forward with positive alternatives that in April of this year caused us to have a 

mandate, overwhelming, over your 44 seats that you had previously. That was the best advice you ever 

gave me, and I thank you for it. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Because I just want to read from your budget dated March 18, ’82. I 

remember many of these, and I remember asking for these in opposition, along with my colleague for 

Regina South, the noble 15 that stood in here. I remember asking for home-owners’ mortgage relief and 

a freeze in utilities. It was suggested in your March 18 budget. I remember asking many times for 

removal of E&H tax on children’s clothes . . . It’s in your March 18 budget. Low-interest loans for small 

businesses . . . Your March 18 budget. The elimination of the fuel tax on tandem-axle trucks, and 175 

billion to extend the natural gas network to rural Saskatchewan. Those were positive suggestions 

brought forward by a Conservative government in opposition, and those were the types of things that 

brought a Conservative government into the governing of this province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now we talk about the economy today. This is what the motion has to do. A very negative motion 

saying that our system has failed; it has failed miserably. And that the economic pressures upon the 

working people, the farmers, and the Northerners and the small businessmen . . . But we were in office 

for 10 months. We called a by-election. We called a by-election which should give the people of 

Saskatchewan an opportunity to say whether they endorse the policies and the programs of the 

government or they reject them. That P.A. by-election was on February 21. And I don’t think I have to 

remind anyone in this House or anyone in the province of Saskatchewan that the people of Prince 

Albert, Saskatchewan, spoke out loud and clear for an endorsement of the policies of the Devine 

government in Saskatchewan. 

 

Now I don’t know if the Royal Bank has all the wisdom in the world. I doubt if they do. But I think they 

do have some pretty good economic forecasters and quoting from their Econoscope which they put out 

on February 22 (I won’t go through it all), it says: 

 

And finally the provincial government is intent upon attracting private sector investment as a stimulus 

to economic development with high tech industries the main candidates. After adding up the positives 

and negatives, we expect both real and normal gross domestic product to grow more quickly in 

Saskatchewan than in Canada as a whole. 

 

Now I don’t think that is a doom and gloom forecast. I think there are many people who feel that under 

the new guidance of this government, that if there is a government 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2570 

that will bring about a turnaround in the recession, it will be the Government of Saskatchewan. And I 

would just like to quote another couple of sources. From Donald Lenz, vice-president of Goldman Sachs 

and Company of New York: 

 

Saskatchewan is fortunate. It has the natural resource base so attractive to the world that it doesn’t 

have to attract situations that don’t fit. It just has to make the investment climate right. 

 

And ladies and gentlemen, I think that is what our government is doing. And another quote: 

 

Saskatchewan obviously offers enormous investment potential in the coming years. Investment growth 

is likely to be among the highest in North America. 

 

G.L. Reuber, deputy chairman, the Bank of Montreal in Montreal. 

 

So you just gain political stripes to try and . . . I know you’re in tough shape politically in this province. 

I don’t mind you for trying. But let’s go back to what you said, Mr. Leader of the Opposition. Let’s look 

at positive alternatives. Let’s come with suggestions. Let’s give credit where credit is due, and support 

the type of innovative ideas that have been brought forth by this government, probably the most popular 

government in North America, the government that is heralded as the one that will lead us out of the 

depression. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — So therefore I cannot support the motion. I cannot support the motion. I want 

to amend it, Mr. Chairman, and insert the following words. The words after the word “Assembly” be 

struck out and the following substituted therefor: 

 

endorses the Saskatchewan government’s policy of seeking a more productive balance between public 

and private sector economic activity in Saskatchewan and calls on the government to continue to 

develop policies which will encourage the people of Saskatchewan to invest in their own province. 

 

I move, seconded by my colleague, Mr. Rousseau, the member for Regina South. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m, too, interested and happy to be able to get into this debate 

today. Well do we remember the sloganeering that happened last April. Well do we remember the PC 

slogan saying, “There’s so much more we can be.” In fact we were reminded of that slogan today when 

the Premier used that and continues to use it — “There’s so much more we can be.” Today, in 

Saskatchewan we know full well what the meaning of that slogan is. The people of Saskatchewan know 

“there’s so much more we can be,” because they’ve been there. They know that they had so much more 

before last April 26. That’s the aspect of the motion that I’m going to talk about today. 

 

Since April this province has been on a long, long 10 months roller coaster ride, going downhill since 

April. Everybody knows that there are factors over which this government and this province doesn’t 

have any control. We’re all aware of that. But what about the things that they have control of? What 

about the things that they could get their hands onto? One of the things that I want to talk about — the 

topic that’s a 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2571 

favourite of mine — is agriculture. The biggest single failure that has demonstrated the lack of 

leadership has been in agriculture, and in particular on the crow issue. 

 

There’s other things that we’ve been sliding on as far as this roller coaster ride is concerned. One of 

them is FarmStart. In estimates we heard what happened to FarmStart. The Minister of Agriculture said, 

“Well, we could only put up so much money because that’s all the takers there were.” 

 

Hog stabilization — smaller producers are feeling the squeeze. Smaller producers are realizing what’s 

happening. The emphasis is for the production stabilization of the large hog producer. 

 

Beef stabilization — the feeder option that helped the small farmer, that would have allowed him to buy 

50 head of cattle and feed them. It was thrown out for the advantage of the large feed operator. Contracts 

were torn up that young farmers and small farmers all over Saskatchewan had in the beef stabilization. 

 

That was last April. Today we know that we’re sliding. What about tomorrow? Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 

want to inform the Assembly that if the Minister of Agriculture doesn’t stop talking and start acting, 

tomorrow will be too late. The agricultural industry is in real trouble — farm income is down; little 

prospect for final payments next year; farm costs continue to rise; the gas tax removal is of little benefit 

to the farmers. 

 

The government now brags about its natural gas program. I was happy to hear the Minister of Health 

refer to that in our budget. One hundred seventy-five million dollars would have been spent on natural 

gas distribution last year if you would have followed the budget. One hundred farmers would have been 

hooked up. But consequently, what did we have? What did we have in the natural gas distribution? A lot 

of talk, a lot of talk is all this government has had. After holding up the program that the NDP started in 

1982, all we’ve had is talk. 

 

Farm fuel costs? The farmers lost a $65 million advantage that they enjoyed. And all the government 

says is, “Oh, Ottawa’s got to do something.” They complain about the energy agreement that the NDP 

government made with Ottawa, but they forget that their little pal, Peter Lougheed, is the one who made 

the energy agreement. He’s the one who set the standards. 

 

Government programs under the Tory party opposite have failed to support the farmer as he needed. The 

FarmStart programs were underspent. Start-up grants to help young farmers and farms under the 

government were cancelled . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I will do that, I will do that, member for 

Weyburn, I will tell them what I said in Ogema. They talk about diversifying agriculture and 

encouraging more processing. All it is is talk. Yet they cut back on hog stabilization, and they cut back 

on the small operator on beef stabilization. They spend all their time bragging about their farm purchase 

plan. Up to this point, 340 applications have been approved. None of those are on the farm yet. Even at 

subsidized interest rates the economy of farming is such that most of these young people won’t be able 

to handle that kind of debt load today. 

 

And in estimates just the other night the Minister of Agriculture told us the number, and there were 700 

land bank applications left hanging out to dry last spring. Seven hundred more farmers would be 

farming today. 700 young people would have taken out the FarmStart loans and would have taken up 

that slack but, no, they left $1.5 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2572 

million in the budget that wasn’t spent — given no choice by the Tory government. They have a 

philosophy to protect, they say. “We can’t go along with it; we’ve got to protect our philosophy.” It 

didn’t matter if the farmer was hurt, as long as their free enterprise ideals ruled the day; that’s what was 

important. They couldn’t even choose between land bank and their new farm purchase plan. The farmer 

had to wait the year, and then he was told, “You either like it or lump it.” The arrogance displayed by 

the Saskatchewan Tory government will be remembered and will be deeply resented by our neighbors 

out on the Saskatchewan farmers. 

 

Now what about the crow issue? The member for Weyburn said, “Tell them about the meeting in 

Ogema.” The key question the farmers in Saskatchewan are asking today is: what is this government 

going to do? Are you going to talk, or are you going to act? 

 

During estimates the minister made . . . And there was an amazing discussion. When asked to follow up 

on a resolution passed on February 22 in this legislature, we had unanimous support, even though the 

government motion had some weakness. We told them the Manitoba government had introduced the 

exact motion to try to get support from the Tory opposition. What has happened? What has happened? 

Had the minister talked to the Tory members in Manitoba? It wasn’t all that clear, but suggests that 

maybe ha had. Had he followed up on our suggestions several times to try to talk to the Alberta 

government? And the minister’s attitude is, “What’s the rush? Don’t get in a sweat. I’m talking to them 

next week — I think.” It’s taken him all that time to get moving. 

 

The Minister of Agriculture is either actually physically sleeping at the switch or he is intentionally 

dragging his feet. I suspect the only reason he has come out against the Pepin plan, after all these 

months, is because his one-yearling pollster friend in Toronto told him farmers’ opinion was against 

changing the crow and he’d better switch horses and get on side with the farmer. And remember his 

statements to farm organizations. I remember the statements that he made at the NFU. I remember a 

statement that he made at the wheat pool and at the Saskatchewan Federation of Agriculture. He said, 

“We haven’t decided on our stand. As soon as I get it figured out I’ll tell you what it is. I’ll go to the 

wall for you.” But what are the farmers doing today? They are going up the wall because he is inactive. 

That’s what they’re doing. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. ENGEL: — The Minister of Agriculture will go down in history as the worst disaster that ever hit 

Saskatchewan agriculture. He is numbering up there with the major drought, and he’s numbering up 

there with the grasshopper plague. He shuffles and slithers along when the Saskatchewan farmers are 

facing a $500 million freight rate bill. This from a government that said it was going to do something 

about farm costs. If they had provided leadership since last April they would have slowed down 

Jean-Luc Pepin. Instead, they aided and abetted him by doing nothing and saying nothing about the crow 

until his plan was announced. 

 

Now what are they trying to do? What are they doing now? They’re trying to tinker with the Pepin plan. 

They’re trying to get some changes, some minor adjustments. Even if they could get a little change it 

will be the same bad plan for prairie farmers. In any case Pepin said he was introducing the plan as 

announced, and I have it from a source that the plan is already announced. There are only two choices 

before us today, Mr. Deputy Speaker — two simple choices. We can accept Pepin’s plan and its rape of 

western Canada, or we can get together and we can fight to stop the Pepin plan and force the federal 

government back to the drawing board. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2573 

I urged this government, more than a month ago already, to get out there and hold a plebiscite on the 

Pepin plan and provide Ottawa with a clear message. You’re waiting until it’s too late. 

 

I urged you to work for a prairie alliance to fight the Pepin plan. Get together with the ministers of 

agriculture from Saskatchewan and Manitoba and Alberta. Nothing is happening. Nothing is happening. 

 

I urged you to get the message out to the rest of Canada why the crow rate should be left untouched, and 

all we did is we had the minister and the Premier go down East and have a few social meetings. Nothing 

has happened. 

 

Get your federal Tory buddies on side to say the crow rate was the last point I urged on you. What has 

happened? Nothing. Nothing has happened. 

 

The time for action is long past. Act now before it is too late. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure to get up today and speak on this motion, and more of 

a pleasure to speak on the amendment. You’ve heard a lot of words in the last couple of minutes from 

the member for Assiniboia. I’d remind that member that if he feels that the present Minister of 

Agriculture is that unpopular, he should perhaps ask the folks in P.A.-Duck Lake how unpopular he is. I 

would suggest that if the present Minister of Agriculture is so unpopular, you wouldn’t see 56 

Conservatives in this House, and eight NDP. 

 

The Leader of the Opposition earlier in question period today stated that you cannot eat positive 

attitudes. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think politically you can see the results of positive attitudes on the behalf 

of people. If you want a by-election, go ahead; we’ll knock you off one at a time. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, attitude is very important. I think that the opposition again has taken a narrow, 

negative view. Let’s take a look at some of the economic performance indicators in this province. Mr. 

Speaker, in this province we have the lowest unemployment rate of all the provinces — it’s at 7.7 per 

cent versus 10 per cent in Manitoba, 10.1 per cent in Alberta and 12.4 per cent Canadian average. Mr. 

Speaker, if you compare that indicator with the country of Canada, we’re doing very well. We’re not 

satisfied that we’re doing all we can, and that’s why you will have new programs coming up in a couple 

of weeks. But to day we’ve done very well. 

 

The Premier indicated today that we’re the only province in Canada to have an absolute net increase in 

employment. That is a positive factor. In housing starts, Mr. Speaker, we are the only province with a 

substantial increase in housing starts — 6.822 housing starts in 1982 versus 5,972 in 1981, under the old 

administration. The national housing starts are down by 52,000. Another economic indicator. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon and Regina, they were the second and the fourth lowest respectively, in rates 

of inflation — at 6.8 and 6.9 per cent respectively. 

 

The estimated provincial population has grown by 5,000 people. Despite a downturn, Mr. Speaker, in 

the economy, the value of retail trade in the province is estimated to 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2574 

have grown by 3.9 per cent this year. 

 

The volume of crude oil production has increased by 9.5 per cent, and the value of sales has increased 

by more than 15 per cent to $950 million. Some of the positive indicators, Mr. Speaker, in this year 

under review. 

 

And what have our initiatives done to help that? Mr. Speaker, we have introduced, of course, the 

mortgage interest reduction program, at a cost of $35 million. We’ve introduced a $3,000 build-a-home 

program which restored growth in housing starts, and in the housing industry which again, Mr. Speaker, 

has increased the activity there, and also has created jobs. The elimination of the provincial gasoline tax, 

Mr. Speaker, has created another $122 million in the economy. The introduction of the farm purchase 

program (which the member for Assiniboia does not seem to like), has assisted young farmers to acquire 

farmland. The government, Mr. Speaker, has also generated nearly 12,000 direct jobs through capital 

projects, which I will get to in a minute. 

 

What is the effect of those four programs, Mr. Speaker? What it means is this: one of the basic problems 

in a recession, in a downturn in the economy is that there is a lack of consumer dollars in the market. 

Those four programs, Mr. Speaker, put dollars back into the consumers’ pockets. If consumers do not 

have dollars, you do not have jobs. I think that the economic indicators that I’ve just highlighted would 

indicate that the initiatives taken by the government, those four programs alone, are indeed working. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just take a look at the statistics for Regina and what they mean when we look at some of 

the indicators. In January and February of 1982, under the old administration, there were 37 single 

detached units started in Regina. In January and February of 1983, there were 185 single units started in 

Regina, an increase of nearly 500 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in housing starts in Regina this year over last 

year. Another indicator, Mr. Speaker, that the present policies of this government are indeed working. 

 

The MIRP program, Mr. Speaker, at present there are 30,000 households in this province who received 

benefits up to February, 1983. And out of these, 1,600 were for new units, a further increase in housing 

starts. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think another statistic that you can look at right in Regina — and this statistic comes from 

the city of Regina — would indicate that there were 5 per cent more small businesses operating in the 

city of Regina as at December 31, 1982, than one year previous. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a growth in the number of small businesses operating, another further indicator that 

our policies are working. The opposition would like the government to spend more money on capital 

projects. Mr. Speaker, I have indicated that the government has generated about 12,000 direct jobs 

through capital projects in 1982-83. In fact, departments have spent $426 million for approximately 

6,865 jobs. The crown corporations have spent a little over $1 billion for the creation of 4,816 jobs. 

Some of the major government programs were: the Regina regeneration of the hospitals which is an 

ongoing program, $10.3 million for 140 jobs; $4 million at the University Hospital for another 54 jobs; 

the CCF 2 program, $16.8 million for 230 jobs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We’re going to change 

the name. Sask Housing corporation has spent another $81.8 million creating another 2,200 jobs. The 

Department of Highways has spent $112 million creating another 1,500 jobs. And as well, Mr. Speaker, 

the province has committed over $10 million in 1982-83 under the 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2575 

jobs program, and to date over 1,100 jobs have been created. An additional $1.7 million, Mr. Speaker, 

will be spent on a variety of skills-training courses throughout the province. And student aid fund 

expenditures, bursaries and scholarships climbed to $10.9 million this year from $7.6 million. Mr. 

Speaker, the government is taking positive action on the economic recovery in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what do some of the economists say about Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan’s future? And 

I quote, Mr. Speaker, from the Royal Bank: 

 

Saskatchewan’s economy contains many of the basic ingredients for strong growth in the 1980s. It has 

substantial mineral resources. Its single most important industry, agriculture, appears poised for strong 

growth during the next few years. This government has a low debt burden, and the benefit of 

substantial energy revenues. 

 

And the opposition should listen to this next quote: 

 

And finally, the provincial government (they don’t want to hear, Mr. Minister but we’re going to tell 

them anyway) is intent upon attracting private sector investment as a stimulus to economic 

development with high tech industries as the main candidates. It is on this basis of these positive 

factors that Saskatchewan’s GDP is forecast to grow at a rate second only to Alberta during the next 

decade. 

 

I would encourage the House to support the amendment. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition welcome the opportunity to take part in 

this special debate. I am pleased to note some of the comments of members opposite because they are 

more revealing than they know. I was interested in the comments of the Minister of Health who stands 

before the House and says that there has been a solution to the water problems in Regina. They have 

spent not one dollar to move one pint of water, yet he declares a solution because they have put forward 

a press release. That is all too indicative of the standards of this government. Once they have issued a 

press release the problem is over, and it’s somebody else’s problem. 

 

We have noted that with respect to Ipsco. If the federal government would do something, then Ipsco 

would have work, and there would be jobs. That’s the solution. Well, I think it’s time that the 

government opposite faced the fact that it is the government and it has the obligation to bring about 

solutions; not press releases, but solutions. 

 

There is going to be a budget later this month. What we are asking the government to do is reorient its 

approach in the new budget so that we will be able to grapple with some of the problems which our 

province is facing. We ask the government to accept new ideas and new directions, and accept them 

before our economy gets too bogged down. 

 

We have had 10 months of the government opposite; it’s just 10 months today since that government 

took office. We have 41,000 people in January out of work. That’s a jump of 15,000 from the same 

month a year ago. It should be noted that the number of unemployed is more than the combined 

populations of Prince Albert and Estevan. Equally disturbing, and notwithstanding the comments made 

by members opposite, 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2576 

there’s not one new job in this province. If they doubt that, if they believe some of the rhetoric that you 

hear from the treasury benches, I invite them to look at the report of Saskatchewan’s statistics put out by 

the bureau of statistics of the province of Saskatchewan, dated February 4, 1983, and the facts are there: 

last year in January ’82, 415,000, January ’83, 415,000 jobs. Ten months of their government and one 

year since the last measurement — no increase in employment. 

 

I invite them to compare that with the 10 years of our government, when the working people of this 

province moved up from 305,000 to 415,000, an average of 11,000 each year — 11,000. Now they come 

up in their first year with zero — zero. 

 

It’s far worse when you look at the figures for young people. Do you know what the rate of 

unemployment for young people is, according to the bureau of statistics? Well, it’s 17 per cent. Those 

are Newfoundland figures of unemployment. The employment for young people between the ages of 15 

and 74 has dropped in the last year by 6,000, from 101,000 to 95. That’s their record of performance for 

young people, and it’s in their own statistics. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this isn’t what they promised. In their booklet entitled “Commitment,” they talked about a 

new PC government that will be committed to providing opportunities for our workforce. An industrial 

strategy will be emphasized; development of a renewable resource potential that will ensure permanent, 

rewarding jobs. Ten months — where are the permanent, rewarding jobs? 

 

During the same campaign, the Premier said that the young people could come home. Well, the young 

people are coming home. They’re coming home from work, and they’ve got pink slips, but no jobs. And 

even since last year’s general election, the government has been promising jobs. And I want to remind 

the members opposite what the Minister of Labor said in June, and I quote: 

 

Everyone is going to be affected by the things we’re coming up with. They’re going to include men 

and they’re going to include women. There will be jobs for those who are coming out of school. We’re 

going to make this province number one, but we can’t do it all in four weeks. 

 

That’s what the Minister of Labor said. All of you are proving you can’t do it in 10 months either. 

We’ve got the highest unemployment rate in Saskatchewan since the great Depression. And of course, 

it’s pushed up the welfare rolls — 58,700 people dependent on welfare; nearly $14 million paid out in 

welfare in January; and almost 6.5 million — and a little more than 6.5 million — paid out to the 

employables; people who want to work, are able to work, but can’t find a job. 

 

I say that it’s time the government opposite decided they were going to spend those millions creating 

jobs, and not paying people for not working. An earlier speaker talks about the number — 12,000 jobs 

created by capital works projects. I ask: where are the jobs? There are no more than there were last year 

at this time. They say they created 12,000 by their own activities. Does that mean that the private sector 

has created 12,000 fewer jobs in this booming Saskatchewan? What other conclusion is there? 

 

We need activities, not of the — I call them Mickey Mouse — make-work programs put forward by the 

Minister of Social Services. I suppose they’re better than nothing. But we need solid jobs: building 

university buildings, and technical institutes, and highways, and houses, and all the other things that this 

province needs. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2577 

The government will no doubt say, “But aren’t you the people who believe that we shouldn’t have a big 

deficit? And that’s true. We don’t believe you should have a big deficit. But we say this: you can avoid a 

big deficit and still build solid assets by reordering your priorities. You can certainly do that by deciding 

you’re not going to give $75 million to $100 million to the oil companies. That would build a lot of 

buildings, and would provide a lot of jobs. Just as many barrels of oil would be pumped, whether or not 

those incentives came forward. 

 

No doubt we should fear a deficit. There’s every reason to believe that members opposite, after they 

bring their budget down at the end of this month, will have saddled the people of Saskatchewan with 

close to $500 million of new dead-weight debt that has to be paid for by your children and mine, and by 

you and me. There’s no doubt of that. But much of this could be done within the confines of the budget 

which they brought down last November, and within the confines of a budget they will bring down at 

the end of this month, if they would reorder their priorities and decide that they were not going to hand 

out money to their friends but were going to spend money to create solid jobs. A simple reordering of 

priorities will do the job. 

 

We say it is important to keep people working, much more important to keep people working than it is 

to engage in some of the spending which members opposite are approving of. We don’t need endless 

studies, and how many have we heard of— endless studies that they are going to launch to deal with 

every conceivable problem? 

 

The member for Regina South is a little sensitive about the Wolfgang Wolff study, but others might 

equally be sensitive about other studies. There has been an unending series of studies costing thousands, 

tens of thousands, millions of dollars, which could have been devoted to creating jobs for people 

unemployed and not jobs for lawyers and accountants and other friends of the government opposite. 

 

I say that it is time this government reordered its priorities. I say that it is important that we keep people 

working. I say that jobs are the most important thing, and it is time that that government acted. Our plea 

to them is to shape the budget which you are going to bring down in a couple of weeks in a way that will 

create jobs for people who want to work, but because of your policies up to now, are not able to find 

jobs. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am indeed very pleased to enter this debate, 

Mr. Speaker. I sat here and listened to 10-minute speeches from both sides of the House, from five 

different members. Did you notice the tone in which those speeches were delivered and the approaches 

that both sides took? It was negative, as usual, from the opposition side. I am pleased to say that our 

members, the two members that have spoken before me, Mr. Speaker, were indeed very positive — 

positive about the future of Saskatchewan. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — It is time the opposition learned, Mr. Speaker, that the role should be a 

positive role, not negative as they have been. 

 

The Premier today, in question period, said that the NDP wanted a recession. Well, I will go one step 

further, Mr. Speaker. The NDP, the members opposite, want a depression. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2578 

They have a depression mentality. Even the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, in his speech, was 

negative and talking doom and gloom. It’s all the attention they can pay to the economy of 

Saskatchewan. It’s a doom and gloom situation according to the members opposite. Instead of being 

positive, they are being negative. 

 

No one in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is more impatient than I am to see the economy turn around. No 

one is more anxious to see Saskatchewan build on its strengths. No one is more anxious to see and build 

an industrial base in Saskatchewan than I am, or the members of this government. To expand our 

agricultural sector, to expand on our high technology sector — no one is more anxious to create jobs in 

Saskatchewan than what we are, and to diversify the economy, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will carry out the objectives that we have promised the people of Saskatchewan in our 

term of office, but first, Mr. Speaker, before we can carry out some of these objectives — we will carry 

some of them out regardless — before we can do that we have one job to do. That is to repair the 

damage of socialism that Saskatchewan has seen for the last 40 years — 40 years of building the 

negativism of socialism perpetrated by that party opposite. 

 

Well, that’s the first job, Mr. Speaker. We have to break down the wall. We have to break down the wall 

that was built around Saskatchewan by the members opposite. What was that wall? How did they build 

that wall around Saskatchewan? Well, let me just give you a few examples. The wall that I’m referring 

to is the wall that prevented investment from coming into Saskatchewan or businesses expanding in the 

province of Saskatchewan. I’ll give you some examples. The energy policy, the SMDC policy, Mr. 

Speaker, the 50 per cent ownership of resource development — let the private sector in to risk and to 

spend all of the money. If the venture works out, then they have to sell them 50 per cent ownership. If it 

doesn’t, tough luck, boys. Go home; it’s your loss. We’re not going to take any losses on it. That is 

encouraging investment? The oil and gas royalty structure that was established by the members opposite 

. . . When we changed it, we saw what happened to the oil industry in Saskatchewan. The potash 

takeover of 1974-75 — no one single action, Mr. Speaker, discouraged investment more from coming 

into Saskatchewan than that one did. The business community in the world, and it is a very small 

community . . . And that action, that takeover by that government is still reverberating throughout the 

world in that business community. The preferential treatment given the crown corporation over the 

private sector when they were in government . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s right. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — The member says. “That’s right.” They still agree today. They still think 

that’s the way to go. The plans and the expansion that they had — expansionary plans that they had for 

the crown corporations, Saskoil, SGI. 

 

I suppose if there’s one other factor that discouraged investment from coming to Saskatchewan it was 

the philosophy of the members opposite and the NDP party. And that philosophy was state ownership — 

state ownership through land, ownership through your farm, your homes, your businesses and the 

resources. They had to own and control everything, and buy companies at inflated values — and I’d love 

to name you a few examples of those — and excessive regulatory reforms, Mr. Speaker. Those are some 

of the reasons why we didn’t get investment into Saskatchewan. 

 

I didn’t dream up that wall; I didn’t dream it up, Mr. Speaker. Time after time and meeting 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2579 

after meeting in Saskatchewan, in Canada, in the United States, in Europe, this was their major concern, 

a nagging concern with the investors of the other countries, would we be taking them over? Well, we’re 

breaking down this wall, Mr. Speaker. It took them 40 years to build it; believe me, it won’t take us 40 

years to knock it down. We’ve made a start. 

 

I’d like to take a couple of minutes to point out some of the positive programs that were introduced by 

our government, Mr. Speaker. The Department of Agriculture — the Minister of Agriculture — 

introduced the farm purchase program; The Land Bank Act was repealed; the beef stabilization board 

announced the implementation of a feeder to finish program to complement he cow to finish program; 

the public utilities review commission was established by the Attorney General and our government; the 

changes to trust and loan company legislation designed to enhance investment and business 

opportunities for Saskatchewan corporations; the long-term contract to supply uranium concentrate to 

the Point Lepreau generating station between SMDC and New Brunswick Electric Power Commission; 

the announcement of the student employment program for the summer of 1983; the Minister of culture 

and Recreation announcing the $60,000 in capital funds and 95,000 in operating costs for the 

Saskatchewan summer Games; the new technical school to be built in the city of Prince Albert — an 

expansion of the project later announced, Mr. Speaker, accommodating 60 per cent more students than 

what they had planned on; four new high schools in Regina and Saskatoon; a $90 million agreement 

under the national training act between the federal and provincial government; the removal of the 

gasoline tax. The five-point program for oil and gas resulted in record levels of activity in Saskatchewan 

in 1982. The requirement for compulsory crown participation in mineral development was repealed. The 

Freehold Oil and Gas Production Act was passed in the Saskatchewan legislature. The water report by 

the Legislative Secretary to the Minister of environment. The approval given to Eldorado Mines to 

construct and operate a uranium mine-mill project at Collins Bay. The establishment by the Premier, Mr. 

Speaker, of the Saskatchewan development committee. The announcement by the Premier of the 

establishment of a cabinet committee on water concerns. 

 

The Minister of Finance brought in a mid-course correction budget last fall. They ridicule that budget, 

Mr. Speaker, but let me tell you, it was not only a correction but it was a new direction as well, 

increased expenditures of almost $200 million announced by the minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are many more funding for construction of a new hospital in Nipawin; additional 

grants by the Department of Health, the Minister of health announced, for the cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon. My own department, Mr. Speaker — 90 new manufacturing plants opened or expanded in 

1982, creating 496 new jobs. 

 

Speaking of that, Mr. Speaker, before my time runs out, the Leader of the Opposition today has been 

saying not one single new job has been created in 1982. Let me correct this . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Again, we talk about doom and gloom and being negative, Mr. Speaker. Well, yes, the 415,000 

number in January was the same as it was last year. That is correct; that’s one month. But let’s look at 

the annualized figures. The annual average level of employment in Saskatchewan in 1982 was 433,000. 

It was 1,000 more than 1981, so that’s an increase. Don’t just pick out your own selective figures that 

you have been doing for so long. 

 

The Open For Business conference, Mr. Speaker, that we brought into Saskatchewan last fall . . . Let me 

quote from a few comments made about the Open For Business conference: 

 

I can guarantee you that the enthusiasm I have found over here will catch on 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2580 

over in Europe and will produce results for you. The first vice-president of Credit Suisse in Zurich. 

 

Here’s another quote, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Saskatchewan is fortunate . . . 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I listened to the feeble words of the Minister of Industry and 

Commerce. He indicated that we were taking a negative attitude in this debate. Well, let me set a few 

facts before this Assembly. Of course we’re concerned. I want to say, when this government took over 

office the per capita debt of this province was the lowest, or second lowest, in Canada. I want to say that 

we had the lowest unemployment rate anywhere in Canada. I wanted to say that our economic growth 

when we left office was the highest in Canada. I want to say that we left 10 balanced budgets during the 

term of our office. I want to say that the credit rating of this province rose to a double A, almost to a 

triple A. And I want to say that in respect to the management of this province, the financial institutions 

of new York indicated that it was the best-managed area in Canada, indeed, in North America. 

 

Those are the achievements of the past government, which clearly and unequivocally cannot be 

discredited. Those were the records. Those were the circumstances in which you took over government. 

And for us to be concerned and to point out the way and the direction that we are in fact drifting is not 

negativism, it’s realism. I want further to say that the Minister of Industry and Commerce was talking 

about throwing down the walls built by socialism. I suppose what he is saying is that the people of 

Saskatchewan who supported the CCF from ’44 to ’64 were wrong. I suppose he is saying that the 

people of Saskatchewan who endorsed the NDP during the period of ’71 to ’81 were wrong. Well, I 

want to say that I think the people of Saskatchewan were right, and I think again that they will indeed 

endorse, having seen the dismal record of the party opposite. 

 

I want to go on to say, Mr. Speaker, that there could be no more fitting background to this special debate 

on the state of the provincial economy than the news media reports of the Premier’s Bay Street speech 

yesterday, because that’s what this government’s economic policy has been all about during the past 10 

months. Speeches, campaign slogans, Open for Business conference. We’ve seen everything short of 

cheer leaders with pompoms and Gainer the Gopher, as this government has attempted to handle 

economic policy as if the province were just one big pep rally. And that key to prosperity was a cheery 

outlook and a blind and unquestioning faith in private enterprise. And I want to say that this blind faith 

in private enterprise is a philosophy that failed, as I indicated before, under the former premier, Ross 

Thatcher, and will fail and indeed is failing. Let’s spend some time comparing the government’s clichés 

and the reality, Yesterday on Bay Street the Premier told the banks and the bond dealers of eastern 

Canada, and I quote: 

 

To heck with the recession. Saskatchewan has decided not to participate. 

 

Tell that to Saskatchewan’s unemployed. I say, Mr. Premier. Tell that to those who are forced onto 

welfare because they cannot find work. Tell that to the workers at the social services agencies, both 

inside and outside of government, who have to deal with the ever-increasing caseloads of child abuse, 

marital breakdowns, stress-related health problems, alcoholism, and drug abuse. Tell them that 

Saskatchewan isn’t participating 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2581 

in the recession. 

 

I remind the Premier and his government members of a few facts. This government took office 10 

months ago, and during those 10 months the Saskatchewan economy has suffered. A 100 per cent 

increase in business and personal bankruptcies; 62 per cent increase in unemployment rate; 44 per cent 

jump in the number of unemployed employables forced onto the welfare rolls; 15 per cent drop in 

building permits issued for new construction — this apparently is open for business. This, I guess, is a 

demonstration of their slogan: So much more we could be. 

 

The press reports that the bankers and the bond dealers down in Bay Street liked what the Premier told 

them yesterday, and I guess they did. You’d smile too if the Premier all but wrote a blank cheque out for 

you, all but begged you to come. But how does that speech play here at home, Mr. Speaker? Well, not so 

well. I have here a few people who obviously haven’t heard that Saskatchewan isn’t in a recession. I 

guess they haven’t heard the Premier’s speech in person. They just don’t understand that our economy is 

supposed to be booming. 

 

Let me remind the Premier and the members opposite — a few of those people who are concerned — I 

have here, “GWG Shut-down Shatters Hope of Refugee.” I have a further press release indicating the 

economic conditions here in this province, “CP Air Pulling Out of Saskatchewan.” I have yet another 

press release, “Ipsco Shutting Down Mills in Regina.” I have yet another press clipping. “Northern 

Telecom Lays 223 Workers Off.” I have yet another, “More Layoffs in 1983 for Pulp Mill Workers.” I 

have yet another one, “120 Laid Off at SGI.” I have yet another one, “Schwartz Brothers Will Be 

Liquidated.” I have yet another one, “Wilkinson to Close.” I have yet another one, “Coal Company to 

Lay Off 27.” I have yet another one,” . . . (inaudible) . . . Dismisses Eight Employees.” I have yet 

another one, “Gulf Workers Face Layoffs.” 

 

I want to say: I ask the Premier to include some of those people in his future trips. I would like him to go 

out and to talk to them, tell them what is going on in respect to his economic free enterprise society. 

Obviously, they just haven’t got the private enterprise religion yet. Tell them to give her snoose. Maybe 

that will help. My point, Mr. Speaker, is that Open for Business has all but closed shop after shop in the 

Saskatchewan economy, and for its people. 

 

I want to say that this government has to adjust. But I doubt very much, Mr. Speaker, if indeed they will 

adjust. It seems to me an opportunity is there for government in respect to how they can stimulate the 

economy of this nation. I would expect that this province, with its history of development, would take a 

lead. Certainly, one of the ways that could be used is indeed to put a considerable amount of infusion of 

money into capital projects, capital projects which are needed. I want to say not this government. They 

have indicated that they were prepared to put some money, or at least they have a press release, in 

respect to a pipeline to serve Moose Jaw and Regina. I want to say that there are capital projects 

throughout this nation that could be built at this time by the co-operative efforts of the federal and 

provincial governments. But do you know what the finance minister, true to his economic philosophy, 

has indicated, and I want to quote: 

 

The ministers did agree that it would be folly to invest in massive amounts of money in the capital 

projects. 

 

That is the stance of this government; that the government has no . . . I just want to close, Mr. Speaker, 

in saying that I will be voting against the amendment. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2582 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, we started out this debate with a resolution that was worded, 

I thought, in a conciliatory manner that dealt with some of the severe economic problems that are facing 

Saskatchewan at the present time. I must say that I’m very disappointed in the member for Indian 

Head-Wolseley and his amendment to the motion, which watered it down, which was a little more of the 

back patting and self-congratulations that we have been hearing for the past 10 months. 

 

There was nothing in it to encourage the people who are facing a very bleak, a very bleak indeed, future 

in Saskatchewan, the 59,000 who now find themselves on the welfare rolls, and the 41,000 who are 

looking for work and see no incentive being given to them by the government. I suppose they could read 

in the Leader-Post about the Premier being in Toronto or New York or wherever, giving the 

razza-ma-tazz speech and doing a bit of cheerleading for the public investors or the private investors to 

come into Saskatchewan and attempt to take the money out. 

 

But I think what the people of Saskatchewan are looking for is leadership and an opportunity for 

themselves to develop and control their future and their economy, and I think that at the time of the last 

election they may have been upset, to a certain extent, with crown corporations. But I think the 

alternative that has been given to them in terms of the large multinationals coming into Saskatchewan 

will make them think again, and four years from now we’ll see the Conservative government being 

turfed, very similar to the Anderson government in 1934 after one short win. 

 

My colleague, the member for Quill Lakes, went through an impressive list of people and news articles 

who have been laid off, and a large number of operations which have closed down and others which 

have been substantially reduced, and I think that if this trend continues for the next several months we 

will be facing one of the worst crises, and the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan will not be remaining 

the lowest in Canada, but will be overtaken by other provinces who are beginning to turn their economy 

around. 

 

This is what people are saying: “How is it that Saskatchewan, that has been leading the way in 

unemployment and the numbers of people on welfare, now that other provinces are seeing a light at the 

end of the tunnel, is speeding down that path to recession and a possible depression in Saskatchewan, at 

the same time as other areas are predicting a recovery?” And I think the Conference Board in Canada in 

their predictions, where they went from predicting Canada to be the fastest growing one year, to the 

slowest growing the next, when the only change that has occurred between Alberta and Saskatchewan 

over that time period is a change in government, would lead one to believe that the government has a 

certain amount of responsibility. 

 

PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS 
 

Return No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Yew that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 1 showing: 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2583 

With respect to construction projects in northern Saskatchewan announced in the legislature in March 

1982, including the DeTox Centre and the Crisis Centre in La Loche, the Training Centre and the 

Crisis Centre in La Ronge, the Dillon Road, the Beauval-Pinehouse Road, the Cumberland Weir, and 

construction on highways 102, 106 and 155: (1) for each project, whether approval has been given to 

proceed; (2) for each project, whether tenders have been called; (3) for each project, the amount of the 

provincial grant which has been offered; (4) the formula used as the basis for the calculation of the 

provincial grant. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 3 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 3 showing: 

 

With respect to construction projects for special care homes at Biggar, Shaunavon, Birch Hills, 

Weyburn, Fillmore, Saskatoon, announced in the legislature in March, 1982: (1) for each project, 

whether tenders have been called: (2) for each project, the amount of the provincial grant which has 

been offered; (3) the formula used as the basis for the calculation of the provincial grant. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — I would like to move an amendment because the special-care homes at 

Shaunavon and Fillmore were not announced in the legislature March 2. The amendment reads that the 

motion for return no 3 be amended to read as follows: 

 

With respect to construction projects for special-care homes at Biggar, Birch Hills, Weyburn and 

Saskatoon, announced in the legislature March, 1982: (1) for each project, whether tenders have been 

called, (2) for each project, the amount of the provincial grant which has been offered, (3) the formula 

used as the basis for the calculation of the provincial grant. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Rosthern. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Lusney that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 4 showing: 

 

With respect to the highway projects announced in the legislature in March, 1982 and set out in a 

document entitled, “Saskatchewan Highways Project Array” and tabled in the legislature on March 23, 

1982: (1) the names of those projects for which tenders have been called and the date on which the 

tender was called, (2) the names of those projects for which tenders have been let and the date on 

which each tender was let, (3) the names of the successful bidders and the amount of each successful 

bid, and (4) in each 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2584 

case whether the successful bid was the lowest bid, and if not, the amounts of the unsuccessful bids. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — I am going to move an amendment to make provision for tenders called versus 

tenders closed and for tenders awarded as opposed to tenders let. That’s the tenor of the amendment. I 

move that the motion for return no 4 be amended to read as follows: 

 

With respect to the highway projects announced in the legislature in March, 1982 and set out in a 

document entitled, “Saskatchewan Highways Project Array” and tabled in the legislature on March 23, 

1982: (1) the names of those projects for which tenders have been closed and the date on which the 

tender was closed, (2) the names of those projects for which tenders have been awarded and the date 

on which each tender was awarded, (3) the names of the successful bidders and the amount of each 

successful bid, and (4) in each case whether the successful bid was the lowest bid, and if not, the 

amounts of the unsuccessful bids. 

 

I so move, seconded by the member for Rosthern. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 16 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 16 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982, the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Premier. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return 17 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Executive Council during the period May 8, 

1982 to commercial air lines for air fares, (2) The name of each individual for whom air fare has been 

paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to propose an amendment that the motion for return no 

17 be amended to read as follows: 

 

(1) The total dollar paid by the Department of Executive Council during the period May 8, 1982 to 

November 26, 1982 to commercial air lines for employee air fares. (2) The name of each employee for 

whom air fare has been paid and the amount for each employee. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2585 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the request was for air line tickets or air fares 

which were paid. We quite agree that if people who are, say, wards of the Department of Social Services 

are flying with Executive Council, that should not be revealed, but we think that it’s proper, for 

example, if our government paid an air fare for a SARM delegate to a constitutional conference that that 

information should be made available, and I do not believe it should be restricted to employees. If 

someone wishes to put some other phrase in to protect confidentiality of people who are in some way 

wards of the government, fine, but if it is to decline to disclose amounts which may have been paid to 

persons other than employees, then I think that that is in appropriate. As I don’t understand the reason 

for it, particularly with respect to Executive Council. I will be voting against the amendment unless 

further explanations are offered. 
 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, in addition to the comments made by my colleague for Regina 

Elphinstone with which I concur, I may say that as well, Mr. Attorney General, you seem to have 

excluded the air fares paid for anyone who is on contract. I would assume they would not be called an 

employee. I can see no reason for that, and I agree with my colleague for Regina Elphinstone that if you 

have paid the way of people to a trade mission to China or for some other purpose and did that with 

public funds, that ought to be disclosed. I would appreciate some comment from the Attorney General 

before we vote on this. 
 

Amendment agreed to. 
 

Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 22 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return 22 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982, to November 26, 1982, the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of 

Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 27 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Shillington that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return 27 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982, to November 26, 1982, the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Culture and 

Youth. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 29 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Shillington that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return 29 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982, to November 26, 1982, the names and salaries 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2586 

of each executive assistant, special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the 

Minister of Urban Affairs. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 32 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Mr. Shillington that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return 32 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Culture and Youth during the period May 8, 

1982, to November 26, 1982, to commercial air lines for air fares, (2) the name of each individual for 

whom air fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 33 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Engel that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 33 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 34 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Engel that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 34 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Agriculture during the period May 8, 1982, to 

November 26, 1982, to commercial air lines for air fares. (2) The name of each individual for whom 

air fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 36 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Thompson that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return 36 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Tourism and 

Renewable Resources. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 38 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2587 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 38 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Industry and Commerce during the period May 

8, 1982, to November 26, 1982, to commercial air lines for air fares. (2) The name of each individual 

for whom air fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 40 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 40 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Industry and 

Commerce. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 41 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 41 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Attorney General during the period May 8, 

1982, to November 26, 1982, to commercial air lines for air fares. (2) The name of each individual for 

whom air fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 42 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 42 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Continuing 

Education. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 44 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 44 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Attorney General. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2588 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 45 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 45 showing: 
 

Regarding the purchase of new vehicles: (1) the total number purchased by the central vehicle agency 

for the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982, (2) the name and location of the car dealership 

from which each one was purchased. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 46 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 46 showing: 
 

The name of each individual issued with a vehicle through the central vehicle agency for the period 

May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982. 
 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to propose an amendment seconded by the member for 

Rosthern that the motion for return no. 46 be amended to read as follows: 
 

The name of each individual issued with an executive vehicle through the central vehicle agency for 

the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982. 
 

Amendment agreed to. 
 

Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 47 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 47 showing: 
 

The total dollar amount spent by the Department of Government Services during the period May 8, 

1982 and November 26, 1982 to refurbish and renovate each office located in the Legislative Building. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 49 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 49 showing: 
 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Government 

Services. 
 

Motion agreed to. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2589 

Return No. 50 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 50 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff employed in the office of the Minister of Health. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 51 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 51 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Government Services during the period May 8, 

1982, to November 26, 1982, to commercial air lines for air fares. (2) The name of each individual for 

whom air fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 52 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 52 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Health during the period May 8, 1982, to 

November 26, 1982, to commercial air lines for air fares. (2) The name of each individual for whom 

air fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 57 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return 57 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Intergovernmental Affairs during the 

period May 8, 1982, to November 26, 1982, to commercial air lines for air fares. (2) The name of 

each individual for whom air fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 7 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 7 showing: 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2590 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982: (1) the total number of television sets purchased 

by any department, crown corporation or agency of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) the cost of 

each television set; (3) the name of each company from which each television set was purchased; (4) if 

tenders were let for purchase of the television sets; (5) the physical location of each television set. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to propose an amendment which basically excludes from 

the answer those, for example, official guardian trust funds, that are utilized for the benefit of 

individuals which, frankly, I don’t think is the direction that the members opposite wish to go. 

 

That the motion for return no. 7 be amended to read as follows: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982: (1) the total number of television sets purchased 

by any department, crown corporation or agency of the Government of Saskatchewan, excepting those 

purchased from trust fund moneys for which a minister is the trust; the cost of each television set; the 

name of each company from which each television set was purchased; if tenders were let for purchase 

of the television sets; physical location of each television set. 

 

Seconded by the member for Rosthern. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 8 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 8 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982: (1) the total number of charter aircraft rented by 

every department, crown corporation or agency of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) the cost to 

each department, crown corporation, or agency for each charter flight; (3) the starting and destination 

points of each charter flight; (4) the names of each passenger on each charter flight. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I will be proposing an amendment that motion for return no. 8 be 

amended to read as follows: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982: (1) the total number of charter aircraft rented by 

every department, crown corporation or agency of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) the cost to 

each department, crown corporation, or agency for each charter flight; (3) the starting and destination 

points of each charter flight; (4) the number of passengers on each charter flight. 

 

I believe that’s the standard form of the question. 

 

I move, seconded by the member for Rosthern. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2591 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 9 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982: (1) the total number of trips made by Executive 

Council aircraft; (2) the starting and destination points for each trip; (3) the names of each passenger 

for each trip. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 10 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 10 showing: 

 

With respect to the use of law firms: (1) for the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the name 

of each law firm that has received remuneration from any department, crown corporation and agency 

of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) the amount received by each firm. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 11 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 11 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982: (1) the number of new positions created in each 

department, crown corporation and agency of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) the title of each 

position; (3) the name of the individual appointed to each position; (4) the salary paid to each 

individual. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to propose that motion for return no. 11 be amended to 

read as follows: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982: (1) the number of new permanent positions created 

in each department, crown corporation and agency of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) the tittle 

of each position; (3) the name of the individual appointed to each position; (4) the salary paid to each 

individual. 

 

I move this, seconded by the member for Rosthern. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2592 

Return No. 12 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 12 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the name and position of each individual in every 

department, crown corporation and agency of the Government of Saskatchewan whose employment 

has been terminated. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to request the members to defeat the motion. I’m advised 

that the question cannot be replied to in the way the opposition intended. Records show those retired, 

deceased and dismissed for cause as terminated. It would involve thousands of people and too many 

hours to be a responsible act of government. We are prepared to entertain a more specific definition or 

question along the lines that the opposition may wish to consider, but the way the motion is presently 

proposed, it is extremely broad. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 13 showing: 

 

Regarding the hiring of defeated political candidates: (1) for the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 

1982 a list of all individuals employed by any department, crown corporation or agency of the 

Government of Saskatchewan who are defeated federal and provincial Progressive Conservative 

candidates, (2) the department, crown corporation or agency in which each individual is employed, (3) 

the annual salary of each individual. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — I’m going to urge the members to defeat the motion regarding the hiring of 

defeated political candidates. The way that that is phrased, of course, includes all candidates for 

provincial governments, for federal elections, municipal, whatever. It’s not limited in any way, shape or 

form, and it, frankly, becomes an impossible task. Some of the records we would have some difficulty 

getting, and so I’m going to . . . It includes, and I’m sorry, it goes all the way back to 1867. I’m sure that 

the opposition could refine the question and perhaps put a new motion for return or question on the order 

paper which would, frankly, be a little more specific. But 1867 — I know Tories are long-lasting people, 

but I don’t know whether that was the intent or not. I’m going to urge the members to defeat the motion. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 14 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 14 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982: (1) the name of each individual hired under 

contract by all departments, crown corporations and agencies of the Government of Saskatchewan; (2) 

the salary being paid to 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2593 

each individual; (3) the length of the contract of each individual. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, again, I’m going to urge the hon. members to defeat the motion, on 

the basis that I believe the opposition could be a little more precise. This would include any firefighters, 

any temporary emergency, temporary one-day secretary. So, it’s extremely broad, I believe, as I say, the 

opposition could be a little more precise as to the specific information that they wish to receive, and we 

would entertain the question. But, obviously, the way it is drafted now it is far too broad for a 

responsible government to attempt to spend the time and effort to get that information. 

 

Motion negatived. 

 

Return No. 59 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 59 showing: 

 

Regarding the employment of James Petrychyn: (1) whether he is employed by the Department of 

Agriculture; (2) if so, his position, annual salary, responsibilities and the date on which he began 

employment. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to return 59. Moved by 

myself and seconded by the member for Pelly that return 59 be amended by striking out the phrase 

“Department of Agriculture” in the second line and substituting, “Government of Saskatchewan or any 

crown corporation or agency of the Government of Saskatchewan.” 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to comment that the government is not adverse to 

supplying the information. There is obviously a very wide dragnet being extended by the opposition to 

find one Mr. Jim Petrychyn. The dragnet is drawn as wide as possible by the opposition. I think it 

indicates perhaps the start of a witch hunt, but I won’t attribute that until I see the opposition continue to 

operate. As I indicated, we are doing a few things different with these motions for return. I indicate of 

the some 83 that are on, the first five we did not deal with; of 78, only three were defeated and a couple 

amended. In fact, Mr. Speaker, that’s getting very, very close to 90 some per cent answering by the 

government opposite. 

 

I just want to bring to members’ attention what the past practice was when it was difficult to find out 

who the members of the cabinet were because that was not in the public interest. That was the practice 

that existed in the past, Mr. Speaker. Some of the cabinet ministers, of course, wished to remain 

anonymous in the past, and I suppose that was really the reason for it. But I just say that by an indication 

of the contrast of the desire of this government to give the information to members opposite, so we will 

support the amendment as proposed by the members opposite. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you. Well, I may say to the member for Regina South, I sincerely 

hope that he runs in Regina Centre again. This individual has enjoyed such a sparkling career that he has 

been in demand by virtually every department in government. It seems to occur about the time that one 

department gets to know him, he seems to be in demand by another one. I have not been able to keep 

track of his many successes. I don’t intend to dwell on that exhaustively. The Attorney General has said 

he will find this individual, in whatever cranny you’ve got him, and I take your word for it. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2594 

In a more serious fashion, I want to express a thought to the Attorney General. I will, in the interests of 

time, ignore your comments about the number which were answered when the former administration 

was in office. I think you will find that, by and large, most of the questions were answered then as well, 

but I do want to say that I would hope that another year Mr. Attorney General, we would deal with these 

before the dying hours of the session. Some of these may need amendments. Some of your comments 

may be apt, but there frankly is no opportunity to amend them when we deal with them the last day of 

the session. And I say, Mr. Attorney General, I would hope that you, or whoever is acting, acting, acting 

House Leader, next time around, at this stage of the session, would deal with these at least a week before 

the prorogation, so that we do have some opportunity to draft amendments, and introduce appropriate 

amendments on another day. I just express that as a thought for dealing with these in the future. 

 

Amendment agreed to. 

 

Motion as amended agreed to. 

 

Return No. 15 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 15 showing: 

 

With respect to the purchase and installation of water purifiers in the Legislative Building: (1) the 

name of each publication in which public tenders were advertised, (2) the total number of bids 

received, (3) the name of the firm to which the contract was awarded, (4) the total number of purifiers 

purchased by the Department of Government Services, (5) the total cost to the Department of 

Government Services for the purchase and installation of water purifiers in offices in the Legislative 

Building. 

 

HON. MR. LANE: — I suppose I could respond at this opportunity to the question. I think that we 

should keep in mind that there are 83 to date on, that in fact many of the questions are being asked in 

estimates, so we are, in many cases, duplicating the answers. It may be in the interests of the opposition 

. . . 

 

I’m not obviously, going to advise you as to your strategy. You didn’t listen to me last time and went 

ahead and called the election anyway. Remember, I was saying, “Don’t do it, don’t do it.” So I’m not 

going to tell you your strategy, but it would probably make it easier on the government and perhaps we 

would be able to respond to the hon. member in a positive way if we weren’t duplicating. He could 

indicate which ones, specifically, and we would, by implication, know if you either wanted them in 

estimates or not at all, and then respond accordingly. So I leave that with you, that in fact the real key is 

that you get the answers as soon as possible, and that’s what we will endeavor to do. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t disagree with the Attorney General in his broad comment that we 

should either ask them in estimates or on the order paper, but probably not both. I may say that with 

respect to this particular question, this was not asked in estimates. I have a list of questions that I asked 

the Minister of Government Services to which no response has been received, notwithstanding the lapse 

of some three months since then. But this particular question was not asked. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2595 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 60 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 60 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Urban Affairs during the period May 8, 1982 to 

November 26, 1982 to commercial air lines for air fares. (2) The name of each individual for whom air 

fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 61 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 61 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Labor during the period May 8, 1982 to 

November 26, 1982 to commercial air lines for air fares. (2) The name of each individual for whom air 

fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 62 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 62 showing: 

 

With respect to the minimum wage board: (1) whether the board has submitted to the Minister of 

Labor its recommendations regarding the provincial minimum wage; (2) if so, whether the board did 

recommend an increase in the provincial minimum wage; (3) if so, whether the board did recommend 

a differential minimum wage. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 58 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 58 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 30, 1982: all recommendations made by the minimum wage 

board to the Minister of Labor respecting the provincial minimum wage. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 63 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2596 

Thompson that an order of the Assembly do issue for return 63 showing: 

 

Regarding the employment of Tommy Roy: (1) whether he is employed in the Department of Northern 

Saskatchewan; (2) if so, his position, annual salary, responsibilities and the date on which he began 

employment. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 64 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Thompson that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return 64 showing: 

 

Regarding the employment of Alex McDougall: (1) whether he is employed by the Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan; (2) if so, his position, annual salary, responsibilities and the date on which he 

began employment. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 67 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 67 showing: 

 

The make, model and cost of each motor vehicle purchased since May 8, 1982 which was obtained for 

the use or benefit of a member of Executive Council and the member of Executive Council to whom 

such motor vehicle was assigned. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 65 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 65 showing: 

 

With respect to the purchase of motor vehicles for the use and benefit of members of Executive 

Council except the Premier: (1) the guidelines respecting the make, model and cost of motor vehicle 

which members of the Executive Council may select for their own use; (2) the length of time or 

service such motor vehicles are kept before being traded in or disposed of; (3) whether or not such 

guidelines have changed since May 8, 1982 and if so the nature and detail of such changes. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 54 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Yew that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 54 showing: 

 

For the period May 8, 1982 to November 26, 1982 the names and salaries of each executive assistant, 

special assistant and other non-clerical staff 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2597 

employed in the office of Minister of Environment. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 55 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Yew that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 55 showing: 

 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Department of Environment during the period May 8, 1982 to 

November 26, 1982 to commercial air lines for air fares. (2) The name of each individual for whom air 

fare has been paid and the amount for each individual. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 56 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Yew that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 56 showing: 

 

Regarding the employment of Ed Charlotte: (1) whether he is employed by the Department of 

Northern Saskatchewan; (2) if so, his position, annual salary and the date on which he commenced 

employment. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 90 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 90 showing: 

 

With respect to any rental land purchased from any housing projects by or on behalf of Saskatchewan 

Housing Corporation included in the Cornwall Centre: (1) the amount requested by the owners for 

such land; (2) the amount of any counter offer for such land; (3) the amount paid for any such land. 

 

Return No. 91 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 91 showing: 

 

With respect to any land being expropriated by or on behalf of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation for 

any rental housing projects included in the Cornwall Centre: (1) the amount initially requested by the 

owners for such land; (2) the amount of any counter offer for such land; (3) the value of the land as 

alleged by or on behalf of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in any court proceedings. 

 

Motion agreed to. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2598 

Return No. 68 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lusney that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return 68 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Telephones on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance the total cost of the trip (including air fares, hotels, meals, etc.) 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 69 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lusney that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return 69 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Rural Affairs on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance the total cost of the trip (including air fares, hotels, meals, etc.) 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 70 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lusney that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return 70 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Highways and Transportation on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in 

each case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at 

government expense; and (3) in each instance the total cost of the trip (including air fares, hotels, 

meals, etc.) 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 71 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 71 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Health on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance the total cost of the trip (including air fares, 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2599 

hotels, meals, etc.) 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 72 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Lingenfelter that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 72 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Social Services on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance the total cost of the trip (including air fares, hotels, meals, etc.) 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 73 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Engel that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 73 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Agriculture on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance the total cost of the trip (including air fares, hotels, meals, etc.) 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 74 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Blakeney that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return 74 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each 

case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at 

government expense; and (3) in each instance the total cost of the trip (including air fares, hotels, 

meals, etc.) 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 75 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Blakeney that an order of 

the Assembly do issue for return 75 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Energy on Saskatchewan 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2600 

government business; (2) in each case his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons 

who accompanied him at government expense; and (3) in each instance the total cost of the trip 

(including air fares, hotels, meals, etc.) 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 76 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return 76 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Premier of Saskatchewan on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance the total cost of the trip (including air fares, hotels, meals, etc.) 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 77 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Blakeney that an 

order of the Assembly do issue for return 77 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Finance on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case, his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 78 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 78 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in 

each case, his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at 

government expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, 

meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 79 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2601 

that an order of the Assembly do issue for return 79 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Attorney General of Saskatchewan on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each 

case, his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at 

government expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, 

meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 80 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 80 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Industry and Commerce on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each 

case, his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at 

government expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, 

meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 81 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 81 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Continuing Education on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each 

case, his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at 

government expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, 

meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 82 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Koskie that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 82 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Education on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case, his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2602 

Return No. 83 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 83 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Urban Affairs on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case, his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 84 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 84 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Labor on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case, his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 85 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 85 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Culture and Youth on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case, 

his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 86 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 86 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative Development on Saskatchewan government 

business; (2) in each case, his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who 

accompanied him at government expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including 

air fares, hotels, meals, etc. 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2603 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 87 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 87 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs on Saskatchewan government business; 

(2) in each case, his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied 

him at government expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, 

hotels, meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 88 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Yew that an order of the 

Assembly do issue for return 88 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of the Environment on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each case, his 

destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at government 

expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 89 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 89 showing: 

 

Regarding the period May 8, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of out-of-province trips 

made by the Minister of Government Services on Saskatchewan government business; (2) in each 

case, his destination, the purpose of the trip, the names of the persons who accompanied him at 

government expense; and (3) in each instance, the total cost of the trip, including air fares, hotels, 

meals, etc. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 92 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 92 showing: 

 

With respect to work stoppage statistics kept by the Department of Labor for the period from January 

1, 1982 to December 17, 1982: (1) the number of work stoppages; (2) the number of workers 

involved; (3) the number of 



 

March 8, 1983 

 

2604 

worker days lost; (4) the number of worker days lost per non-agricultural wage and salary earner. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 93 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 93 showing: 

 

With respect to the workers’ advocate associated with the workers’ compensation board for the period 

January 1, 1982 to December 16, 1982: (1) the number of requests for assistance that have been made 

to the workers’ advocate; (2) the time it has taken on average to process such requests in December 

1982; (3) the time it took on average to process such requests in November 1982; (4) the time it took 

on average to process such requests in October 1982; (5) the time it took on average to process such 

requests in September 1982; (6) the time it took on average to process such requests in August. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

Return No. 94 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debated on the proposed motion of Mr. Shillington that an order 

of the Assembly do issue for return 94 showing: 

 

With respect to work stoppage statistics kept by the Department of Labor for the period from January 

1, 1981 to December 31, 1981; (1) the number of work stoppages; (2) the number of workers 

involved; (3) the number of worker days lost; (4) the number of worker days lost per non-agricultural 

wage and salary earner. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


