






















































Hansard: May 31, 1983


(2736) 2737 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 31, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
WELCOME TO STUDENTS 

 
HON. MR. LANE: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a great deal of pleasure and pride 
that I introduce to you and through you to this Assembly some students of Notre Dame college in 
Wilcox. Not only are they students of the college, they are the national juvenile hockey champions. The 
Hounds of Notre Dame are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. I’d ask them to stand and be recognized. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — They are accompanied by their coach, Mr. Barry MacKenzie; assistant coach, 
Phil Ridley, and Louis Stoeckle. They are accompanied by Mr. John Weisshar. We did have the pleasure 
of meeting with them earlier, along with the principal, Martin Kenney. During the April 21 to 24 
championship held in Ottawa, Ontario, the Hounds demonstrated the Saskatchewan spirit and defeated 
the Nepean juveniles to win the championship for 1983. As I advised, they had met the Hon. Paul 
Schoenhals and myself, the Minister of Culture and Recreation. We will be meeting with them again 
after question period for pictures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to join with me in sharing the pride in the athletic endeavours of the 
team, and the college. Martin Kenney advises me that Notre Dame has had a tremendous year in all 
aspects. I might advise the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that I believe seven of the team members have been 
successful in receiving athletic scholarships from various colleges in the United States. I hope that 
Saskatchewan at some point can address the very serious and important question of athletic scholarships. 
We wish them well in their future endeavours. Again, on behalf of all members I would like to 
congratulate them on their significant achievement and wish them the best in the future. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker I want to join with the Minister of Justice to extend and join 
with him in the congratulation to the Notre Dame juvenile champions of all Canada. I had the 
opportunity of first seeing the juveniles in action in the preliminary round towards the championship 
which was held in Humboldt. I want to say that the display of their hockey was excellent. I knew that 
they could go on to better things. In fact they defeated the team in Humboldt in which my son played on, 
9 to 2. And while that was regrettable, I want to extend to Barry Mackenzie, the coach, and Mr. Kenney, 
the principal of Notre Dame, our congratulations. Certainly sports, along with building character, has 
been a highlight of Notre Dame, and to all of you, I want to extend congratulations. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2738 

HON. MRS. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker it is my pleasure today to introduce to you . . . While 
they are not nationally renowned, there could very well be a few Hounds — in the group. They are a 
class of grade 6 students from the city of Swift Current, and also the rural areas. I believe there is one in 
there who has a father sitting on this side of the House, the member for Morse. They are accompanied 
by their teachers, Gerry Regier and Mr. Dick Dunlop. I will be meeting with you at 2:30 and I would 
hope, while this may be an educational experience, it would also contain some fun for you. I would ask 
that you all welcome them today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and to the 
members of the assembly, some 24 grade 4 and 5 students from the W.C How School in Regina. 
They’re seated in the west gallery. They’re accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Jill Sargeant, and five 
parents: Mrs. Royan, Mrs. Konoff, Mrs. Coles. Mrs. Forester, and Mrs. Tucker. I want to first of all 
congratulate the parents of the students, Mr. Speaker, for taking the time and the interest in supporting 
their children’s school activities. I’m going to meet with them at 2:30 for pictures and refreshments, and, 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in extending a warm welcome to these students 
this afternoon, and I hope they will enjoy the proceedings of the afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Potash Marketing 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Premier. First, let me 
welcome him back from his extensive trip. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — My question has to do with some of the comments which he was reported 
to have made during the course of the trip, particularly comments made to the Canada-Brazil Chamber 
of Commerce in Sao Paulo. You talked, according to the reports, about the need for Canpotex to find a 
number of innovative ways to market Saskatchewan potash to make it, in your words, ‘irresistible’ — 
innovations such as long-term contracts, competitive pricing and even barter arrangements. My question 
to you, sir, is this: were you indicating by your remarks that you were serving notice on Canpotex that 
for the next period of time, it either had to pick up its socks or else the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan would consider reviving its own overseas sales arm, PCS International? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — No, Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t saying that. What many people around the world 
today want to know is that the major suppliers are prepared to go to work to accommodate some very 
difficult economic conditions. I believe, if you look at the events that led up the Williamsburg summit, 
the evidence points to very high rates of inflation, high interest rates, and some difficult periods of 
repayment. A country like Brazil, with about an $80 billion debt, needs al the consideration that it can be 
given to cope with the short-run difficult situations with respect to their repayment potential. So what I 
said is that Canadians, and certainly Saskatchewan producers as represented by Canpotex, were prepared 
to look at ways to help the Brazilians cope wit the short-run situation because we felt, in the long run, 
that trade and increased trade between our 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2739 

two countries would be to our mutual advantage. 
 
We said that there are some advantages, and I did — and I will elaborate just very briefly in a ministerial 
statement after question period —to have one voice speak for Saskatchewan. I’m sure the members 
opposite have done so, in talking about orderly marketing, certainly in talking about the wheat board, 
know some of the strengths, theoretical strengths of one voice speaking for a region, and we’ve faced 
some very severe regional competitors in eastern Europe and western Europe. All I was talking about 
was the strength of Saskatchewan in it s ability to deal with some of its trading partners — and Brazil 
has been an excellent partner — in a very contemporary fashion. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. In view of the fact that Canpotex, according 
to the minister in charge of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, has a policy of carrying accounts 
either for 30 or 60 days and no more, and that’s still a current policy according to the minister. Can the 
Premier explain how we can effectively sell to Brazil through an arm which insists on getting cash on 
the barrelhead 30 or 60 days and no longer? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was going to talk about that in a few moments, but very 
briefly, we’ve arranged some means, with the help of the federal government and the banking 
institutions, to extend longer range credit. The Royal Bank of Canada, for example, is prepared to do so 
up to the extent of about $15 million for up to 180 days which would make us competitive with the 
Soviet Union, the Israelis, and the Jordanians. As a result of continued negotiations, we hope to be able 
to put together some other financial arrangements which make it a little easier, as I’ve said earlier, for 
countries in south America like Brazil to cope with some very high interest payments that they have to 
make at the current time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — supplementary, Mr. Speaker. In view of the fact that Saskatchewan’s 
share of the Brazilian market dropped from 37 per cent in 1980 to 16 per cent in 1982 because we were 
not using the innovations now suggested by the Premier, will he not admit that the innovations which he 
now suggests Canpotex could introduce could have been introduced last year by PCS International, and 
improved our market share in Brazil very substantially in 1982, and not at some future time. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, two or three observations: Number one, the fall and the 
big drop as the hon. member knows, incurred in 1981 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 1981, under the 
former administration. Number two, I’ll go back to my argument, and I’m sure the hon. member’s 
argument with respect to the strength of, if you might say, a cartel, and if in fact you have a major potash 
producing region like the province of Saskatchewan you want to get into the ball game of, what you 
might call, destroying the orderly marketing process when you’re into an international market. We deal 
with regional cartels out of the Soviet Union, regional cartel out of western Europe, and to date, we have 
the potential for a regional cartel out of Saskatchewan; certainly into many parts of the world, clearly not 
the United States. 
 
The moves that were made by the Soviet block — particularly East Germany — the balance of 
payments problems between brazil and Canada and east German countries has led to many interesting 
arrangements with respect to barter and trade and new trading relationships, which until now have led to 
many significant problems both in Brazil and in eastern Europe, and consequently into Saskatchewan. 
What we’re proposing, and what we said to Brazil is that we’re quite prepared to look at short-run 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2740 

situations which will protect the Saskatchewan market — protect the Canadian market share, and not 
jeopardize the strength of having a regional voice speak for Saskatchewan potash. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Premier, and I’m now referring to the 
sale of Saskatchewan potash to Brazil, and as the Premier acknowledges, serious problems in that potash 
market developed in 1981, and it was necessary for Saskatchewan to respond. And Canpotex declined to 
respond, and PCS decided to set up its own arm, decided in 1981 to do that, effective July 1, ’82. The 
use of those techniques could have sold more potash. My question to you is this: if these techniques are 
now, in your judgement, likely to sell more potash in 1983 and 1984, why did you not adopt them 
through PCS International effective July 1, 19982, and see that Saskatchewan enjoyed a much larger 
market share commencing a year ago? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we want to make it very clear that what is possible in Canpotex 
under our administration is a lot different that what would have been possible under Canpotex under the 
former administration. Clearly, that’s the case. 
 
The confidence that we can build internationally, as a regional seller through Canpotex, is now 
becoming extremely clear. The buyers of potash from Saskatchewan from all over the world are quite 
prepared and are happy to hear that we’re dealing through Canpotex as one voice — one voice. And the 
arrangements that we’re making in international trade through one single seller out of the province of 
Saskatchewan ban be no way reflected in saying you’re going to take a separate, individual potash 
corporation, whether it’s public or private, and make some tremendous big sales. I believe the Leader of 
the Opposition has been referring to something in Brazil that they had a couple of hundred thousand 
tonnes sold. There was no evidence of that at all — no evidence of that at all. 
 
So the arrangements that we’re making today, and those that we’ve been making for some time, in 
rebuilding the confidence in the industry, that was destroyed by the NDP, the former administration, 
takes some time. The confidence caused major falls in 1981 — major falls . . . (inaudible interjections) 
. . . The hon. member knows that the significant drop was in 1981. The impact that they had on the 
industry in 1981 was dramatic. The impact that they had in 1982 was dramatic, and it’s going to take 
some time and some effort to rebuild the confidence in the Saskatchewan potash industry. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Premier referred to a line of credit 
organized through the Royal Bank of Canada. Did he organize that line of credit, or did the Government 
of Canada? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, it’s combination of efforts by the federal government at the 
encouragement of provincial officials, a co-operative effort between the two levels of government and 
the industry to make sure that Canadians are competitive internationally. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I take it the minister agrees that it was not 
made by Canpotex, since he didn’t even mention their name. Doe she not agree that this could equally 
have been done on behalf of PCS International as well as Canpotex, and we would have had sales going 
back more than a year ago? Does he not acknowledge that potash sales have fallen and that the first four 
months of 1983 are below the 1982 figure which he said followed the loss of confidence in the industry? 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2741 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s clearly that the hon. member opposite would have 
preferred to remove the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan out of Canpotex, jeopardize the sales of all 
other Saskatchewan producers in markets all over the world — whether this be in Asia or South 
America or so forth — and the people of Saskatchewan would have lost. Well, in practice, Mr. Speaker, 
and in theory — and I’m sure the hon. member is familiar enough with it — there are some strengths in 
an oligopoly, in a cartel. And if we can build on those strengths using the entire cartel it’s better than 
using one particular independent Saskatchewan producer and sacrifice the rest. So we have rebuilt the 
confidence in the industry in the province of Saskatchewan so that we can deal as a unified force 
internationally, except in the United States, and as a result it’s going to be much more effective than 
tearing it down like the previous administration wanted. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A couple of quick questions. I noted also, in Vienna the Premier talked 
about . . . ‘Devine Lauds Free Trade in Speech to Fertilizer Conference.’ Does the Premier feel that free 
trade is consistent with oligopolies and cartels? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — when I’m talking about free trade in wheat, I expect the wheat board to be 
competitive and provide wheat all over the world and other countries to reciprocate. When I’m talking 
about trade in Canpotex, I’m talking about them being competitive all over the world and being able to 
trade because both countries benefit from mutual trade. 
 
What I did talk about in both places was the strength of one region speaking with one voice. As the 
wheat board speaks for Canada when it comes to marketing grain, Canpotex can speak for Saskatchewan 
when it comes to marketing potash. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — One final question, Mr. Premier. You indicated that confidence in 
Saskatchewan’s potash industry has been lost in 1981, and in that dark year, PCS made a profit of $141 
million. When do you assume that under your enlightened leadership that record of that dark year will be 
surpassed, and we will see profits of much higher than $141 million? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member knows well that the trading that has gone on 
around the world internationally with respect to potash and many other commodities has changed 
dramatically in potash, but also in many other commodities, as a result of the balance of payments 
problems faced by many countries. Brazil is a typical example. When you begin to trade on a barter 
basis . . . When Brazil begins to trade on a barter basis with East Germany, it makes a significant impact 
on what might happen with the Canadian economy. 
 
Now I will continue in a little more detail in a few moments what the impact is in terms of Canadians at 
the national level and at the potash industry level being able to deal with countries like Brazil which 
decided, as a result of international financial problems, not to trade with Canada at all on many other 
things. 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2742 

Salary Increases to Premier’s Staff and Minimum Wage Freeze 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. I, too, would like to welcome him 
back from his trip and I’m sure that his staff will be bringing him up to date on what has occurred in the 
province since he left. I would like to recommend to him a quick update on what the mood of the 
province is, and I would like to quote from the Estevan Mercury on that issue. And it says in part: 
 

The folks in the Estevan constituency are still wondering when our leader and MLA is going to 
do something for us. After all, he was a parachute candidate and the folks were good enough to 
elect him to power. 

 
The article goes on, Mr. Premier, to talk about the inconsistency of limiting minimum wage to 4.25 an 
hour at the same time as you increase drastically your own personal staff. And I wonder, in your trip that 
you took, did you have time while you were in Vienna or Rio, to reconsider the ill-conceived plan to 
raise the wages of your own staff, or if you’re now considering rolling them back until minimum wage 
is increased in the province? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the hon. member’s question with respect to letters 
to the editor, it says on page 8 . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Page 8 of the Commonwealth, recent 
edition, a policy with respect to letters to the editor, and I say as a quote: 
 

Regular letters are being sent from caucus (from caucus) but the bulk must be done at the local 
level to be effective. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if it’s NDP caucus policy to send letters to the editor using local people so that it can 
become ‘more effective,’ then perhaps maybe we could find out who sends the letters to the editors, and 
provides the kind of information the hon. member is talking about. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure after that, that I do welcome the Premier back 
because of the mass confusion that reigns while he’s here. This is not a letter to the editor. This is an 
editorial from your newspaper in your home riding. And I would like to quote from it again: 
 

It’s hard to visualize how a government that has frozen minimum wage for two years can be so 
generous to those at the top of the income scale. Those at the opposite end are finding it 
increasingly difficult to make ends meet at 4.25 an hour. 

 
Now the question is, Mr. Premier, while you were on your trip, did you have an opportunity to review 
that ill-conceived plan to drastically increase the salaries of your staff and freeze minimum wage? That 
was the question and I’d like a response to it. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I think that same editorial might have predicted that the NDP 
would win the next election back in April of 1982. So with respect to wage increases, Mr. Speaker, I 
said that there would be wage increases corresponding to increases in productivity because by definition, 
it isn’t inflationary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. members know that nobody is confined to minimum wage — 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2743 

nobody. Nobody’s confined to minimum wage. If they want to make improvements in productivity 
throughout the civil service, the government service, they can receive increases with respect to 
productivity because they warrant it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask a question about one of those dynamic 
new team, part of the team that you talk about being so productive in getting increases — one Derek 
Bedson, part of the new image of Saskatchewan politics. Can you tell me where Mr. Bedson will be 
located after tomorrow when his job as your deputy minister ends? Can you give me his point of 
residence, where he will be established, and where he will have an office after today? And also, can you 
tell us whether his salary has been increased even further to mark the more productive work that that 
individual is doing? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the hon. member would recall that I announced before I 
left that the increase would not apply to Mr. Bedson and to Mr. Gren Smith-Windsor. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That was when you left? What about now? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — It still doesn’t apply. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, the question was . . . There were two parts to the question: 
one, whether his salary would be increased — and I’m glad you’ve limited that dynamic individual to 
84,000 a year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 85,000 a year I’m informed by the member for Elphinstone 
— but can you tell me where he will be located after today, where his point of employment will be? Will 
it be in the United States, in London, in Vienna? Can you tell us where he will be located for 85,000 a 
year? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, as a result of my trip I can say that there are many places in the 
world that haven’t even heard of Saskatchewan, and haven’t heard enough about Saskatchewan, so that 
there are all kinds of opportunities for Saskatchewan people to be abroad marketing the message about 
Saskatchewan and the opportunities we have and the products we have to sell. I’ll be making an 
announcement in due course, Mr. Speaker, with respect to new positions and new offices, wherever they 
are. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Premier tells us that there are many 
places that don’t know about Saskatchewan in the world. I wonder if this is the only individual — a 
person who has been in Saskatchewan for about a year — is this the only individual . . . young and vital 
as he is, is he the only one who you will be sending to tell about Saskatchewan and the values of it? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, there’s all kinds of potential for Saskatchewan to make its mark 
in the world. There will be many programs and many opportunities for Saskatchewan people to express 
themselves internationally — in Europe, in south America, the Pacific Rim, the United States, and so 
forth — and we’ll be making those announcements in due course. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, just one very quick follow-up. Some of your staff have 
shelter allowances. I wonder whether you’ve arranged for Mr. Bedson to have a wine allowance. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I have no response there. 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2744 

Trade Union Act Amendments 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of labour. My question to 
the Minister of Labour is this: in view of the fact that you plan to introduce trade union act amendments 
tomorrow, I believe, has the minister consulted with representatives of employers and representatives of 
working people with respect to this bill? 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we have held many, many meetings with unions, with 
employees, with employers. In fact yesterday afternoon for five hours I was with various groups. I’m 
leaving in about another half-hour for a number of other group meetings with unions and employers. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. It is reported that some employer groups 
have received rough draft copies of the bill. Would the minister confirm that, and would he advise 
whether or not any trade unions have received a rough draft copy of the bill? 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — To my knowledge, Mr. Speaker, no one has received a copy of the bill. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to re-phrase my question because obviously the 
minister is taking refuge in ‘copy.’ I’ll put it the other way. Have you provided a detailed outline of the 
contents of the bill to both employer groups and employee groups, indicating not what the issues might 
be addressed but rather, what solutions you proposed? 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I have not handed out detailed specifics of The Trade Union 
Act amendments that are coming down tomorrow. We have given in our meetings yesterday some 
policy areas that we might be heading off into, but nothing in specifics. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that his consultation with trade 
union groups has been no more extensive than providing a general list of what he feels the issues are, as 
opposed to any indication of how he proposes to address those issues? 
 
HON. MR. MCLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, all that we have done so far is listed 
the policy areas that we thought we’d address in our amendments. Those were handed out to the unions 
yesterday and the groups that we met, also the employer groups that we met yesterday, and I’ll be doing 
the same this afternoon. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 
 

International Trade Meetings 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to spend a few minutes 
presenting a ministerial statement with respect to the international travel that I have been involved in in 
the last couple of weeks. The object of the intergovernmental meetings, with several countries and 
industry officials, was to improve Saskatchewan’s economic position in the currently difficult world of 
international 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2745 

trade. 
 
Recent circumstances leading up to the Williamsburg summit clearly point to large deficits in developed 
and developing countries alike, a growing tendency towards protectionism, and international fears of 
renewed cycles of inflation. The general high interest rates have caused repayment problems for 
developing countries, as well as trading problems for eastern European countries, which further leads to 
a lack of hard currency needed for their purchase of grain, livestock and manufactured goods. Thus 
eastern European and South American countries have been increasingly tempted by barter arrangements 
to avoid international interest payments. 
 
Consequently the Saskatchewan delegation took the opportunity to find out first hand: one, the problems 
faced by our customers; two, the difficulties experienced by our major competitors; three, how well 
Saskatchewan public and private companies were performing in the market-place; and, four, the extent 
that international people were aware of business opportunities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Most of the meetings were about potash markets, grain and livestock sales, energy, tourism, two-way 
trade opportunities in manufactured and consumer goods, and Saskatchewan opportunities in general. 
I’ll just very briefly point on four or five meetings. 
 
The first was in Vienna, at the International Fertilizer Association. The keynote address by 
Saskatchewan, followed by a significant statement by Sir Robin Ibbes of Great Britain, made it clear that 
world protection would only make domestic economic conditions worse in the long run. Saskatchewan 
took the position that more trade, rather than less, was the key to mutual success. Because eastern and 
western European potash producers effectively use regional marketing groups, Saskatchewan made it 
very clear that our public and private producers, represented by Canpotex, were prepared to represent 
this region of the world in a very vigorous fashion. The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan competes 
independently for the U.S. market, and our European competitors were advised how competitive we can 
be in difficult times. It was made clear that each Saskatchewan producer independently considers the 
U.S. Midwest as Saskatchewan’s backyard, and would not see long-run market share jeopardized by 
short-run European or Israeli activities. 
 
We had several very good meetings with most of our major customers, like China, Japan, and India, and 
discussed their problems about long-term trade relationships. Similarly, in talks with competitors we 
gained information on transportation changes, product quality, and technological changes in the 
industry. 
 
With the help of the Canadian ambassador, Mr. Alan Sullivan, several meetings were set up with 
Austrian energy and steel companies to explore international trade and mutual economic development. 
Deep-well exploration and the use of new mining technology were two topics of discussion. 
 
Similarly, the whole question of convincing Europeans to travel to Saskatchewan was reviewed. In our 
view, far too many do not know where Saskatchewan is or what there is to do in the province of 
Saskatchewan. For example, a Canada information office in downtown Vienna did not even have a 
Saskatchewan brochure. Other provinces were represented, with brochures from Alberta, from British 
Columbia, Ontario, Nova Scotia. The individual at the desk said that if they ever did receive something 
from Saskatchewan they usually kept it as a keepsake because they didn’t want to give it out because 
they weren’t receiving any and hadn’t for years. 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2746 

East Berlin. The reasons for the East Germany visit were two fold: one, to find out how well they mined 
in the potash business: and two, to give them the message that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
was very determined to maintain and build our market share in the U.S. Midwest. The same message, I 
might add, was given to the Russians, the Israelis, and the Jordanians. 
 
We had several meetings with trade and international economic officials. Ambassador John Fraser from 
Warsaw joined us in the potash mine tour and in the trade discussions. The East Germans are very 
interested in trading with Saskatchewan and talked about such possibilities as grain, livestock, mining 
technology, equipment and energy. 
 
The Alberta trade missions and the trade exhibits in Leipzig led by Horst Schmid had left a very 
favourable impression on the East German executive. 
 
West Germany. Several Saskatchewan officials discussed the potential for opening a trade office in 
Dusseldorf. The Consul-General, Mr. Maldwin Thomas and the trade commissioner, Mr. Ed Shelly were 
very helpful in pointing out that many important trading jurisdictions have trade offices open there. For 
example, every major Japanese trading company has an office in Dusseldorf as does Ontario. A 
Saskatchewan trade office is under very serious consideration, with a potential announcement as early as 
this fall. 
 
West German officials indicate that complete tour packages needed to be offered to Europeans planning 
travel in western Canada. Similarly, investment and market development funds from Europe need 
information on the opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan. These packages need to be produced 
in Saskatchewan and marketed all over Europe. The Saskatchewan presence in Europe, frankly, needs to 
be revamped in a major fashion. 
 
London — the objectives of the London leg of the mission were to, dispel any rumours that the former 
Saskatchewan administration’s plan to dismantle the office of the agent-general was consistent with the 
current thinking and, two, to examine the operation closely and indeed expand its capacity in London. 
Mr. Bob Larter was very excited over the potential for expanding the focus of the London office as both 
the administration centre for European trade, tourism and investment activities, and also as a 
development arm to penetrate the Middle East market. 
 
Mr. Merv Johnson, retiring agent-general, was extremely helpful in providing us with ideas of what 
could be done with the office and many of the changes that could be made to have the communication 
links between Saskatchewan and the London office improved. Good economic discussions were held 
with the high commissioner, Mr. Jamieson, trade commissioners, financial people, wheat board officials, 
and other business men. 
 
Finally, Brazil — the first trade discussions took place in Rio de Janeiro with the major trading 
companies and import-export licensing agencies. Perhaps due to the previous week’s rather serious 
discussions and because of our trip, CACEX advised us that import permits would be granted for 
approximately 50,000 tonnes of potash to be purchased this year. This was an interesting development 
for several reasons: first, the market in Brazil does not open until July and August; second, the sales are 
about four times what was purchased last year during the same period; and thirdly, many of the 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2747 

non-tariff barriers and excuses for not purchasing Saskatchewan potash were dealt with across the table. 
 
For example, we were able to get assurance from the Canadian government and the Brazilian 
government to resolve their quarrel over statistics and trade balances. Secondly, with the co-operation of 
the Royal Bank of Canada, we were able to secure longer-run credit terms for up to $15 million for 
future potash sales. Finally, a major commitment by the Brazilian Minister of Finance to make a current 
statement about Canadian-Brazilian trade relations was made. Mr. Brian Schumaker, consul general in 
Rio, and Mr. John Broadbent, trade commissioner, were very helpful. 
 
Similarly, the Brazilian wheat board, Mr. Speaker, announced that it would be purchasing the maximum 
of 1.5 million metric tons from Canada, which is consistent with our three-year long-term agreement. 
Ambassador Robert MacLean met the Saskatchewan delegation in Sao Paulo, along with several trade 
officials, and was very helpful in meeting industry people interested in Saskatchewan. 
 
I addressed the Canadian-Brazilian Chamber of Commerce and reiterated Saskatchewan’s confidence in 
Brazil and the benefit of increased trade. Several meetings were held in the capital, Brasilia, with cabinet 
ministers and officials about Saskatchewan-Brazilian trade in potash, wheat, oil, livestock, high 
technology, coffee, juices, clothing, tourism, and communications technology. While we were in the 
midst of our discussions, we were informed that the World Bank had made a major statement that 
international finance should be used for increasing agricultural productivity in developing countries. 
This international economic statement coincided well with discussions on joint ventures in land 
development, fertilizer use, and the potential for the development of Brazilian Amazon potash resources, 
by changing Saskatchewan potash technology for a larger market share in the long run. 
 
Brazilian people have done a remarkable job in the last 25 years. They have replaced much of their oil 
imports with domestically produced alcohol fuel, and are now the second largest exporter of soy beans 
in the world. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan delegation worked hard in over 30 meetings, by letting 
many of our customers and competitors know that we are indeed open for business and are serious about 
our international commitments, and we want them to get to know us better. We received firm 
commitments by many countries and companies to attend the Potash Trade Show ’83 in October in 
Saskatoon, and to attend other Saskatchewan trade shows like Agribition, Energex, and the Farm 
Progress Show. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has a responsibility to the world to help feed those who are hungry, and a 
responsibility to ourselves to not waste our own potential. It’s only the beginning. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Premier for that extensive report. I will not try to 
reply to it point by point. I will make a few observations and comments. The Premier found himself in 
the position of any ambassador for Saskatchewan abroad. He talked about grain — wheat particularly — 
and he found, I am sure, that the Canadian Wheat Board is a vigorous salesperson, but that we from 
Saskatchewan should add our weight and attempt to ascertain where there are problems in marketing of 
Canadian 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2748 

wheat and relay those to the wheat board. 
 
He spoke of potash and livestock. I now that others who have travelled abroad — including me when I 
occupied that post — did the same thing, and with some effect, as I’m sure the travel of the Premier will 
have some effect. 
 
I am pleased that he noted in Vienna that Saskatchewan stands for broadening trade and not 
protectionism. There is little for Saskatchewan in any policy of vigorous protectionism, either by Canada 
or any of our trading partners. We here in western Canada, and particularly in Saskatchewan, need to 
underline that point. 
 
He had meetings with our competitors in the potash industry, and that I commend. We had a number of 
meetings with the soviet Union, who are always a major potential competitor, and sometimes an actual 
competitor, and these exchanges help to improve the knowledge we have with which to do our planning. 
 
May I make a couple of observations now. If his statement suggested that there was any plan of the 
previous government to close Saskatchewan House in London, he was misinformed. The rumour never 
had any substance. 
 
With respect to the discussions, generally he found that interest rates have been a major bugbear in 
international trading in the last couple of years, and I hope he will use all of the power of his office to 
persuade the Reagan administration in the United States to abandon its high interest rate monetarist 
policies and to pursue a policy of lower interest rates and expanded economic activity. 
 
And one final point — his discussion in Brazil indicates, I think, the nature of trading in the world today. 
And whether or not the people in Korea to whom one sells potash, or Brazil to whom one sells potash 
are private sector or public sector purchasers, the decisions are effectively made by governments. And as 
the Premier indicated, an import permit was given by the government to import the 50,000 tonnes of 
potash and that made the deal possible. We are in the day of dealing government to government 
throughout the world in many of these areas, and we are unwise to assume otherwise and, in my 
judgement, unwise to use any marketing arm in whom we do not have full confidence that it speaks for 
our government, because we are certainly going to deal government to government in selling potash to 
Brazil and Korea, whatever the form may be, and to China and effectively to India and a good number 
of other countries, indeed most countries outside of North America. 
 
Those points I think the Premier would probably agree with. I thank him for his extensive statement and 
hope that his efforts abroad will yield great success for Saskatchewan. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 
Bill No. 97 — An Act to amend The Pest Control Act 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Pest Control Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 98 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments to Certain Acts 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2749 

resulting from the enactment of the Northern Municipalities Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the hon. member, I move first reading of a bill 
respecting the consequential amendments to certain Acts resulting from the enactment of The Northern 
Municipalities Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 99 — An Act respecting the Reciprocal Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill respecting the reciprocal 
enforcement of maintenance orders. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 100 — An Act to amend The Land Titles Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Land Titles Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

RULING BY MR. SPEAKER 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day, I would like to make a brief ruling on the order brought 
forward by the Minister of Finance yesterday. I went back and reviewed the record, ad also reviewed the 
guide-lines that were set out at the time that the question period was first struck; and I’ve reviewed 
Beauschesne’s in all its clauses we would likely not be able to carry on a question period in this House 
because of the restrictions it provides. 
 
I believe that the question period yesterday, though some may not have thought the questions to be 
urgent . . . That’s very difficult for the Chair to rule — whether or not a question is urgent and of 
immediate importance — because it is, perhaps, of immediate importance to the person asking it and 
may not be to the person that was listening to it. Also, the question sometimes in its first statement does 
not bring out its most pertinent fact, and rather the pertinent points of the question come out in the 
supplementary questions. So for the Chair to rule when the question is first asked, I think, would be 
very, very difficult. I would ask the members on both sides of the House to try and keep question period 
as sharp and pointed as possible, and answers to be very much the same. 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
MOTION UNDER RULE 16 

 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to rise today to discuss and 
debate what we in the opposition believe to be one of the most pressing problems facing the young 
people in Saskatchewan today; and that is the problem that they are finding having . . . the problem they 
are having finding jobs — meaningful jobs — or, in fact, any kind of jobs at the present time under the 
economic circumstances that was now find ourselves in in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2750 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will be well aware that only 14 months ago there was a campaign ran in 
Saskatchewan which, in many respects, played upon and campaigned towards the audience of the youth 
of the province of Saskatchewan. And we will all remember the clichés and the slogans: bring the 
children home; and there’s so much more we can be. And campaign literature that was used by the new 
government was full of that kind of slogans, and I have here one pamphlet call Commitment which, in 
part, I would like to quote from. It says ‘Provide Jobs and Opportunities,’ one section of the brochure: 
 

An industrial strategy will emphasize development of renewable resource potential that will 
ensure permanent rewarding jobs here in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this referring to young people in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the youth of the province have come to know is quite different from 
what was promised prior to last April 26. Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 14 short months since that election 
campaign, we have found that unemployment among the youth segment, that segment between the ages 
of 15 and 24, has risen and risen dramatically in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these glowing campaign promises stand in stark contrast to the reality which is 
present under a Conservative government. They promise jobs, and the reality is the worst youth 
unemployment that this province has known in decades. And this isn’t based on any numbers that we 
have thought up or conjured up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are based on what is known by the 
government as their own record from the Department of Labour. And by youth employment I would like 
to go through some of the statistics which would compare the first four months of 1983 under the new 
Conservative government. And the facts, their own numbers, the ones that they publish on a 
month-to-month basis, are in fact very revealing. 
 
In January of last year there were 11,000 people between the ages of 15 and 24 looking for work, and in 
February that number was 13,000; in March, 12,000; in April 12,250 young people per month who were 
unemployed. And we believe that to be a significant problem. We believe that to be a problem so 
important that we would go forward and, through our budget which we had designed in March of last 
year, bring an out and introduce the biggest job creation program in the history of the province in order 
to alleviate that very high rate of 12,000 people per month. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Conservative government that came on the scene at that time was elected with 
the promise of, ‘There’s so much more we can be.’ And here again, the theme, ‘There’s so much more 
we can be,’ is really dramatized in the numbers that would indicate there was indeed so much more 
employment that could be created among the young people of the province. 
 
And you’ll remember the statistics that I gave you for the first four months of 1982, and I would like to 
compare those to the first four months of 1983. During the first four months we saw numbers like 
19,000 in January of 1983. That is up from what I mentioned earlier, 11,000 in 1982. In February, the 
number of young people employed in 1983 was 18,000, up significantly from that time last year. And in 
March 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2751 

of 1983, it was 20,000 young people unemployed compared to 12,000 a year earlier. In going through 
this record, I find that the total increase in unemployment among that sector of the labour force is in fact 
a 53 per cent increase for an average per month of 18,750 young people being unemployed each month 
at the present time. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan, which is often talked about being 
the lowest in the country, and is if you go by the raw numbers, but if you include the number of people 
who are now employed, so-called, on the farm — which has increased by 10,000 people in January, and 
February, and March . . . Lord only knows what those individuals might be doing on the farm in those 
months. But I would assume they’re at home simply because there are no jobs in the city, and they find 
it one way of putting three square meals a day into their stomachs simply because of the fact that they 
are now living at home rather than working in the cities. 
 
But getting back to the increase in the unemployment among young people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
find that that group of people now has an unemployment rate throughout the province at 16 per cent. 
And my colleague from Athabasca, I’m sure, will fill us in on the unemployment in northern 
Saskatchewan which among that age group is much, much higher. And before members of the 
government caucus rise to their feet and talk about gloom and doom that they would have us believe is 
being attempted to be created in the opposition, I would like to say that these gloom-and-doom numbers 
are facts. They’re their facts, and so if they’re saying that they’re gloom and doom, I would ask them 
and beg them to do something about the gloom and doom that they are creating among the young people 
in the province today. Because very, very truthfully the young people who I talk to who are without jobs 
are floundering in the province of Saskatchewan at the present time. 
 
What the government would have us believe is that this group, too, has not got the Saskatchewan spirit. 
Simply if they believed in how great the Conservative government was, and if they believed in this and 
that, they would be all right. But the very simple fact is that this government has failed, and failed 
miserably in the past year, and has failed again with the program that they have brought out known as 
Opportunities 1983. I think you need to look at the program closely to find out where the failings of this 
program are. 
 
First of all, the amount of money that they are talking about putting into the program is $3.7 million. In 
asking the government earlier about the amount of money the increases in salaries will cost for their 
personal staff and high paid salaries of their civil servants, we find that that increase alone, by their own 
admission, is around $6 million. So the youth of this province, the job creating program is slightly more 
than half of the increase which will go to senior civil servants and the political staff in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are other major flaws in the program, as well. For example, you have to have registered for 
classes this fall, as I understand it, in order to qualify for the program. So any student who is not 
planning on going back to university next fall, be that because they cannot afford it because of 
ever-increasing tuition fees and have to stay put and work a year, they will not be eligible for this new 
Opportunities 1983 program. If they’re a graduate from a technical school or a university, they, as well, 
are excluded. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, even if the program lived up to the very highest expectations of the government, 
which would mean 3,500 new jobs would be created, that would mean that you would still have in the 
province of Saskatchewan about 15,000 young people 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2752 

who are unemployed. And many people in the province do not believe that 3,000 or 3,500 jobs will be 
created by this program when you look at the amount of money which is being put into it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to point, as well, to the fact that at the Canadian employment 
placement office in Saskatoon, the number of people who are seeking jobs and placement in jobs at that 
centre alone presently stands at 2,000. And of those 2,000 who are seeking employment through this 
centre, only 329 of them have been placed at this time, and 100 of them for less than five days. So if you 
look at the number of people who have fund employment for more than five days, students who have 
found employment for more than five days in the province of Saskatchewan, out of the Saskatoon 
centre, you’ll find that the number is 228 out of 2,000. And this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not gloom and 
doom. These are the facts. These are the records. And I would ask the members of the government to 
stand up in their place and tell us how they expect this job-creating program to mean anything to those 
18,000 or 19,000 students who presently find themselves unemployed and unable to find work, and for 
that reason many who will be unable to continue their education because they will not have the money to 
return to university. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that it’s past due when this government should come to grips with the 
unemployment situation we are seeing in Saskatchewan, whether it’s the 60,000 overall or the one-third 
of that 60,000 who make up the student unemployment population. I believe it’s time that this 
government show economic leadership in the province of Saskatchewan. And that is why I move, 
seconded by the member for Athabasca: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Saskatchewan government for its failure to recognize the 
plight of many thousand Saskatchewan students and young people who cannot secure summer 
employment and that this Assembly urges the government to exercise positive economic 
leadership in implementing immediately a full array of effective measures which will enable the 
youth of this province to secure meaningful and rewarding employment opportunities. 

 
MR. FOLK: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With a great deal of pleasure that I rise in the House today 
and move an amendment to congratulate our government for its measures to help students to find 
rewarding employment this summer. That motion which I will introduce will read as follows; 
 

That the motion be amended by deleting all the words after the words ‘that this Assembly and 
substituting therefor the following: ‘congratulates the Government of Saskatchewan for the 
success of the Opportunities ’83 student employment and commends it for establishing the small 
business employment program which will provide 4,000 new jobs in the small business sector.’ 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve listened a little bit to the members of the opposition and in particular the member from 
Shaunavon who says, ‘Don’t get up and talk about gloom and doom.’ Well, perhaps I wont’ do that 
because they obviously recognize that that’s all they can talk about over there. As long as that black 
cloud just goes over those three members there, that is fine with me. 
 
As all members of this House are aware — or at least I think all members — we, the 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2753 

industrialized countries, in recent months are years have gone through a period of economic recession. 
This has had many ramifications, Mr. Speaker, which the former government of our province tried 
unsuccessfully to grapple with and which our government, during its first year in office, had fought 
effectively through a number of positive actions. 
 
As the Minister of Finance stated in his excellent budget address just two months ago, nationally, 
inflation is down; and in Saskatchewan, inflation is down even further. Through such measures as 
elimination of the road tax on gasoline, the Mortgage Interest Reduction plan, changes to the oil royalty 
structure, and the farm purchase program, our government has helped to ensure that Saskatchewan’s 
economy gets healthier and healthier, leading all other jurisdictions in what I believe are the most 
important measures of economic performance. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all recognize, I think, that during difficult times it is often the young and 
students who suffer because of rising costs and unemployment. And it is precisely because youths are 
particularly hard hit by financial difficulties during downturns in our economy, that this government 
took a major step to help create summer employment during 1983. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit that Opportunities ’83 is a program which gives an excellent view of just what 
this government is all about. It is responsive to the needs of students and it is responsive to the needs of 
employers. This government, in other words, is responsive to the needs expressed by the people of the 
province, and flexible enough to meet those needs. This flexibility, I submit, was illustrated by the 
addition of $1 million to the program’s original allocation of $2 million when it became apparent that 
more students and employers than anticipated wanted to take part in Opportunities ’83. Also, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m informed that this amount is by far larger than any amount ever allocated by the previous 
NDP administration. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. FOLK: — In moving this amendment today, I would like to review the terms of reference of this 
program, and talk a little about what our government was doing when it implemented this successful 
program. The program announced in the March budget set out to provide a total of 2.7 million this 
summer, to allow farms, businesses, non-profit organizations, municipalities, and other local 
government bodies to hire students with the government subsidy of up to $350 per month for up to three 
months. High school and post-secondary students who were enrolled in post-secondary educational 
institutions for this fall were eligible for employment under this program. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the aims of this program were clear. They were to provide employment for 
students who required summer-job income in order to continue their education, and to provide for that 
employment throughout the province and throughout the many sectors of our economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this program responded so well to the needs of our people. It was such a step in the 
right direction that the Opportunities ’83 office received even more applications for employment of 
students than was expected. Our government, displaying its responsiveness to real needs, added an 
additional $1 million to this program in late April, to add even more student jobs to the expected 3,000 
jobs which we anticipated the program would originally create. 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2754 

This program has been a prime example of our government’s recognition of the needs of young people. 
It is helping young people financially, and it is helping young people develop the skills, both academic 
and work-related, which will be necessary for their successful transition in the world of work. 
 
I would like to point out that this program, while it is a temporary measure designed to address a specific 
problem, is not a program which is mounted in isolation from overall government policy. Opportunities 
’83 is one program this year, but on the larger front of ensuring that there is adequate employment and 
training for our young people our government has taken many initiatives, initiatives which are well 
thought-out and co-ordinated. The government, as the Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower 
has stated, has embarked upon a plan to expand Saskatchewan’s technical vocational capacity by 
roughly 60 per cent over the next three years — taking us to more than 8,600 training places per year, up 
3,100 from the current level of 5,500. 
 
This year alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government is spending about $7 million to add about 1,200 
new training spaces — adding sports at out three institutes, planning for a new technical institute in 
Prince Albert, and using the Saskatchewan skills extension program to take this invaluable kind of 
training out to the people throughout the province. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in view of our government’s moves to increase accessibility of education, 
flexibility or programs, thus making more and better training available for our young people. I believe 
that we are in fact serving well the needs of students and youth in the province. We recognize that our 
youth is our most valuable natural resource, and that the development of our human resources is a key 
element in any successful economic recovery program. 
 
The Opportunities ’83 program is one specific program which illustrates our concern and our 
willingness to act for the people. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to relate one incident during the campaign last 
March. When we were going door-to-door I talked to one person in my constituency and he indicated he 
was going to vote NDP. And I asked him why, and he says, ‘Well, the PCs have got the best programs.’ 
And I say, ‘Well, why are you voting NDP?’ He says, ‘Well, for the past two summers I had a job up 
North. They paid me in the neighbourhood of $2,550 to $3,000 a month.’ And I say, ‘Well, gee, you 
must have been doing good work.’ He says, ‘Well, no, not really. I just basically sat around.’ But that’s 
good money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when I look at the motion brought forth by the member from Shaunavon, ‘to secure meaningful and 
rewarding employment opportunities.’ I would like to draw this parallel between what the former 
administration did for meaningful employment, and what our government is doing through the 
employment ‘83s. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am pleased in view of all this to commend the government ad move 
this amendment here today. Thank you very much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. It gives me great pleasure today to get up in 
this House and debate this very important issue that we have before the legislature today. I find it quite 
interesting that the Conservative government would amend such a motion and stand up in this House as 
the member for Saskatoon 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2755 

University has just done, and congratulating the government on what they have done, when the statistics 
that their Conservative government has put out themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker, speak plainly for 
themselves. 
 
I don’t know who he’s been talking to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but when I go around this province — and I 
just got through going around northern Saskatchewan — I’ve seen hundreds and hundreds of young 
people who have no opportunities to go to work; there’s no programs proposed for them. And I just 
wonder what the member from Saskatoon University is talking about when he says, ‘I congratulate the 
Conservative government of Saskatchewan for the opportunities that the youth have in this province.’ 
 
Let’s take a look at the figures. As my colleague from Shaunavon has just indicated to this legislature, 
the figures speak quite plainly as to what the problem is in this province. They seem to feel that they 
way to solve the problem of youth unemployment is to put millions of dollars — and he was quoting in 
millions of dollars . . . And that’s fine, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You can put as many millions of dollars as 
you want out to try and slow down the high unemployment rate that we have with our youth. And on the 
other hand, what do they do? They cut programs. 
 
Let’s just take a look at some of the programs that they have cut, and taken away jobs away from the 
youth in this province. And it’s quite plain. Yes, they want to put money into youth programs, but what 
do they do? By their own admission, they cut 90 jobs out of the Woodland Enterprises in Prince Albert. 
They cut them out of the bush and they say, ‘Well, we’re gong to take the 90 adult jobs that they had in 
the bush, and we’re going to let them plant trees for the summer.’ And they’re taking 90 jobs away from 
the youth and the university students that always have them jobs, and this is what they’re doing. Let’s 
take a look at what’s going on in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And I find it quite interesting that the member from Saskatoon University would indicate that an 
individual told him that he was working in northern Saskatchewan and receiving $2,500 a month for 
doing nothing. I just don’t think that is possible . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . And the members, they 
laugh. They feel that the jobs . . . that the individuals who are getting paid these large sums of money in 
northern Saskatchewan are sitting on their rear ends and doing nothing. That’s what they’re indicating. 
 
But let me say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how many jobs has SMDC created this summer for the youth 
in this province? Every year SMDC has university students that were coming out. Geologists — young 
geologists who were in their first, second, and third years of geology — went out and worked for SMDC 
in the bush in northern Saskatchewan. They no longer have them jobs; they’re no longer there. One just 
has to go and take a look in northern Saskatchewan and you’ll find out that SMDC is just not doing any 
exploration work any more. It’s been cut right off. 
 
And when you take a look at the figures . . . Let’s take a look at the figure for April, or for January. 
Under the NDP government, there was 11,000 students unemployed. Under the Conservative 
government, one year later, there is 19,000 unemployed, by their own admission. That’s their numbers; 
that’s their figures. And you go into northern Saskatchewan, like I did last week, and I seen hundreds of 
young people between 15 and 25 looking for work and said o me, ‘What has gone wrong? There is 
absolutely no jobs. Housing has come to a dead stop. Road construction has come to a dead stop. Roads 
aren’t being built any more.’ 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2756 

There’s cut-backs just about in every segment of government that we have in this province. And that 
why the youth of this province, the teenagers that are coming out of grade 11 and 12 and usually have 
summer employment, university students who usually go and work on Highways projects — them jobs 
are not there any more. They have been eliminated. And you go and talk to any foreman on the 
highways crews, used to be foremans, and now they’re out driving machines because of the 157 
employees that were laid off. Former superintendents are now operating machines just in order to have a 
job, and the jobs that the Highways created for the youth are gone. They’re just not there because there’s 
no highway construction in this province compared to what there was under the NDP government. 
 
And I say the members of this Conservative government, putting out the figures like you have just put 
out, and to get up and say that you’re going to congratulate yourselves for what you have done for the 
youth in this province to create employment for the youth, I think it’s bad, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think 
it’s real bad, because you go out and you talk to the youth of this province, talk to the graduates as I 
have done in the last week, where I went to four graduations, and I saw young people graduating out of 
grade 12 and graduating out of the community colleges, and where are they going to get jobs? No hope 
at all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. No hope at all because of the cutting and slashing of this Conservative 
government. They’re continually cutting programs. And then they threw a few million dollars into 
make-work programs. And they say, ‘Well, we’re solving the problem.’ But I tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this Conservative government is not solving the problem. It is creating more and more 
problems and more and more of our youth in this province are unemployed and they feel insecure and 
they just don’t know where they’re going to go. 
 
Jobs that they had in the nurseries — they’re gone; jobs in SMDC, as I said, in northern Saskatchewan 
exploration has come to a complete stop. That’s where these jobs are gone. So I just say, you may be 
going to put in a few million dollars into the pot and say, ‘We’re going to create 400 jobs . . . 4,000 
jobs.’ You may create 4,000 jobs and cut back on 8,000 or 10,000 jobs. And the figures indicate that. 
And that’s a sad situation. 
 
You can say what you want in this House, but I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you ought to get into the 
communities and there’s where you’re going to see the youth. Don’t sit in this House and then tell us 
figures and say everything is rosy and congratulate the government. Get out into the communities; go to 
these graduating classes, and just see what the youth of this province are saying. And I tell you: I’ve 
been all over this province and they’re saying that we are in trouble. What are the jobs; where are the 
opportunities? 
 
Drive down the highways. I tell you . . . You drive down the highways on week-ends between any of 
these major cities and you don’t see any traffic any more. You’re not going to have problems with 
highways because people can’t even afford to travel. A year ago you could drive up these roads and 
there was just one massive line of traffic. I tell you, that’s not the way it is today. And we had our youth 
out there and travelling and they were mobile and they had jobs and they were going back to school in 
the fall and they knew that they had money to continue their education. They don’t have that today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have overdone my time here and I will sit down and let some of the other 
members get into this. 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2757 

MR. GLAUSER: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In spite of what the member opposite from 
Athabasca was saying, I, too, am pleased to rise today in support of this amendment. I would like to 
remind the member that economists can rarely agree on anything, but this is a particular time that they 
do seem to agree on one thing, and that is that the private sector must create jobs. We cannot have the 
government . . . The governments in the past have performed dismally at creating employment for 
people, and our program of opportunities, Opportunities ’83 — the student program — and the small 
business program are two examples of the manner in which the private sectors do co-operate, and they 
are providing jobs as everyone in this House knows. 
 
In speaking to the amendment I would like to draw the attention of the House to some specifics 
regarding this government’s summer student employment program — Opportunities ’83 — to add to my 
colleague’s argument that this program illustrates how well we on this side have responded to the needs 
of youth and students this year. Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker, pardon me . . . All high schools and 
post-secondary students who were enrolled in post-secondary educational institutions for this fall were 
eligible for employment under this program. I think my colleague on this side and the Minister of 
Advanced Education and Manpower, when this program was first announced, have given a good 
description of the aims of this program and how it fits into this government’s comprehensive and 
well-thought-out strategy for training, employment, and economic recovery. 
 
So I would like to turn to some of the facts and figures regarding the operation of Opportunities ’83 — 
facts and figures which show how well this program is working for the youth, for the employers, and for 
the province of Saskatchewan. At the time of the March budget when Opportunities ’83 was announced 
with the initial funding of $2.7 million, it was anticipated that approximately 3,000 student summer jobs 
would be created throughout this program; but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by April 22 — the application 
deadline — about 4,000 employer applications had been accepted requesting assistance for more than 
6,000 summer students. Clearly this government was addressing a need which was felt around our 
province. So Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you and members of this House are aware, our government 
decided to respond in an even larger way to the needs of students by adding $1 million to the original 
program. This infusion of money meant that more than 3,500 students jobs could be created by this 
program. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell members that our most recent view of statistics concerning subscription to 
the Opportunities ’83 program shows that of the more than 4,100 employer applications we received, we 
have approved approximately 3,300, or roughly 80 per cent of the applications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this was a commendable figure and one which shows just how well our government 
is responding to the needs of students and employers in Saskatchewan. These are interesting figures as 
well, Mr. Speaker: I can tell you that these approved employer applications have so far provided for the 
employment of about 3,800 students in Saskatchewan this summer. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I submit to members opposite that this is not a give-away program. It is a program 
that is a providing for gainful employment of young people, so that they can further their education, and 
I submit that members of the former government 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2758 

cannot have it both ways. On the one hand they criticize us for inaction and not helping people. On the 
other hand they criticize us when we do spend money for what I consider to be valuable and worthwhile 
programs. And, Mr. Speaker, we are providing for this valuable program for youth and students in 
amounts which, when you look at the local figures for some of our centres, are much more generous and 
much more responsive to people’s needs than the former government’s YES (youth employment 
services) program . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And wait till I get there! Or your youth employment 
programs were. 
 
Let’s look at Moose Jaw, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In Moose Jaw last year the YES program provided 
$47,857 for summer students employment. Well, what was it this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker? This 
government through the Opportunities ’83 program is providing $70,125 for student employment in the 
city of Moose Jaw. Well, let’s look at Prince Albert. The story is the same. Last year the YES program 
provided $35,683 for student summer jobs, and this year Opportunities ’83 . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . And listen to this, member from Athabasca: this year $142,450 — fur times as much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And in Saskatoon (and the member from Shaunavon should listen to this), last year YES 
provided $257,207; this year we have provided through Opportunities ’83, $478,275. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. GLAUSER: — And for the member of Elphinstone: in Regina last year YES provided $208,277, 
while this year Opportunities ’83 is providing $425,275. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government listens to the people of this province and acts in a positive 
manner to meet the needs of people. Opportunities ’83 demonstrates this, and so do many of the other 
programs our government has introduced. Mr. Speaker, because of the responsiveness to the needs of 
youth which this government has shown so well through the tremendously successful Opportunities ’83 
program I am pleased to add my support to the amendment. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to add a few words to this debate. 
Speakers prior to me in this debate have pointed out the stark figures, the fact that unemployment among 
young people is up well over 50 per cent in 1983 over last year. And I think all of us are now familiar 
with the problems which are being faced, particularly by students — university students and high school 
students — in getting employment. And that’s evidenced by the many headlines which we are seeing in 
papers. I see one here which says: ‘Educated, Graduated, Unemployed.’ Another one which says: 
‘Unemployment Isn’t Working For Students.’ Another one which says: ‘Students Want Jobs Not More 
Excuses.’ And another one which no doubt has been mentioned, indicating that 407 STI graduates face a 
grim outlook. And I know in my own experience, and I’ve talked to a good number of law graduates 
from across Canada who are having a real difficulty getting positions where they can serve their articles 
and get themselves admitted to the bar, and in my own personal acquaintance there are many who are in 
difficult circumstances. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is not only the fault of the government opposite. It is not only the fault of 
the government which preceded it. It is a fault which we all must share, and I just want to just take a few 
minutes to point out some of the real human consequences of this. And I may refer, if you will permit it, 
to a clipping of something which the United Church had to say over the week-end, and saying that in 
their view job creation must be top priority, and they went on to say this in the course of their resolution 
on 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2759 

unemployment and job creation. 
 

There flows from prolonged unemployment extreme human hardship, despair, and degradation, 
with severe consequences of increased crime, alcohol, and drug abuse, family breakdown, loss of 
self-worth, depression, and even suicide. 

 
Well, that of course is an extreme way of stating the problem, but for many, many people it is a problem 
in human terms, and for young people it’s a particular kind of problem. It’s in the nature of youth to 
expect that the future will unfold; that if you as a young person apply yourself, if you train yourself, 
there will be an opportunity, and you will have an opportunity to use your talents — for your own 
service, yes — but for the betterment of your neighbours and your community as well. That is what 
youth very frequently feels. We sometimes refer to it as youthful idealism. Whatever we wish to call it, 
it’s a characteristic which we need in our society, and we need to nourish in our society. 
 
We as a society are failing these young people. No one says that all young people can expect a rose 
garden. And I am not feeling particularly unhappy about some who have to scramble a bit, because it is 
not part of life to be necessary launched from your educational career into a job which is easy to find 
and well paid. That may not always be the case. But it is certainly a part of our responsibility as public 
servants in the broader sense to offer some opportunities to young people. 
 
The situation which is prevalent in Canada today has been the subject of statements by many people. I 
particularly wish to refer to one published by a committee of the Canadian Conference of Catholic 
Bishops, entitled ‘Ethical Reflections on the Economic Crisis.’ In which they pin-point what they feel is 
the obligation of governments — and when I say governments, I include oppositions as well. I’m not 
here trying to indicate that it’s only the job of the treasury benches to solve these problems. On the very 
top of their list they put this one: 
 

First, unemployment rather than inflation should be recognized as the number one problem to be 
tackled in overcoming the present crisis. 

 
And they go on to indicate their reasons for that. And they say, and I’m picking up another quote: 
 

At the same time, working people, the unemployed, young people, and those on fixed incomes, 
are increasingly called upon to make the most sacrifice for economic recovery. 

 
And they go on to say that we as governments are calling upon young people and others, but particularly 
young people, to accept the state of unemployment because we are unwilling to act to create full 
employment because of our fear of inflation. And it behooves us to find ways to address both 
unemployment and inflation. It has been done in a free society by some countries — not perfectly, but 
with a good deal more success than we have realized here. It involves what is essentially a co-operative 
approach by government, business, and labour to limit increases in incomes, particularly for those who 
are higher incomes, but increases in incomes for those who are working so that governments may 
stimulate the economy to create jobs without inducing inflation. 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2760 

Now that is what is needed, and that is what must be pursued, and that is what has been relatively 
successful in countries like Japan and West Germany and Sweden, where there are certainly low levels 
of unemployment and low levels of inflation by our standards. Certainly no country is immune from the 
difficulties, but they have all had rather greater success than we have because they have pursued what 
might be called the social contract — a policy of co-operation between government, management, and 
labour. There is no question that a persistent state of unemployment tends to generate a climate of social 
fear and a passive acceptance. I’m now quoting the Catholic bishops: 
 

. . . a climate in which we take away from young people some of the greatest opportunities that 
they have to use their youth to expand their opportunities and the society in which they live. 

 
I’ll just refer to one other comment on the moral consequences of unemployment, and I refer to the 
encyclical of Pope John Paul II, entitled Laborem Exercens, and I’ll quote just briefly from that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and they talk about unemployment: 
 

. . . which in all cases is an evil and which, when it reaches a certain level, can become a real 
social disaster. It is particularly painful when it especially affects young people who, after 
appropriate cultural, technical, and professional preparation, fail to find work and see their 
sincere wish to work and their readiness to take on their own responsibilities for the economic 
and social development of the community sadly frustrated. 

 
That is what we are doing to many, many young people in Canada today. The encyclical goes on to offer 
its solution which suggests overall planning with regard to different kinds of work. I will not pursue that 
except to say that we are dealing not only with statistics, but we are dealing with the need for 
governments to act so that young people’s lives are not blighted, so that we do not brand and stigmatize 
a generation of young people with their . . . 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — The Leader of the Opposition has expired his time. 
 
MR. MYERS: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you, member 
from Quill Lakes, thank you. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise once again in these Chambers and to speak to the amended 
motion concerning the Opportunities ’83 student employment program. The program is proving to be a 
bigger success than originally anticipated. The $2.7 million originally required has had an additional $1 
million placed before it, and we’ve been able to employ another 1,000 students, bringing the total to 
3,000 students this summer. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the Minister of Finance has stated in the budget address last March, he and the 
Minister of Education realized the current level of unemployment is too high, but even at its present rate 
it’s still the lowest in the country. To counter this high rate of unemployment in this province, the 
government’s actions in the past six months and for the forthcoming year have and will move to address 
the unemployment rate. 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2761 

The Build-A-Home program has proven to be a very successful program, and will be continued to 
August 1, and no doubt this activity will also employ a large number of students and summer students. 
The youth employment program for the summer months will assist the students who will be seeking 
summer jobs so as to enable them to return to schools, technical institutions, and universities next fall. 
 
One of the major concerns expressed by the Premier’s advisory board was the shortage of summer jobs 
for students. This is a valid concern since the majority of students enrolled in post-secondary institutions 
rely on summer earnings to make it through university of technical schools in the winter. The 
administration has listened to the concerns expressed by our youth and responded by introducing and 
increasing the Opportunities ’83 program. This program was a result of the government’s listening to the 
Premier’s youth advisory board. The nine youth that come from many parts of the province to make up 
this board have expressed their concerns and requirements and will continue to express their concerns 
and requirements for the students of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Opportunities ’83 program is a new summer job program designed now to 
create 4,000 new summer jobs for Saskatchewan summer students during the periods of May 1 to 
September 30. We will assist employers with job creation by subsidizing each student’s salary to a 
maximum of $350 per month for up to three months. In other words, the Opportunities ’83 will assist 
Saskatchewan businesses, Saskatchewan non-profit organizations, and Saskatchewan municipalities. It 
will also assist Saskatchewan students by creating more jobs, and by opening up more opportunities for 
summer employment. 
 
Let me give you an example of how this program works. I can think of a young man or a young woman 
in my constituency, in my neighbourhood, who needs summer earnings to complete his or her last year 
of computer sciences at the University of Saskatchewan. She has convinced a local hardware store 
owner that she can help him with his plans to computerize his accounts and stocks. He needs assistance, 
and he would like to give this student a break. He’s impressed with ideas and the energy of this student, 
but he can’t afford to pay the additional salary out of his own pocket. Now the Opportunities ’83 
program can bring the two of them together and provide both of them with requirements that they need 
— the employer in his business and the student in using the abilities they have attained through their 
education and will use upon graduation. 
 
Municipalities need playground supervision and lifeguards; regional parks require maintenance staff; the 
chamber of commerce needs students to man tourist information booths; businesses need clerks, 
secretaries, cashiers, sales people, industrial workers, construction crews, carpenters, accountants or, as 
was just said, just plain gophers. The list of employees and employers is endless; all of them will benefit 
from the program. 
 
Let me talk about the details of Opportunities ’83. The eligibility requirements for both employers and 
employees are very straightforward. Eligible employees include Saskatchewan businesses, non-profit 
organizations, municipalities, and local government bodies. Employers must guarantee the summer 
positions are new opportunities, and that no regular employee will be replaced by a student. Eligible 
employees include permanent Saskatchewan residents who are either high school or post-secondary 
students enrolled for the fall of 1983. Application forms and brochures were sent to local chamber of 
commerce and filed offices and Department of Agriculture, Culture 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2762 

and Recreation, industry and commerce. The information could have been picked up by secondary 
educational institutes, high schools, and community colleges. 
 
So this program did work towards employing the summer students. I think we have a right to be excited 
about this program. It doesn’t take a crystal ball to tell us that young people are our future, and 
Opportunities ’83 is going to get the future working for Saskatchewan. 
 
The opposition has talk about this program, but all they have expressed are the negative views. They 
don’t know how to look to the future, to utilize the future of this province. They have negative attitudes. 
They’ve had negative attitudes since the budget came down; they can’t see any good in it. They can’t 
see the budget helping the people of this province, but it is; it’s working for them all the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be supporting the amendment and will not be supporting the original motion. Thank 
you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we drew up this resolution we felt it was important that 
we bring to the attention of the government the concerns and the hopes and the aspirations of young 
people in Saskatchewan — indeed, in all of Canada. 
 
I think that what is developing in our country, indeed across the world, is an isolation to the concern of 
the unemployment situation which has indeed struck so heavily on our young people. And it seems to 
me that the youth of our province, and indeed our country, is our hope for the future, for it is on their 
shoulders — or our youth — that we place the awesome responsibility to build a better society, build a 
better society for what we have left them. 
 
But today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many of our youth who would so eagerly and idealistically take up the 
challenge of making a contribution to society are being denied that opportunity, for many of our young 
people have become a part of the yearly statistics, the statistics of unemployment. For many of our 
young people their hopes have been shattered, their idealism replaced by despair. The youth of our 
province ask not for handouts. All they ask is the right for meaningful employment. 
 
And we bring this resolution to the floor of this Assembly, not on a purely partisan political basis, 
because the problem exists throughout our nation. I read recently — just to put it into perspective, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — the young people of Canada today, according to Statistics Canada, are unemployed 
at the rate of 34.4 per cent in the month of March. This compares with the unemployment rate for adults 
in the country as a whole of 13.9. And some 1,658 million Canadians are out of work — again according 
to Statistics Canada. We find a developing trend where one-third to almost one-half of the unemployed 
in this country are young people. 
 
As an elected representative I can see no situation which is more critical and which moves me more than 
the situation that is developing for the future of our young people. I talked to a niece of mine who 
recently graduated with great distinction as chartered accountant, silver medal. And she talks to me and 
she say, ‘What a sad situation. Many of that class I graduated with have finished their articles and were 
relieved of their positions in the various firms.’ 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2763 

Recently I was home over the week-end and I find young people milling around desperately, hoping to 
find opportunities for jobs. I’ll tell you, a young fellow was at my door the other day — a bright young 
fellow — first year engineering. He has tried in Saskatoon; he has tried in Prince Albert. Today in 
Humboldt what he’s doing is weeding gardens for elderly citizens. 
 
This is the future that we here in Saskatchewan are providing to our young people . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . yes, indeed it’s honourable, but that’s fine. You can call it honourable, but I’m telling 
you what the situation is: that there are young people in this country should have the opportunity of full 
participation and to reach the maximum of their abilities. I want to say that, you know, you take this 
provincial government, and oh, they rave about cutting the road tax. They said how a great use that 
would be to our young people. Yeah, it was a great use, but today thousands of our young people don’t 
have a job, can’t license their car, and that’s the fact of the situation. 
 
You know the Tories had another expression during the last campaign. Our provincial government says, 
‘Oh, there’s so much more we can be.’ And I want to say that our youth realize what this means for 
them — unemployment and a loss of a career opportunity. The leader of our party indicated some of the 
prospects that have been noted throughout Saskatchewan at various graduations. I look at one here 
which took place in Moose Jaw. 
 

‘407 STI Graduates Face Grim Outlook.’ All dressed up (it says) with no place to work. 407 
young people graduated from the Saskatchewan Technical Institute Saturday in an unusual 
atmosphere of the 25-year-old school. Once a definite stepping-stone to a wealth of job 
opportunity, the institute has found itself caught in the economic slump unable to find work for 
most of the students. 

 
I look at another indication of the problem where it says, ‘Unemployment workers march downtown 
Regina.’ And still more touching we find at the graduation at the Regina university, and it says, ‘Only 
one cloud dims biggest-ever convention: Where’s a job?’ This is the situation that is facing our young 
people here today in Saskatchewan. It seems to me that our society was built on a work ethic and I think 
that is commendable. But it seems to be that when a free enterprise society, free enterprise system fails, 
fails to provide the opportunity to our young people, then surely that system must be challenged. 
 
I want to say that the answer to this very serious unemployment situation with our young people have 
been a makeshift approach by the government opposite. They entered into an agreement on the NEED 
(new employment expansion and development) program, put in a budget, they told the people of 
Saskatchewan, for $10 billion and they used $2 million. It wasn’t that there was no unemployed. They 
had no intentions of spending the money to generate jobs. but even look at the NEED program. It’s a 
makeshift. It doesn’t go to the crux of the economic, worthwhile activities — meaningless. Opportunity 
’83, and all members stood up here and said what a great program this is. Well, I want to tell you that 
individual after individual in my constituency have said they have applied and they have received no 
answer in respect to their application. 
 
Secondly, what they have done is set up a grant to business — $5,000. Not a single cent is going to be 
spent this year in the budget in respect to that. It seems to me that the government opposite, indeed their 
Liberal counterparts in Ottawa, have one economic 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2764 

strategy for solving unemployment of the young people. And this is brought forward in the Parliament 
of Canada, that what should be done for the young people is to put them into a stint in the military, from 
a year to two years, and this would help to alleviate it. And guess who supported that? That was the Tory 
answer to providing meaningful employment — voted with the Liberals. 
 
I guess what you can say is that there is a growing concern. And the Leader of the Opposition has 
indicated that the church groups across the world . . . 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — I must remind the member that he has used up his time. His 10 minutes 
are up. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to on division. 

 
MOTIONS 

 
Resolution No. 10 — Natural Gas Industry 

 
MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to address the Assembly today with the intention of 
moving Resolution No. 10: 
 

That this Assembly concurs in the government’s program to stimulate the natural gas industry by 
promoting domestic and export sales, and urges the federal government to approve the export 
application of Ocelot Industries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, since taking office this government has taken progressive steps to stimulate the natural gas 
industry in the province. In support of the resolution, I wish to outline to this Assembly today the steps 
that were taken and the environment within which they were made. 
 
Saskatchewan has significant reserves of natural gas which could be developed. As of January 1, 1982, 
Saskatchewan had 41.194 billion cubic metres or 1.462 trillion cubic feet of remaining, established, 
recoverable reserves. Indications show that this ultimate potential could be a great deal higher than 
recognized by the previous administration, given major new markets for Saskatchewan gas, favourable 
physical conditions. Most of Saskatchewan’s reserves are found along the western border of 
Saskatchewan and particularly in the Hatton area north-west of Maple Creek — an area which has 
remained largely undeveloped. In the past, because of their shallow nature, there has been a reluctance 
to rely on the Milk River gas reserves in the Hatton area for long-term deliverability. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, the application by Ocelot Industries to the National Energy Board showed that 
the Hatton-Milk River reserves are capable of supplying the long-term needs of domestic and export 
markets. Yet with all this capability only 16 natural gas wells had been drilled during the 18 months 
prior to April of 1982. No major new gas fields have been discovered for more than a decade. This is 
due to the lack of incentive to explore and/or to develop new gas supplies in the province. 
 
At the time we took office, producer net-backs were unrewarding at 5 cents per thousand cubic feet for 
old gas — and old gas is gas which was on production prior to 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2765 

October 1, 1976 — and 14 cents per thousand cubic feet for new gas — or gas brought onto production 
since October 1, 1976. This, compared to Alberta’s full tax net-back of 39 cents per thousand cubic feet 
for old gas and 58 cents per thousand cubic feet for new gas — and not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the 
royalties to the province and its people was only 2 cents per thousand cubic feet. 
 
The Ocelot proposal to export up to 100 million cubic feet per day of natural gas from the Hatton area, 
over the period 1985 to 2000, inclusive, promised to develop the Hatton reserves and promote 
substantial reserve increases by additional drilling results and market stimulation. The Ocelot proposal, 
Mr. Speaker, meant the drilling and tie-in of over 800 wells to meet the full export commitment of 100 
million cubic feet per day by November 1, 1986. 
 
Four hundred and thirty miles of field-gathering system would have been required, which together with 
the wells, would have used over 8,250 tons of steel. In addition, four compression stations were needed. 
The project meant 450 person-years of construction employment in the short term with a further 400 
person-years of jobs, and close to $1 billion in revenue to the provincial treasury over the life of the 
project. In addition, Mr. Speaker, the project promised to serve as the catalyst needed to stimulate the oil 
and gas service sectors in south-west Saskatchewan. 
 
No wonder the government supported Ocelot’s application before the National Energy Board. We were 
subsequently very disappointed when the National Energy Board, on January 27, 1983, decided to deny 
the Ocelot application. The board’s reason for the decision was based on lack of agreement between 
Saskatchewan and Alberta on the sharing of export revenue. The decision effectively shut off one of the 
few opportunities open to stimulate a Saskatchewan industry that had languished over the past decade. 
 
The government knew, of course, that the flow-back issue would have to be dealt with if the export 
application had been successful. I want to spend a few moments on the flow-back issue. In Canada we 
have a two-price system for natural gas — a higher price for exports and a lower price for domestic 
sales. The difference between the two prices, minus an appropriate cost to service, is called flow-back. 
 
In Alberta and British Columbia, the major exporting provinces, the flow-back is shared so that the 
producer gets the same return whether selling to the domestic or the foreign market. We believe this to 
be a reasonable principle that preserves economic efficiency for the producer. But when you take 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia producers as a group, the principle does not hold. 
Saskatchewan producers do not have access to flow-back revenues, even though they contribute to the 
exportable surplus, and because Saskatchewan does not have the advantage of exports and the associated 
throw-back, we are not in a position at this time to give our producers the same benefits that they would 
enjoy in British Columbia or Alberta. 
 
However, we’re continuing our efforts to gain access not only to the domestic markets, but to export 
markets. Once we are successful in gaining access to the export markets, returns to producers will be 
similar to those in other jurisdictions. Notwithstanding our disappointments over the NEB decision, the 
government recognized that producer returns had to be raised substantially in order to bring on new 
projects to satisfy the Saskatchewan market. 
 
Initially, upon taking office, this government raised the fieldgate prices retroactively by an average of 25 
per cent over the period July 1, 1981 to January 1, 1982. This 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2766 

increase was designated to cover escalating production and exploration and development costs. 
Subsequently, after extensive analysis and review of the industry, on February 17, 1983, and is designed 
to stimulate exploration and development in the province’s gas fields. The average fieldgate price rose 
by over 85 per cent to an average of $1 per thousand cubic feet in 1983. However, the increase will not 
directly cause a significant rate increase for the natural gas customers of Sask Power Corporation. The 
direct impact on consumers as the result of the increase alone is assessed to be about 16 cents per 
thousand cubic feet, or less than 5 per cent in current residential price. 
 
Effective February 1, royalties increased from 10 cents to 2 cents per thousand cubic feet. Subsequent 
increases in fieldgate prices will track increase in the Alberta border price. Under the Canada-Alberta 
energy agreement, the border price is scheduled to rise by 25 cents per thousand cubic feet on August 1 
of this year. Subsequent increases in the Saskatchewan royalty will be 5 cents per thousand cubic feet 
for each 25 cents per thousand cubic feet of increase in price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is fully aware that even at new levels, producer net-backs are still only 
half the levels enjoyed by Alberta producers. But we believe that with the stimulus of our new policy, 
industry, and we’ll enjoy cheaper Saskatchewan gas and avoid more expensive natural gas imports in the 
future. When major markets open up — and we’re confident that will happen — we’ll be in a position to 
offer producers returns more comparable with those in the other producing jurisdictions. 
 
Domestically, we have sought our market opportunities to get development going. New demand will be 
generated by such projects as the rural gasification program which was recently announced by the Hon. 
Lorne MacLaren, minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Under this program, 
natural gas service will be extended to 25,000 farm and 10,000 urban families by 1990. As well, new 
industrial opportunities based on natural gas, such as the production of ammonia and nitrogen based 
fertilizers, can help supply our agricultural needs while diversifying our economy at the same time. 
Already, Mr. Speaker, results are evident. During the first three months of 1983 alone 10 natural gas 
wells were drilled. The Department of Energy and Mines’ March 8 sale of Crown petroleum and natural 
gas rights realized $15.3 million. Of the 15.3 million, the total sale of petroleum and natural gas rights in 
gas prone areas was $2.98 million. The total number of acres sold in permit and lease form in gas prone 
areas was 138,356. The March 8 sale was the largest sale of land in gas prone areas in the recent years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan natural gas industry is on the upswing. Producers who’ve been 
approaching SPC enthusiastically are ready to enter into new gas contracts. In some cases producers 
have also initiated discussions with the Department of Energy and Mines in order to present new 
production proposals. The future of our natural gas industry, indeed, looks promising. However, we 
need exports at this time to develop the industry to its fullest potential. At the same time, a system has 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2767 

to be in place to show the export flow-back revenues with Alberta. The Ocelot proposal would have led 
to the development of 800 wells over the next three years. This would have resulted in 450 person-years 
of employment in the short term, and a further 400 years of jobs over the life of the project. The 
proposal, in essence, would have stimulated further exploration and development of natural gas in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition has some confusion on potential for gas development in Saskatchewan, as 
evidenced during the estimates in this House. We now have an underdeveloped industry. We produce 
less than 40 per cent of or consumption of 100 billion cubic feet per year. This is the policy of importing 
over 60 per cent of or consumption from Alberta at higher prices than we could produce our own. Our 
recoverable or developed reserves are about 1.4 trillion cubic feet. For the present policy, consuming 40 
billion cubic feet of Saskatchewan gas per year, these reserves would last for about 35 years. Our 
discovered but undeveloped reserves are about 1.2 trillion cubic feet. For the present policy, these 
reserves would then add up to another 30 years, and our reserve estimate total would be about 65 years. 
It’s an undeveloped industry. 
 
Continuing the policy provides no incentive to explore for new gas. To increase our reserves, 
exploration will have to occur, and exploration has been at a standstill for years. Our ultimate reserves 
may be 4 trillion cubic feet or more, which we won’t even know until we encourage and increase the 
pace of development. There is gas in Saskatchewan. If tomorrow we were to be supplying all of our 
current consumption from Saskatchewan supplies, our known recoverable and discovered reserves of 
over 2.5 trillion cubic feet would last more than 25 years with no exceptions. Of course it would be 
practically impossible to make such a switch overnight, nor do we intend to attempt it. We will have a 
use for pipeline gas imported from Alberta for many more years to come. The TransCanada Pipeline 
contract itself does not end until 1992. We are looking for vigorous, but orderly, expansions to the gas 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s put the Ocelot export project into context. If approved by the national energy program, or National 
Energy Board rather, at full volume the Ocelot project would export about 35 billion cubic feet of gas 
beginning in the late ‘80s. with our known reserves, we could supply all of Ocelot’s export proposal and 
reduce the Alberta gas imports by about half, and still have 25 years worth of reserves left, and that 
assumes no new exploration. 
 
I hope, Mr. Speaker, that these comments will clarify the apparent misconceptions expressed by one of 
the hon. members in opposition recently. And may I repeat for their benefit that if we continue to import 
60 per cent of our gas from Alberta, present Saskatchewan supplies will last through 65 years. If we 
were to supply all of our present needs, about 100 billion cubic feet per year, known Saskatchewan gas 
reserves would still last for 25 years. Or, if we were to produce all of the gas Ocelot proposed to export 
and reduce our imports from Alberta by half, our present known reserves would still last for 25 years. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the above assumes no exploration. 
 
Our policy of rising the price to Saskatchewan producers from 54 cents to $1 per thousand cubic feet 
will stimulate exploration. Interest in gas lands has already been expressed in the March sale, and we 
expect more interest in the upcoming sale in June. The overly pessimistic and cynical view of the gas 
industry taken by the previous administration will be proved wrong, Mr. Speaker, both in the short and 
in the long term. 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2768 

And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that yesterday I was in Calgary meeting with a number of oil and gas 
producing companies and we talked about the land sale coming up on June 7, and there’s a great deal of 
optimism in it and we’re encouraged by that. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon South: 
 

That this Assembly concurs in the government’s program to stimulate the natural gas industry by 
promoting domestic and export sales, and urges the federal government to approve the export 
application of Ocelot Industries. 

 
MR. MYERS: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s with great pleasure I rise again this 
afternoon to speak on the actions which have been taken by our federal government in not allowing us to 
export or natural gas to the United States. This comes at a time when this country is direly in need of 
economic development and, as the opposition points out, they would like us to provide jobs to the 
people, and this would be one way of providing jobs to Saskatchewan people. Not only would we be 
allowed to develop the Hatton gas field but we’d also be allowed to provide the pipes and other 
necessities associated with natural gas development. 
 
There are quite a number of ways that this would benefit not only Saskatchewan but the country as a 
whole. But the federal government has taken a dim view on allowing Saskatchewan to rise to its place in 
the sun, a deservedly well-placed place in this country. We enjoy almost half the farmland in Canada 
and we can call on two mountain-fed rivers to assist our economic development. Irrigation and 
recreation should come natural to this part of the country, and we shouldn’t forget that timber and 
mineral resources and thousands of lakes which also help to encourage recreation and tourism in this 
province. We have superb hunting and fishing. We have top-notch technical schools and universities. 
 
If that doesn’t boost a person’s confidence, let’s compare Saskatchewan to the rest of the country. We 
have the lowest rate of unemployment, and I admit it is, even at its point, it is much higher than we 
would like it to be. We have the lowest gasoline prices. And we have the best mortgage assistance 
program in the country and it came at a time when mortgage rates were high and it came when it was 
needed. It wasn’t just a judicial piece of legislation that was inserted into the province like that of the 
former government, but it came when it was needed. 
 
In 1982 this was the only province in Canada to have a net gain in jobs — almost 1,000. Our finest 
assets though, they are human resources — the Saskatchewan people. Our work ethic and our will to 
win has provided us with a good lifestyle — a lifestyle we would like to maintain. And through the 
export of natural gas which the member from The Battlefords has explained with his facts and figures 
that we will be able to provide to a hungry market, to a hungry market that wants that resource and will 
also provide s and this province with the economic stimulus to move ahead. I don’t condemn the federal 
government but I certainly don’t appreciate their unwillingness to co-operate with a western province — 
a western province which has so much more to offer Canada. 
 
The export of natural gas to the United States will only strengthen the ties that we already have with our 
neighbours to the south. But not only will it strengthen our ties to the neighbours to the south, it will also 
strengthen our economic position within this country. And when our position is strong, the rest of the 
country grows from that strength and not from the negativism that has been prompted in the past. 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2769 

In the past we imported, and we still do import, natural gas from Alberta. Matter of fact that import 
extends up into the 1990s and it’s at a rate of about $1.50 a thousand cubic feet in relationship to $1 a 
thousand cubic feet which we ourselves produce the gas for. In order to vitalize the industries in this 
province and to have economic growth in this province, we must develop these fields. And we cannot 
develop them without exporting some of the natural gas because we need that revenue, that capital to 
initiate the projects in this province. Just to give you some idea, for example, in December we repealed 
the cumbersome, complex Oil Well Income Tax Act in favour of the simpler freehold oil gas production 
act. At the same time we simplified the fiscal regime even further by eliminating both the producing 
tract tax and road allowance levy on oil production. We are willing as a government to stimulate this 
industry, to stimulate this province, but we need, we need the assistance of the legislators in Ottawa. We 
are not selling off our heritage. We have proven by our stimulating activities in the oil patch that we 
have more than we need, and we should be using it at a time when we need it, which is right now. 
 
We will not take the negative attitude that the former government took, but we will move ahead, and we 
will press the federal government. And if we can’t press this federal government, then we will move to 
elect a new federal government, a new government which will listen to the responses of Saskatchewan 
residents. We need this export, and we need it at a time when we need it most to stimulate jobs and 
activity. 
 
I will not take up any further time in this Assembly. I will be supporting the motion. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just have a few words to add on this topic, and I 
will be asking for leave to adjourn debate. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have heard a couple of speeches here 
today which talked about the export of natural gas, and the consumption of natural gas, but we haven’t 
heard a great deal about one of the promises of the Conservative Party, and that was to extend the rural 
gasification program to rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And in talking earlier during estimates of Energy and Mines, I had an opportunity to ask the Premier 
about production of natural gas, of known reserves and of anticipated reserves, and at that time he 
indicated to me, and the record will show this out, that if we were to switch totally to Saskatchewan 
natural gas at present rates of consumption of the known reserve — that is what is on the stream and 
being produced — that we would indeed have 12 years of known production in producing natural gas. 
And I think in answer to me, I would just like to read into the record again his reply. I had asked the 
minister: 
 

I would like to ask if you have at your disposal information on the amount of natural gas known 
reserves in the province at this time at the present rate of consumption. 

 
And he went on to answer: 
 

. . . from calculating feet to metres, but we think we’ve got it together. Established reserves in the 
province are 400,000 million cubic metres. That doesn’t include probable reserves. (That’s 
reserves that we may have.) And we use 2.9, or 3,000 million cubic metres annually. 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2770 

 
I asked him, ‘So roughly, I think that that would be about 12 years of reserve, is this correct?’ And Mr. 
Devine replied to me: 
 

That is correct. About 12 or 13 years of established reserve at present consumption. 
 
So when members are talking about the fact that we now have, all of a sudden, 25 or 30 years of 
consumption . . . This is one of the reasons that the energy board, the National Energy Board, is having 
difficulty knowing, and one of the reasons that Ocelot is having difficulty getting an export permit is 
because the government of the day . . . It depends on who you talk to as to what our reserves are. 
 
I think that if we were to get our minds straightened out on whether we have 12 years of consumption at 
present rates in Saskatchewan or whether we have 24 years — I’ve heard stories of 50 and 60 years — I 
think it might make a great deal of difference. I believe that the problem in getting an export permit for 
Ocelot at the hearing was not only the fact that there was an agreement between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan. That was part of the problem and I don’t know what the government to date has done to 
rectify that problem, but as well the conflicting views coming out of Saskatchewan as to what we have 
in terms of usable natural gas at the present time. 
 
But it’s not bad enough to confuse the issue by ranging the years of consumption from 12 to as high as 
50, but also we have this wishful thinking that is so well known in Saskatchewan now at the present 
time. It seems to me that all you have to do to get double your gas production or triple it or quadruple it 
is simply to have a positive attitude to double your gas production or triple it or quadruple it. What 
indeed you have to do is have natural gas exploration, and that gets us around to natural gas exploration 
which was to have been done last year in the grasslands park in Saskatchewan — exploration which was 
not done because of lack of funding by, here again, the Conservative Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think while we have a resolution on the order paper which talks about natural gas exports and how 
this government is going to support that type of an application, I think there are two or three things they 
can do on their own very quickly in order to see that exploration and export permits are granted. One of 
them, get the story straight on how much natural gas we have in Saskatchewan. Secondly, take part in 
the natural gas exploration which is proposed and supported by and funded by the federal government. 
And thirdly, get the agreement that is needed between Alberta and Saskatchewan which was lacking at 
the time of the original application. And I think if the Saskatchewan government was to do their 
homework and get their work done that the people of Saskatchewan and Ocelot Industries would be 
much better served, rather than attempting to blame someone else, which we heard many speeches 
earlier on when this government was first elected, that we weren’t going to have a blaming of the federal 
government of our problems. 
 
I notice that all six resolutions which we have on the order paper by the conservative government now 
either urge the federal government or — I don’t think there’s a condemn —but all of them urge the 
federal government to solve the problems of Saskatchewan. We had assumed when this government 
came to power that they would be solving the problem. And I'm sorry to say that it has taken only one 
year for them to turn the tables, and they are now blaming the federal government for all of their 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2771 

problems including the lack of exploration and the lack of permits for natural gas in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have more words to say on this topic when I have a chance to do more 
detailed research on the natural gas situation in Saskatchewan. I therefore beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 11 — Final Report of the Regina Airport Study 
 
HON. MR. EMBURY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to get up after some lengthy time 
this has been on the blues and speak to the resolution before us . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I might 
point out to the member of Shaunavon that this motion also urges the federal government to complete 
the implementation of the final report of the Regina airport study, and one of the reasons for that is, of 
course, that the Regina airport is owned and operated by the federal government and is not under our 
jurisdiction. That is one of the reasons why we have . . . urging the federal government to proceed. 
 
On the face of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the motion in front of the House today may appear to 
only affect the city of Regina, but as I will point out a little later in my remarks, the airport in Regina 
really serves the whole south part of Saskatchewan and the study that I will be discussing in a moment 
will indicate that those figures . . . A great many of the passengers emplaning and deplaning from the 
Regina airport are from outside the city of Regina. 
 
To give you a little history, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Regina airport. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker, the city of Regina ha shad an airport since 1928 when 160 acres of land were 
purchased by the Regina Flying Club and the city purchased the land from the flying club later that year, 
and in December 1928 an air mail service was started by Western Canada Airways which served 
Winnipeg, Regina, and Calgary. It took 10 years, Mr. Speaker, to 1938 before the first transcontinental 
air mail and passenger service by Trans-Canada Air Lines began, and Regina was one of the points of 
call. 
 
Through the years up to 1972, the city of Regina owned its own airport. In that year, the department of 
National Defence and Transport Canada assumed the full responsibility for the airport when they 
purchased it from the city for approximately $2.3 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the time from 1928 to present, there has been a steady growth in the city of Regina. 
As new residential developments such as Lakeview, Whitmore Park, and Albert Park were constructed, 
the demand for additional residential land has resulted in proposals to develop the area south of the 
airport and has brought into focus the possible conflict between the use of land and airport operations. 
Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of serving on the council in the city of Regina when that very problem 
came before the city and the provincial government at that time, and a real conflict between the use, the 
airport use and residential use, came about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to give you an idea that the airport in Regina is not just for the use of the people in 
Regina, the Regina airport serves as a point of origin and destination of 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2772 

scheduled flights for approximate area which is roughly formed by the United States border to the south, 
the Alberta border on the west, the Manitoba border on the east, and a line through these figures were 
used . . . This book was compiled in 1978. At that time, within that area there were approximately 
300,000 to 350,000 residents. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I’m about to speak to, vis-à-vis the Regina airport expansion and the study 
that was completed and agreed to by the three levels of government — the federal government, the 
provincial government, and the city of Regina — recommended a number of things to happen to the 
airport. But a few statistics, Mr. Speaker, that would give you some idea of the volumes of traffic that go 
through that airport and are projected to go through that airport in the next four or five years. 
 
In 1976, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the passengers emplaned and deplaned were 500,000 people in that year. 
The forecast for 1991, or eight years hence, is for 1.4 million people to emplane and deplane at the 
Regina airport. In 1976, the total aircraft movements were 180,000, or 493 per day. The forecast for 
1991, or eight years hence, is for a total aircraft movement of 260,000 per year, or 712 per day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of effects that this increased traffic in the air will have, and there’s a 
number of effects the number of people will have. As I mentioned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the joint study 
which was approved in June of 1978 by the three governments resulted in no action from the federal 
government. Mr. Speaker, the federal government, when they accepted that report in 1978, indicated that 
they would move — as I will indicate in a moment — that they would move on the study and would 
proceed to implement its recommendations, which they did not. 
 
I was more than pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see that the Deputy Premier, the member from 
Souris-Cannington, in august of last year after only serving in his office for some four months, achieved 
what the NDP cold not achieve for years. I must say, Mr. Speaker, however, that the federal plan now 
and what they’ve accepted is not following the full study recommendations. I read, Mr. Speaker, a 
number of the issues that were brought out in that joint study in 1978. Some of the issues read as 
follows, and I read from page 18 of the joint study, ‘The Final Report and Recommendations of the 
Regina Airport Study,’ which reads: 
 

Based on forecast demand, the existing runways with an improved taxiway system will reach 
capacity in the late 1980s. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is with an improved taxi-way system. 
 

By the end of the planning horizon, which is 1996, it is projected that there will be some 200,000 
local aircraft movements in addition to 120,000 itinerant movements per annum. (It concludes) 
To meet this level of demand, additional runway capacity will be required. 

 
It goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

. . . that the major constraint to the use of the airport for international charter and/or scheduled 
operations is the limited runway length available for take-off which restricts the number of 
destinations which can be reached non-stop. The restriction is most severe in the summer months 
and a limited runway length of 7,900 feet virtually eliminates reaching any transoceanic 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2773 

destination without a technical fuel stop. 
 
The study goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

The issue of aircraft noise is significant, and has increased over the past years as the volume of 
air traffic has grown and as residential areas in the south-west part of the city have been 
developed. The annoyance from flight operations to and from runway 0725 (which is the 
secondary runway) is somewhat less because there are fewer operations. 
 
The types of operations which do not cause concern over built-up areas are the larger air carrier 
aircraft, especially during night hours, and the Canadian Forces jet aircraft. Related to the 
annoyance of aircraft noise, there is also a small number of people who do perceive that there is 
a hazard to living in the flight path, a perception which is reinforced by noise and frequency of 
operations. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would now like to read to you some of the recommendations of that joint study of 
1978: 
 

The essential characteristics of the conclusions reached and agreed upon by the three levels of 
government — the federal government, the provincial government and the city government — 
were: the acquisition of the necessary land and the associated planning of the airport to permit 
future development of a major parallel runway system; a centrally located terminal area; and 
adequate commercial/industrial aviation facilities and services; the determination, development, 
and promulgation of relevant municipal land; use plans to fully foster and protect an expanded 
airport complex; and the planning, funding, and providing of facilities to meet the needs 
demonstrated through the forecasted growth of aircraft movements and passengers. 

 
The report goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In accordance with those conclusions, Transport Canada (and this is in 1978) would undertake 
the following. (They would:) Assemble land through purchase or option by the early 1980s to 
permit the expansion of the runway and the terminal systems. 

 
I might point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that to this point the only work being done at the Regina airport 
is for the terminal system. No work is being done, or has been planned, for the runway system. 
Transport Canada also said in that study that they would undertake early major expansion of air terminal 
facilities, which hey are doing, and associated services including those processing transborder and 
international flights as soon as financial resources and engineering designs will allow. 
 
They would undertake the construction of a parallel 12-30 runway approximately 3,500 metres long to 
satisfy growth forecasts which indicate the need for that runway by 1985. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that need 
is two years hence, and they have not undertake any work on that parallel runway. Transport Canada 
would further undertake ongoing programmed improvements to the airport to maximize operational 
facilities and services. 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2774 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the point here, and the point of the motion, which reads: 
 

That this Assembly urges the Government of Canada to complete implementation of the final 
report of the Regina airport study by proceeding with the construction of the recommended new 
runway. 

 
is to the point because, I think, Mr. Speaker, that the point is that there’s no use building a grand, new 
airport facility if you can only land Piper Cubs to get into it. I think the point is that, given the recent 
federal budget statement . . . I read from the budget in brief of April 19, 1983, which would indicate 
under the special recovery capital projects of the federal government that they would provide public 
capital projects totalling $2.2 billion. They will be put in place over the next four years, and it would 
entail more than 100 projects involving all regions of the country. And they went on to say that they 
would take special steps . . . or special steps are being taken to fast-track the new projects and ensure 
that they are carried through on time and on budget and that they include major investments in airports, 
highways, and port facilities 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, given that they have agreed in 1978 to proceed with the new Regina airport 
which includes not only the taxi area, the new airport facility but the runway, and include the runway, 
given the 1983 budget which would indicate that they intend to put more money into airports, that we 
should, or this House should agree, and I would move, seconded by my colleague from Regina 
Rosemont: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to complete implementation of the final 
report of the Regina airport study by proceeding with the construction of the recommended new 
runway. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. DIRKS: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As the member from Regina Rosemont and a citizen 
of the province of Saskatchewan and a resident of Regina, I’m naturally concerned about this particular 
motion and would definitely want to speak in favour of it. The motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly urge the Government of Canada to complete implementation of the final 
report of the Regina airport study by proceeding with the construction of the recommended new 
runway. 

 
And I would like to draw attention to the fact that the blame for the fact that the runway has not yet been 
constructed lies directly at the feet of the federal government. 
 
I think the historians of the years to come will look back upon the Trudeau years with regard to 
Saskatchewan and will class them as years of indifference, years of neglect, years of disregard, years of 
perhaps even callousness, as they have attempted to put, perhaps, eastern Canada on the map and have 
neglected the very serious needs of many of the people of western Canada. I think the federal 
government perhaps could be classed, in many respects, as being notorious for ignoring the needs and 
aspirations of Westerners. And a graphic example, I think, of the fact that they have ignored the needs of 
Westerners can be seen by the fact that the runways here at the Regina airport have yet to be upgraded 
even though a three-level government study concluded that the runways needed upgrading as long ago 
as 1975. 



 
May 31, 1983 

 
2775 

For years the people of Regina have persuasively advanced arguments in favour of upgrading the airport 
facilities here in Regina. My colleague from Lakeview here in Regina has, once again, persuasively 
advanced those arguments. I don’t think there is anyone here in this House that would argue with the 
proposition that Regina’s airport is not in immediate need of substantial modernizing, not only the 
facilities themselves but the runway. This, of course, was the conclusion of the Regina airport study, and 
I want to underscore again that it was the agreement of all three levels of government that the runways 
and the facilities should be upgraded. 
 
The study was commenced in 1975, after much prodding. So, in fact, we would really go back to the 
mid and early 1970s. At that time already the citizens of Regina and of southern Saskatchewan, indeed I 
expect citizens from right across Saskatchewan, were calling for substantial upgrading for Regina’s 
airport facility. The study commenced in 1975 — that is almost a decade ago — and was completed in 
1978, completed five years ago. And so for over a decade now the people of Regina have been calling 
for action, action which I think all members of this Assembly would agree is entirely justified. 
 
In the first place, the city of Regina is, of course, the Queen City of the Plains. It is the capital of 
Saskatchewan and as such it deserves an airport and a runway facility that is in keeping with the 
importance of the stature of this particular city. My colleague from Lakeview has in a very 
commendable fashion indicated that the traffic projections for this particular airport are such that the 
runway capacity is in need of immediate upgrading and expansion. The limited length of the runway at 
present certainly militates against the handling of traffic projections that we see in the study itself. The 
member from Lakeview has already pointed out that there are substantial sound and noise problems that 
the people of Regina presently undergo. 
 
I think it’s important to underscore, again, that the commerce of this province, the tourism industry, the 
economics of the city of Regina would be substantially enhanced if we were to see a runway that was 
lengthened. At present international flights are simply not able to be accommodated adequately here in 
Regina. 
 
I think many of us here in Regina just about gave up hope that the federal government was going to do 
anything with regards to this particular issue. Not that long ago, however, a ray of hope was injected into 
the problem. The federal government did indicate that they were going to be moving on some 
recommendations. They indicated that they were going to upgrade the terminal and that, of course, is 
fine. We expect that. It’s necessary. They indicated that they were going to upgrade some of the runway 
taxi areas. That is, of course, necessary. It’s difficult to commend them after the foot-dragging that they 
evidenced over the last seven or eight years. And I think perhaps it would be in keeping to remind the 
members of the Assembly that were it not for the fact that the federal NDP party was responsible for 
putting the Liberals back in power we might not have had that kind of foot-dragging that we have seen 
on this particular issue. 
 
The main problem, of course, is that although the federal government has indicated that they will move 
to implement some of the recommendations, they have not indicated that they are going to upgrade the 
runway. I think this is particularly unfortunate. The runways that we have will be utilized to the 
maximum in a few short years. I think it’s absolutely necessary that we commence action now. They 
have, as my colleague indicated, allotted a capital project fund of over some $2 million, and we 



 
May 31, 1983 
 

 
2776 

would hope that they would be using some of those funds to in fact build the parallel runway which is so 
necessary. 
 
The indisputable conclusion of the Regina airport study is that this runway is necessary. I concur with 
that conclusion and I would ask all members of this Assembly to support the motion that has been 
advanced and that I am seconding. Thank you very much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t want to delay the House long on this except 
to say that I concur with the sentiment of the resolution. It is difficult to be a person living in Regina and 
using the airport frequently without being aware of the need for upgraded facilities, and we are aware of 
the fact that the matter has been studied. We’re aware of the fact that a new runway has been 
recommended. We’re all aware of the fact that runway limitations have made it impossible for the 
runway to be used with certain types of aircrafts . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — 747s. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Yes, 747s, although occasionally 747s have landed at our airport. The 
strip is simply too short for permitting a maximum operation. The strip is short for other types of aircraft 
as well. And in any case, generally the airport needs upgrading. One is tempted to deal with the terminal 
and the many, many promises of a new terminal and the dates, the receding date at which the 
construction is going to commence. But I will confine my remarks strictly to the resolution and the 
construction of the recommended new runway and say that I concur with the resolution and join with my 
colleagues on both sides of the House in its support. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


	ORAL QUESTIONS
	Potash Marketing

