






















































Hansard: May 19, 1983


(2424) 2425 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 19, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
SUPPLY AND SERVICES 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 13 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, I want to express the hope that you do indeed give serious 
consideration to doing the design work on the courthouses. I can tell you the situation there is bad in 
Regina and I take your word for it, it’s worse in Saskatoon. The cost of doing the design work is 
virtually nil and if you get it done, you can then proceed with the construction fairly rapidly, as I say, 
once the Minister of Finance gets around to putting this province’s finances back in order the way they 
had been form any decades before the Tory wrecking crew came along. 
 
I had, Mr. Minister . . . Madam Minister, I’m sorry, received some indication (and I forget the source 
and can’t find it), that some consideration had been given to allowing private developers to build the 
courthouses and then having the government lease them from the private developers over a long term. 
Two questions: was that given any serious consideration and if so may I have your comments on the 
proposal? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay, that proposal is what we refer to as lease-purchase and that is an 
option open to government, to the private sector or whatever. And the situation we find ourselves in, 
when we go to treasury board with a submission from now on, lease-purchase will be given as an option 
to actual government borrowing themselves and we hope to do that on every project. It’s feasible on 
every project but it will become a treasury board decision as to whether you do it government alone with 
total government funds or whether you go to a lease-purchase option. 
 
I might say that other jurisdictions do use the lease-purchase on some of their capital projects. And as 
I’ve stated, it’s just an option that we’re going to submit along with any proposal that we make to 
treasury board. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, what benefits do you see accruing to the taxpayer from a 
lease, option to purchase? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Probably the best scenario would be that if we were to build a building 
today, from my standpoint, if we were to go with lease-purchase . . . What it really does is have various 
generations of taxpayers helping to pay for that particular facility, rather than us sitting here and the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan right now whacking out say $26 million or $35 million out of the treasury 
within two years. That is an advantage and I think it probably goes along with your philosophy where 
you spread the costs over, and user-pay and that type of thing. But like I say, it’s not a firm, it’s 
definitely not a thing that we’re going to do with every project. It’s just an option that can be presented 
as an alternative for consideration. 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2426 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, we take credit for many innovations, Madam Minister, but the 
user-pay philosophy is not one that my party takes credit for. One of the old-line parties invented that 
and I had not heard it applied to buildings before. 
 
Madam Minister, has this government reached its limit in its capacity to borrow money? Otherwise why 
can’t you accomplish the same purpose of sticking further generations with the consequences of your 
mismanagement by simply borrowing the money and having them pay it back? What on earth is the 
advantage in leasing it and having the future generations pay the lease cost? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — You know, in reply to that question I would say, hold the phone, folks; we 
do have a winner. I don’t think we have mismanaged. We are trying to manage a very mismanaged 
government — a government that has been, you know, from our point of view, seriously mismanaged 
over the years. And I think what we have done in the short 12 months that we have been in power — we 
have delivered on our major commitments that we made during the elections. And I don’t call them 
promises. I call them commitments. And it isn’t something that you have to do in one year, but we did 
deliver on our five commitments. 
 
We committed certain things to the people of Saskatchewan and I’m happy to say that we delivered on 
the five major commitments and we will continue to do so. And I think what we have demonstrated to 
the people of Saskatchewan through our very good management of government and taking a different 
approach to things — we have showed the people of Saskatchewan that we can deliver on our promises, 
our commitments, and they can trust us. When we say we’re going to do something, we’ll do it. 
 
And I don’t agree with your belief that we have mismanaged. We haven’t. We came into this 
government on May 8th and we found that the March ’82 budget had been . . . The estimation of 
expenditures were short by about 190 million, $200 million, and the revenues projected coming back to 
the province were in the area of short by $220 million. So right off the bat, we were in a deficit position. 
 
Now I think we have come up with very reasonable budgets in the last two budgets that so ably 
presented by my colleague, the Minister of Finance. I think it’s recognized by the people of 
Saskatchewan that we’re doing a good job. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, it was an interesting political statement, but let me try. If I can, to lead 
you back to the question that I asked. And let me give you my view — and it may help you to focus your 
response — of cost effectiveness in building buildings, Madam Minister, because a government has the 
power of taxation, its credit rating is generally better than that of private concerns. It can therefore 
borrow money at less. The major cost, Madam Minister, of building buildings is the interest cost. 
 
Since governments can borrow money at a lower cost than private developers can, ipso facto they can 
build the building at a lower cost. They can borrow money at a lower cost. They can also therefore build 
the building cheaper, since that is a very major cost to building a building. 
 
I suggest to you that you’re not going to save money by leasing buildings. You’re going 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2427 

to cost the taxpayer money. 
 
Ah, I’m relieved to see your deputy back. I was afraid we’d had yet another change of deputies over the 
lunch hour, as a result of the disaster of your estimates earlier in the day. You had my colleague and I 
very concerned about that, and I’m relieved to see you back, sir. As I was saying, Madam Minister . . . I 
was afraid the minister’s intuition had got away on her again. 
 
Madam Minister, you can borrow the money cheaper; you can therefore build the building cheaper; 
therefore it’s going to cost the taxpayer less to have you build it than have a private developer build it. I 
suggest to you, therefore, that if you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The only reason you might lease a 
building is because: (a) you can’t do your sums, or (b) you want to benefit some private developer who 
can obviously have a sure thing if he builds a building and leases it to you over a long term. He can 
obviously have a sure dollar and a sure profit. 
 
So I say to you, Madam Minister, that the government can build these buildings cheaper. The 
government ought to be building them, and it is in the highest degree illogical to have a private 
developer building buildings and leasing them to a government over a long term. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay. I really wish you wouldn’t get so excited. As I stated before, we 
have a different attitude. We have different ideas. The lease-purchase option is specifically that. It is an 
option to look at. And sometimes when things get tough, and things could get tougher in the future, and I 
think the things in Saskatchewan are on the upswing, but that is an option available to government. 
 
And you say that, yes, government can borrow money cheaper than the private sector, and perhaps that’s 
true. But I look back to a land assembly that you people did at a cost of $4.9 million, and you turn 
around and you sign a lease agreement with a particular developer for 100 years, and all that developer 
pays is $23,000 a year. In 100 years, the government is going to get back $2.3 million at a cost of $4.6 
million a few years ago. And in our way of thinking on this side of the House that isn’t even good 
business sense. And all I’m saying, it is an option we can look at; it’s an option that we can present, and 
I tell you I would rather go to lease-purchase than to make a deal with a developer, an agreement for 100 
years, where he’s only going to pay me $2.3 million, and I’ve already invested 4.6. That doesn’t even 
make sense. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, Madam Minister, the Cornwall Centre, the development to which you 
are referring, does of course come within the jurisdiction of the Minister of Urban Affairs, and he may 
feel after his lack of success in New York that he needs all the help he can get, but we’ll leave that for 
his estimates, and perhaps we’ll deal with those things that come within your estimates, Madam 
Minister. 
 
You mentioned the question of assembling land. That again of course is something that the government 
can do cheaper than the private people, because they can expropriate and the private people cannot. So, 
if assembling land is part of your problem, I say to you that that is something else the government can 
do cheaper. And please keep us out of the Cornwall Centre. That was a special development with special 
reasons. 
 
Well, if the member had been around during the estimates of the Minister of Urban Affairs, you might 
have heard that discussion. Madam Minister, I ask you to respond to that as well. The government can 
buy the land cheaper, so that’s not a reason. The 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2428 

government can expropriate and therefore get it cheaper in some cases than private developers can, so 
that’s not a reason to go to lease, option to purchase. 
 
Madam Minister, has treasury board ever been dull-witted enough to accept a lease, option to purchase 
suggestion? Have you ever done that in fact? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, this might come as a shock to you. I’m not trying to bail out my very 
able colleague, the Minister of Urban Affairs. The particular land assembly that I was talking about is 
not here in Regina, and certainly not the Cornwall Centre. It’s another land assembly that was done by 
you when you were in power. As far as treasury board, and it wasn’t in Saskatoon . . . The land assembly 
done at a cost of $4.6 million, signing a lease for 100 years, with a return of $2.3 million to the 
government was, and is a government services project. It’s not Urban Affairs. 
 
Anyhow, getting back to your last question . . . Okay, treasury board expects us, in our proposal and on 
any capital project, to include the lease-purchase option, which we will. And we think that there should 
be alternatives. Whether you go to it or not is a decision that will be made at that time. But at least we 
are offering alternatives and it will be included in any proposal that we from this department put forward 
to treasury board. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Has a lease, option to purchase ever been accepted or adopted in any specific 
instance in your department? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We have entered into one lease-purchase situation. That involves an urban 
camp in Saskatoon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Urban camp in Saskatoon . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Urban camp. Okay. On analysis, it was cheaper for us to enter into a lease-purchase and own that 
facility at the end of five years, than to go into a straight lease. And the department right now is working 
on a proposal to treasury board to go on a lease-purchase and/or build ourselves. We’re preparing those 
figures right now and it’ll be going to treasury board within a while. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You said an urban camp. Is that the same thing as a jail, or is it, an urban 
camp, something other than a jail? I don’t know what an urban camp is, and perhaps the minister could 
help me. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — An urban camp is a place where we can place low security people, usually 
in default of fines, and that type of thing. They don’t really require the high cost of an actual jail 
situation, and it gets them integrated back into the communities a lot faster. There’s a few around the 
province. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I say this move to privatize things has reached a new high, Madam Minister, 
when you’re privatizing the jails. It’s one thing to privatize SGI; it’s another thing to privatize the jails. 
Before we know it, the Minister of Justice will find the court system privatized — I suppose that’s the 
next step. Madam Minister, was this the subject of any cost-benefit analysis, this privatization of the 
province’s jail? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, here we go again, just a difference in philosophy, and I really 
shouldn’t be speaking for the Hon. Minister of Justice, but that’s a different philosophy. You know, 
about 75 per cent of the people in our penal institutions today are there because of default of payment of 
fine, and very non-violent crimes. And for you to suggest that rather than have them become vibrant part 
of communities and 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2429 

stick them off in a jail someplace, I can’t believe that you just stated that. You being a lawyer — you 
should have those statistics and know those statistics. But, besides that, urban camps are not something 
new; urban camps have been around Saskatchewan, around Canada, around the USA, for a long, long 
time and it’s not something new. But, we recognize that we as a government would rather put low 
security people, particularly the ones that are in there for default of paying a $60 fine, or an $80 fine, or 
a $150 fine, we would rather have them in an urban camp and we plan to expand the urban camp 
concept in the province. And in this particular case, on analysis, it was found it was cheaper for us to go 
into a lease —purchase and own that facility and own those grounds in five years because we hope as a 
government, that that will be an ongoing program. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Madam Minister, let’s not get into an argument over semantics. I 
would describe the institution that you just mentioned — a minimum security institution, with a 
rehabilitative process in it. My father’s a dirt farmer and described that as a jail, but I don’t think he’s 
saying anything I’m not. It is, in fact, a security institution, but I do not want to get into the discussion 
with Madam Minister, on the issue of whether or not it’s a good thing or a bad thing. I’m sure it’s the 
answer to the province’s law and order problems. I’m sure it is. Madam Minister, what I asked you is 
not to defend the urban camp, and we’ll use your terms to avoid arguments . . . I asked you not to defend 
the concept, but to defend it’s construction. Did you do a cost-benefit analysis on this — the urban 
camp? On the business of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and I’m asking about the cost-benefit analysis 
of the concept of leasing it rather than building it. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We did do . . . And I indicated to you the last two times I was up, that on 
studying the proposal, the professional people within my department ascertained that it was cheaper for 
us to go into a lease-purchase arrangement so that we could own that facility at the end of five years. A 
facility that we plan to . . . If we haven’t bought it, or if it isn’t ours at the end of five years, we would 
continue to lease it. I go to Prince Albert where you have a very straightforward lease arrangement. 
Don’t let it be a continual drain on the treasury. At the end of five years, the urban camp in Saskatoon, 
the ownership will revert to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s a lease-option, right. That’s what 
lease-option is: at the end of the five-year lease, that facility will belong to the Government of 
Saskatchewan. And as I say, it’s going to be an ongoing program, and in the analysis it was cheaper for 
us to develop than to rent a facility for the next hundred years. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, will you file or provide me with your cost-benefit analysis so that I 
may share the minister’s understanding of why and how it can be done cheaper by a lease option to 
purchase? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can only indicate to you that to maintain the public competitive system, 
those figures will not be available. You did the same thing on spaces that you leased. You would never 
give the breakdown and I think you should appreciate why. Those documents can’t be made public. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I’m afraid I must admit to my limitations, Madam Minister, because I 
don’t understand why. I don’t understand why you can’t tell me where you saved the money in the lease, 
option to purchase, concept. That’s what I am asking you. That’s all I’m asking you for. Just tell me 
where you saved the money. Did you save it on the construction? Did you save it on the land? Did you 
save it on the interest rates? Did 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2430 

you save it on the ornaments? Where did you save it? That’s really all I want to know. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay, we’re ready . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. Order! Allow the minister to make her comments. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — In our last estimates you requested sort of similar information which we 
provided to you on a confidential basis. If you can give me your assurance that this particular cost 
analysis would be kept confidential, I’d be willing to provide it to you by way of letter. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay. I’ll certainly give you that undertaking. Would you send it then to 
2343 Broad Street rather than to the Legislative Building, where it might not be confidential? If it’s 
confidential, send it to 2343 Broad Street, the law office, and I assure you it’ll be confidential. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you would be prepared to give us a list of all assigned CVA vehicles — a 
list of all the vehicles and a list of who they are assigned to. I know that the members of Executive 
Council have assigned vehicles. They’ve had that since at least the ’30s. I wonder if you’d give me a list 
of all the vehicles that are assigned — makes, models, costs, etc. — and the individuals to whom they’re 
assigned, and the position they hold. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That is a rather outlandish request. We can provide through CVA the 
executive vehicles that are assigned to those cabinet ministers, deputies, senior people in the Crowns. 
But as far as assigned cars to individual departments, CVA has no control over that. That, falls within 
the realm of each individual department, to assign their allotted number of pool cars. 
 
So I can give you the executive fleet because we do physically look after that. But as far as the assigned 
pool cars that are with each individual department, university, Crown, we don’t have any control over 
who gets those and for what period of whatever. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — All right. It may be the case. Let me be more specific, then. Would the 
minister undertake to provide me with a list of the make and models, the year, of all vehicles assigned to 
any order in council appointments, any people appointed by order in council . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I’m thinking of permanent heads — that’s right — and all vehicles assigned to any elected person, 
whether he be a member of Executive Council or not? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can only respond by telling you once again that we do know where the 
executive cars are and who they are assigned to. That’s very specific in the regulations. They go to 
deputies, to senior people who qualify under the miles travelled during the year, or kilometres as they 
say nowadays. But as far as OCs within the department, that would be impossible for us to provide you 
with that information because we don’t know who’s an OC in Education or Social Services, and those 
particular cars that are assigned to that particular department are the responsibility of that department. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — . . . (inaudible) . . . see those questions answered on the order paper. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2431 

Madam Minister, do I take it that the executive fleet, as you refer to it, includes permanent heads, the 
members of Executive Council, any assigned vehicles to any other elected individual . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and the Leader of the Opposition, indeed —a black Oldsmobile. Is that what comprises 
the executive fleet? I don’t know what ‘executive fleet’ is. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That comprises our executive fleet, plus the heads of the Crowns. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay. I’ll accept that undertaking then to provide the make, model, year of 
all vehicles assigned to all permanent heads of departments, all GMs of Crown corporations, and any 
elected individual whether or not he be a member of Executive Council. And I gather I have the 
minister’s undertaking to provide that. I was restating what I understand you to have undertaken. I’d ask 
you to confirm it. You are agreeing to provide a list of the make, model and year of all vehicles assigned 
to all permanent heads, all general managers of Crown corporations, and any elected individual whether 
or not he be a member of Executive Council. If that’s what you’re undertaking to provide, then that is 
satisfactory. 
 
I’d also like a brief description of the position held by each person because it may assist me in knowing 
. . . I may not know all the deputy ministers’ names. So if you can provide me, as well, with a 
description of, ‘Otto Cutts, deputy minister of supply and services’; that’s all I want. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay. We will provide you with the list of our executive vehicles that we 
know who they are assigned to. Okay? You have to understand that some of the Crowns don’t deal 
through CVA. So if there is the odd Crown missing, don’t think we are withholding information because 
they don’t all go through us. Okay? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay. With respect to the tendering of contracts, have there, Madam 
Minister, been any contracts which were overspent, which were above the budget? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Is this part of the package that you said you can’t find, the over-50? . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. We can provide you with that. Okay. We’ll send that under cover. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay. A list of all contracts which were overruns . . . And would you also 
provide me with a list of any contracts for which the lowest bidder was not accepted and an explanation, 
if there is any charitable explanation, for not accepting the lowest bidder? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We didn’t let a contract go, or we didn’t award a contract to anyone other 
than the lowest bidder. Unless, like . . . Now, you have to understand — and it’s all in the annual report, 
by the way — the contracts that were received, some are rejected because they don’t meet the 
specifications as laid out in the tender. So those aren’t considered as valid bidders on a tender. Just for a 
point of clarification: when you refer to the $50,000 contracts, are you specifically saying our 
construction contracts? Because I think that was your previous request in the estimates of a few months 
ago. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — We were dealing then with government services which did not include the 
Supply and Services wing. No, I was really asking for both construction and the purchasing agency. Let 
me be fair and avoid too much detail here. Let’s limit 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2432 

ourselves to contracts over $5,000 to reduce the size of the information load. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think that’s an unreasonable demand. We have over 17,000 files in 
purchasing alone, and the auditor would catch us on some. Would he? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
No. But a $5,000 contract is not an unreasonable contract. That’s a run of the mill and if you want 
anything over $5,000, they would have to spend months and months and months going through 17,000 
files. We don’t mind that in the public works side, because those are sort of normal type contracts and 
there aren’t that many. But, from my point of view, I think that’s being unwittingly unreasonable, I’ll 
say. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, that’s very charitable of you. That’s very charitable of you, Madam 
Minister. Let me be clear; I didn’t want a description of all 17,000 contracts; what I want are any, which 
the low bidder wasn’t accepted. I would have thought that would have been a fairly short list. Now, if 
that’s a very lengthy list, then that in itself invites some additional questions. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I would like to indicate to the hon. member that the purchasing agent within 
Supply and Services, Mr. Rankin, who has been with the government by 10 years, has indicated that a 
tender ha snot gone out except to the low tender. Some tenders are rejected because they don’t meet the 
specifications, they don’t meet the delivery date, they don’t meet the standards set out. But, to give you a 
very specific answer, we would have to go through the 17,000 files that we have. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, are you saying that there have been no cases since May 1983 — I’m 
not interested in going back beyond that, unless you are — there have been no cases since May 1983 in 
which a tender has been accepted for the purchase of personal property which is anything other than the 
low tender? Is that what you just told me? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — In terms of the purchasing agency, that’s correct. No tenders have gone out 
unless they’re the low tender. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — And did I understand the minister to say that no construction bids have been 
accepted except the low tender in each case? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s correct. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask the minister: can you outline what is the 
general policy for the use of the aircraft? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — If you are referring to executive aircraft, the policy in place today is the 
same policy that was in place under your administration. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I need my mind refreshed. Would you outline what that policy is? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I have nine pages here. I could read them all to you. I might add that this is 
what I received in my briefing book when I took over and it was just a carry-through from the previous 
administration. Would you like me to read it? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I would like you, Madam Minister to outline in a general way what the policy is 
without reading nine pages and then thereafter that send over a copy of the nine pages. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2433 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay. We could start with who may use the aircraft. There’s the Premier, 
the Lieutenant-Governor, cabinet ministers, Crown or government officials. The Premier has priority 
followed by the ministers and the Lieutenant-Governor. The Premier, the Lieutenant-Governor and the 
cabinet ministers may use executive aircraft for official government business only and returning to their 
constituency if they reside in this constituency and it is not served by commercial aircraft. All flights 
have to be authorized by the Premier or the Lieutenant-Governor in Council or a minister. I think that’s 
the general thrust that has been in place. 
 
Now, in addition to what I have just mentioned, the following people are also allowed to use executive 
aircraft under the following circumstances: members of the Legislative Assembly by invitation of a 
minister only; non-government officials by the invitation of the minister only; and families of the 
Premier, minister and Lieutenant-Governor when they are on official government business or going to 
an official government function. And I think that stands pretty well. Like I say, we haven’t made any 
changes to it. We think that it’s a good set of rules and we’ve been following them. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Yes. Thank you for that information. Could you provide us with a copy of the 
general guide-lines in respect to the use of the aircraft, just so that we might familiarize ourselves? I 
think you set out the general use of it. And I take it that members of the Legislative Assembly are 
permitted to use the aircraft, or at least to accompany a minister, for flights home. That’s within the 
policy, I take it? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s similar also to what it used to be. Members of the Legislative 
Assembly, unless they are travelling on behalf of a minister to official government functions, are put on 
stand-by and can by bumped by either the Premier, other ministers Lieutenant-Governor, or government 
officials. I think you are quite familiar with the criteria. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Yeah. For cabinet ministers to use the executive aircraft for, you know, flights back 
to their constituency for the week-end or whatever, you know . . . I recognize the pressures on cabinet 
ministers and I just want to clearly establish that it is, because you know, as I look through here, you 
know, Regina to Hudson Bay to Regina, Hon. Neal Hardy and that’s flight 139, and then there’s 140 — 
Regina-Kindersley-Unity-Meadow Lake-Regina. And I suspect that many of those are in fact the cabinet 
minister using a plane in order to go back to his constituency. And I would suspect that in flight 140 — 
Regina-Kindersley-Unity-Meadow Lake-Regina — it probably conceivably could have dropped off 
some of the MLAs. And so I’m just asking you, within policy whether or not there is any limits on the 
use of the plane for cabinet ministers in returning to their constituency. And is it an established practice 
that in doing so, you know, accompanying MLAs can be returned to their ridings? I don’t see anything 
in particular wrong with it, but I’m just wanting to know the policy. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can only indicate again, the criteria and the rationale for using the planes 
are the same as what was put down on paper by you people when you were in government. And one of 
the criteria for using it is that cabinet ministers, the Premier, Lieutenant-Governor may use the executive 
aircraft for official government business only and/or returned to their constituency if they reside in the 
constituency and it is not served by commercial airline. 
 
As far as MLAs, if they’re on stand-by and want to take their chances of being bumped, it’s certainly 
permissible. I can’t remember a certain member from Prince Albert who was 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2434 

not a minister and used it fairly frequently and a few from Saskatoon. And it only . . . You have to use 
common sense. 
 
But I can indicate to the member, if you’re going to get into specific ministers, I cannot answer on 
behalf of other ministers. I can only answer on behalf of myself. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Okay. Now just in respect to personal staff, have there been any additions since the 
last information that you provided to us? You had a Elizabeth Crosthwaite changed from an EA to a 
special assistant from . . . went up to I believe $54,000. Can you confirm whether you still have 
Elizabeth Crosthwaite as special adviser and what the salary is of that lady? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, Mr. Crosthwaite is still with me and her salary, as far as I know, is 
54,000. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’m wondering whether she qualified for the recent increase at 6 per cent, 3,000. 
Because I know I checked with the Attorney-General or the Minister of Justice and it seems to me that 
he came back and gave a correction and indicated that his staff, at least, was adjusted upward with the 
order in council adjusting senior political staff. And so I would like to know whether the adjustment was 
made; and if it did, did she get the full maximum, 3,000 in there, and therefore would be at 57,000? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay. She was at a salary of 54,000. I can undertake . . . I don’t know if she 
got the 6 per cent raise, if it was a general order in council . . . I would assume that she did as did all 
other out-of-scope employees, get, the 6 per cent to a $3,000 maximum. I’ll confirm that, though. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And a Doug Thompson, EA constituency, it seems to me that it was $35,000. Can 
you give me a confirmation of what amount you paid to Mr. Thompson and does he reside in Regina and 
work out of Regina? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Thompson is in Regina and I think his salary is 30, not 35, and he 
would probably fall under the general 6 per cent to a $3,000 maximum raise, but that’s another thing I 
will confirm with you. That’s something that I don’t know for sure. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And do you have any additional executive assistants or special advisers or 
communication bodies around the shop? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I don’t. I have my principal secretary, a clerk-typist, Mrs. Crosthwaite 
and Doug Thompson in my office, and myself. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And can you indicate whether you have any of these nefarious contracts for personal 
services as the Executive Council demonstrated the brilliant use of? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I do not have anyone under personal contract. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I could shorten this process up just a bit. I don’t have anything more 
specifically . . . I’m looking at the staff complement, and looking at the expenditures. To put it mildly, 
Madam Minister, this is quite an egg to unscramble because you mixed up two departments here. Rather 
than deal with each subvote separately, I’d be prepared to accept the written explanation on this, the 
explanation 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2435 

being an explanation for any increase or decrease in staff, and the reasons for an increase if that’s the 
case; reasons for the decrease if that’s the case; whether or not any positions decreased had people in 
them; if so, were those people transferred or dismissed? 
 
With respect to the funds, you could give me the undertaking to provide the same information, that is an 
explanation for any increase or decrease in funding; if an increase, where; a decrease, where; and if you 
would give me that information I would be prepared to accept it. 
 
I may say —he’s not in the House, and it’s a shame because I rarely compliment him, and I hate for him 
to miss this rare opportunity, but the Minister of Urban Affairs, in his capacity as minister of culture and 
youth, undertook to provide the information and it was provided in quite a satisfactory form. So if you 
could provide me with that information, I wouldn’t ask you to deal with each individual subvote. I’m 
really just building a data base. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Certainly, we can provide you with that information as quickly as possible. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, this building was under a 10-year renovation program. I 
would appreciate it if you would give me an indication of where we are on that 10-year renovation 
program. I guess I really want to know what remains to be done in that 10-year program. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we still have the south wing to remodel, for want of a better word. 
We’ve had a few problems. The excavation that’s taking place right now with the piles was sort of an 
unexpected thing. The settling hadn’t been calculated into the 10-year plan. And we feel that the major 
renovation should be finished shortly. Then there’s just a few little things to finish up. It’s going fairly 
well, I think. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 17 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, this was an area in which there was a change in the 
purchasing agent. I’m not sure that I understood Madam Minister correctly. You may have told me 
earlier who the appointee was. You may respond in writing if you like, but I would appreciate knowing 
the name of the appointee, the salary and qualifications. We can save ourselves a bit of time . . . I’m 
going to ask you the same question under the Queen’s Printer, since I understand there was also a 
change there. And if I could have that either now or in writing, we can go on. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The purchasing agency right now is being headed up by Ken 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2436 

Rankin who has been with the department for 10 years. And the Queen’s Printer is . . . He’s acting . . . 
The Queen’s Printer position is vacant at this time. 
 
Item 17 agreed to. 
 
Items 18 to 21 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 22 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Sorry, Mr. Chairman, I was on, my feet on the subvote 22. I may have been 
remiss in not addressing you, but I didn’t realize you didn’t see me. 
 
Madam Minister, this was transferred from Highways and Transportation. I’m curious as to why that 
would be transferred from Highways and Transportation to your department. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We consider ourselves a central service agency and we do business for up 
to 16 or so agencies. A lot of them . . . I shouldn’t say a lot of them . . . Some of them require survey and 
mapping expertise and we as a government feel that we like to have a one-stop shopping concept and 
that’s why a lot of things are happening in Supply and Services. And we think that we will . . . What it 
will do really is to co-ordinate and distribute information to agencies requiring it. We think it’s a good 
approach to take and we’re quite excited about what’s happening in the department. 
 
Item 22 agreed to. 
 
Item 23 agreed to. 
 
Item 24 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, what sort of a weird aberration is this supposed to be, a 
deficit . . . ‘To provide a net expenditure (recovery) of (from) the Central Vehicle Agency Revolving 
Fund (Statutory)’ What is that supposed to mean? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — You’re going to like this. That indicates a profit generated from Central 
Vehicle Agency will be flowing into the Consolidated Fund, as a result of the changes from advance 
account to revolving account. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I may say, Madam Minister, that is truly a delight to see someone who isn’t 
hell bent on destroying the finances of this province. 
 
Madam Minister, apart from selling vehicles — and I don’t know if that’s been done — how is a profit 
achieved? I’m curious about your wizardry; I’m truly an admirer of yours, Madam Minister. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — You’re going to love this one, too. It’s just a different approach that we 
have. We feel that we, as an agency, can provide super service, and still make a dollar. There’s a set rate 
what we charge departments for the use of the vehicles. And if we can keep our maintenance, etc., we 
can actually capitalize on the moneys coming. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I . . . Well, let me express my heartiest congratulations on this turn of good 
fortune, Madam Minister. Have you changed the rates at all or is simplified . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I’m not sure if I was ahead on this one, but I am curious. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2437 

Have you changed the rates, Madam Minister, that you are charging on this affair? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay. We’ve increased the rate slightly, but the profit that we expect to 
realize by the end of ’84 mainly is because of better maintenance programs, more utilization of the 
existing cars, the move to more sub-compact cars, and that type of thing. And the gas tax has something 
to do with it. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Tell me, do you have any . . . How does the number of vehicles compare? Do 
you have fewer or less vehicles, or the same number — fewer or more or the same number? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I’m not sure if this is the information you wanted, but in ’81-82 we 
purchased 1,137 vehicles to complement the fleet; in ’82-83 we purchased 1,178 vehicles to complement 
the fleet; and in 1983-84 we expect to purchase 922 vehicles to complement the fleet. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — All right. You may respond to this in writing, if you wish, but could you give 
me the corresponding number of vehicles you retired in each of those years? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we can provide that in writing. It’ll just take a few days or so to 
compile those figures. 
 
Item 24 — Statutory 
 
Item 25 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Could you give me the corresponding figure for last year? I’m not sure 
where I’m supposed to find it in all this. Would you give me the corresponding figure for last year? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — This is rather complicated and it corresponds to an item on page 76, and if 
you like we can provide the differences in writing. Okay? 
 
Item 25 — Statutory 
 
Item 26 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’d appreciate the same undertaking with respect to this subvote as well. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we will. 
 
Item 26 — Statutory 
 
Item 27 — Statutory 
 
Item 28 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, have we ceased to make grants to the cafeteria board now? 
There’s nothing being granted to them? Or did this disappear into some other subvote? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s correct — there’s no longer a grant to the cafeteria board. They’ll be 
working on a break-even premise, and we’ve also added the cafeteria of the T.C. Douglas Building to 
fall under the jurisdiction of the cafeteria board. 
 
Item 28 agreed to. 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2438 

Item 29 agreed to. 
 
Vote 13 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

SUPPLY AND SERVICES 
 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 14 
 
Items 1 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have the suspicion, Madam Minister, that this is the winding down of some 
program, but perhaps you’d explain to me the rather sharp decrease in expenditures under this subvote. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Could we provide that in writing to the member? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yes, that would be satisfactory, Madam Minister. As well, I would ask you 
to supply the list of projects which you have budgeted capital funds for. I think you call it your project 
array. But if you could provide that list to us, in writing of course, I would appreciate that. I am 
referring, of course, to each subvote — if you could supply it for each subvote. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we can provide that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I want to ask a brief question with 
respect to your proposals for office accommodation in Lloydminster. I wonder if you can tell me what 
the state of a proposed office building in Lloydminster is at the present time. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Right now we are surveying the market and the market need and what’s 
available there and what the impact of the provincial office building would have on that area. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, does that mean that you are planning 
to go ahead unless the market survey dictates otherwise, or is it rather that the project is on hold until 
you gather more information which will include this market information? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s on hold until we get the market information. There was some concern 
expressed — substantial concern expressed — as to what impact a provincial building would have on 
the space already available in Lloydminster. We gave a commitment that we would check that out to 
make sure that we weren’t unnecessarily creating an overabundance that might or might not already 
exist in that particular city; and that’s what we’re assessing right now. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, when do you think you will likely 
have that assessment work completed so that you will be in a position to know whether or not the 
construction of the building would create excess capacity? 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2439 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Hopefully that information will be to us and analyzed before fall. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Vote 14 agreed to. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

RESOURCES DIVISION 
 

SUPPLY AND SERVICES 
 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Vote 14 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I inquire with respect to the 
provincial building, which was well along in its planning stages more than a year ago. I saw the models 
of the proposed building and its proposed juxtaposition to the Plains hospital more than a year ago, and 
would ask the minister why there is not provision in this year’s budget for at least a start on the 
provincial lab building. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The sitting problems have still not been resolved and presently a committee 
has been set up to review the problems and recommend solutions. And the committee consists of 
representatives from Health, Supply and Services and the Plains Health Centre. And the final 
recommendations will be presented to the Wascana Authority and treasury board for approval. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, what are the nature of the siting 
problems? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The infrastructure as it relates to sewer and water are posing some very 
serious potential problems and this is one thing that we’re tying to come to grips with. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, could the minister be a little more 
. . . give us a little more detail with respect to the nature of the sewer and water problems? This is after 
all beside a general hospital which was designed to be a considerably larger hospital than it now it. 
While a lab is a consumer, all right, of sewer and water services, no one denies that, it is not a 
spectacular consumer and I ask what she is suggesting is the nature of the problem. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — One of the problems is that the Plains hospital board has indicated that 
there are some functional relationship problems to the existing facility and they have specifically asked 
the Department of Health to consider an addition to the existing building instead of a free-standing 
building that was originally proposed. And they want a resolution of the functional relationship 
problems, and I thin one of the problems was that were it a free-standing building the services would 
have to be provided by ourselves rather than under the authority of the Wascana Authority, and this is 
well and good in times of plentiful water supplies, but there are some critical areas that really have to be 
resolved. In fact, I think I spoke of this before; if these particular problems cannot be resolved 
satisfactorily, either by our department, Health or 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2440 

the Plains hospital, another site will have to be considered. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I refer to the restoration of 
Saskatchewan House, and ask whether it is considered that that project is complete for the time being, at 
least, until someone decides to restore perhaps another area of Saskatchewan House . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I thank the member for Moosomin for assisting me with . . . Now I repeat my question. 
And this has to do with Saskatchewan House. And there was a proposal for the regeneration of the first 
floor of Saskatchewan House and some other major areas of it. And it’s my understanding that that 
project is substantially complete. And is that what this means — that that project is complete? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That is correct. I might add that I was at a function there last week with 
quite a number of out-of-province people, and everyone was duly impressed with Saskatchewan House. 
And I thin it’s something we can all be proud of. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I ask the same question here with 
respect to the archives building. Does this indicate that the project will not go forward, or not be 
commenced during this fiscal year? And could the minister outline why this project continues to be on 
hold? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, as I answered the member from Regina Centre, this particular 
building falls into the category of a few other major projects, and it just comes down to a matter of 
economics. And we felt, when we were looking at the needs of the people, that programs such as 
continuing education, manpower, road ambulance — those types of direct service programs — were 
programs where we had to have the funding. The archives, though personally I would like to see an 
archives and I’ve talked to the archivist about this — I figure it would be marvellous — but at this point 
in time we just don’t have the money for such a building. 
 
I might indicate that we are looking for a semi-permanent place for the archives, a building that would 
reflect the importance of such a function for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, a couple of questions following from 
that: has the project been completed in its conception? That is, have you accepted a site for the project so 
that when funds become available, the site for the project and the broad general design which is in 
existence, will be acceptable, or are those matters still open? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay, the site was never resolved firmly. We are still looking at the former 
Diocese of Qu’Appelle as a possible site, and we’re still in negotiations with the Wascana Authority and 
I think they would like to see it close to there, but maybe on another site. But currently the project has 
been put on hold until we can build one. Hopefully, we’ll have it built; I think it’s an important part of 
history that has to be restored or housed permanently in a good facility. I think we’re looking at alternate 
spaces for the archives in the interim. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, this may not be strictly in order but I 
will ask it anyway. This has to do with the alternative accommodation and is it intended that the 
alternative accommodation will be provided by the Department of Government Services in what might 
be called the Lakeshore Building of the McCallum 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2441 

Hill people. I would have to locate it approximately at the corner of Hillsdale and 23rd, behind that 
property. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We are still at the evaluation stage and that is one of the alternatives being 
looked at at this time by the planning department. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, you may not be able to answer this 
and if you can’t, I understand it. Are you able to tell me other properties which are being evaluated? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We are looking within our own inventory of space plus a few other 
locations. 
 
Vote 14 agreed to. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’d like to thank the minister and her officials. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I would just like to take this time to thank my officials for their prompt 
answering. I’d like to thank the members of the opposition for the spirit in which they asked the 
questions. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’d like to thank the officials for their co-operation. I hope some of them 
survive until the next set of estimates. I’d like to thank the minister for her co-operation and hope she 
survives until the next set of estimates. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

REVENUE AND FINANCIAL SERVICES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 18 
 

Item 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce her officials, please. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My deputy minister, Paul Robinson; Keith 
Laxdal, E&H tax expert known right across Canada; Gerry Kraus, one of the most efficient comptrollers 
across Canada, and Ken Brehm — he was with me in Supply and Services, and just a jack of all trades. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, would you provide us with — you can do it in writing if 
you like —salary and qualifications of your deputy minister, or acting deputy? I’m not sure of the 
capacity of this individual . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, we can. Is it just the deputy you wanted, or anyone else, just to be 
specific? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, just the deputy. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Just the deputy? The deputy minister, whose educations are an Honours 
B.A., psychology, from the University of Waterloo; an M.B.A. in finance from McMaster University; 
registered industrial accountant in Saskatchewan. Awards: 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2442 

graduated first in undergraduate psychology; won the R.H. Walter award; dean’s honour list in his 
M.B.A.; three first-place medals in the R.I.A. program. His work experience; he was originally on 
secondment from Saskatchewan Power Corporation, February 1983 to May 1983. Assignments: assisted 
in co-ordination of the first budget; advised on finances of Lake Diefenbaker pipeline proposal; 
employed by Saskatchewan Power since June, 1980. The list goes on and on. His salary is $68,000 per 
annum. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, my learned friend from Quill Lakes covered your personal 
staff in Supply and services. Do you have any personal staff which will relate to this department for 
which we did not get the details in Supply and Services? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, the staff complement in my personal office here in the building is the 
same as under Supply and Services. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, I want to deal with an issue which arises actually out of 
public accounts. Your officials have been very helpful in dealing with it in public accounts, but I would 
appreciate the opportunity to get your views on it as well, because that opportunity of course is not 
afforded in public accounts. It relates to a problem which is not a new one — I’m not going to suggest 
that . . . This administration has created many problems for the province, but this I don’t think is one of 
them. It’s kind of an old chestnut. 
 
The problem is that we do not seem to be doing an adequate job of auditing people who have licences to 
collect and remit sales tax, and the concern as expressed by the Provincial Auditor, and as expressed by 
the members of the public accounts committee, is that we are not doing an adequate job of auditing these 
books, and we may not be getting all of the revenue. As I say, the issue has been outstanding for some 
time. To pout it mildly, the cost of a couple of auditors or a couple of additional staff would pale in 
comparison with the potential revenue we’re losing. This is a very large revenue item — sales tax and 
other taxes of that sort. 
 
I raise it particularly, Madam Minister, because I notice item 3, revenue operations, your staff is cut 68 
to 60, lowering the partial man-years, or person-years. Audit and investigation, which may be more 
directly the point, is cut from 61.4 to 59.3. I wonder, Madam, in the context of these staff reductions, 
how you plan to go about solving what I think your staff admitted in public accounts, has been a 
problem. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can indicate to the member, in response to his question, the reduction in 
the staff complement has to do directly with the removal of the gas tax, so we actually don’t need those 
auditors in those positions. It might be worth noting that the recovery with almost the same number of 
staff has gone up significantly each year, and I think that reflects on the general efficiencies and 
productivities that we find amongst this, what I would consider a highly trained, efficient group of 
people. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, is Madam Minister denying that the problem exists? I caution you that 
if you do, you’ll be quarrelling not only with the Provincial Auditor who feels it does, but your own staff 
of another department who admitted that the problem does appear to exist. I would ask Madam 
Minister’s view on whether or not the problem exists, and then I’d appreciate your comments on what 
you’re doing to solving a problem which appears to be common ground that we do have a problem. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I wouldn’t want to argue with the Provincial Auditor and 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2443 

that’s not the stand of my department. We’re not arguing with the Provincial Auditor that perhaps there 
is a dollar or two left out there that might be missed, but I might indicate to the hon. member that the 
field audits that are done — in ’72 we recovered $1,286,000 with a staff complement of 25 and with a 
staff complement of 24 in 1982-83 we recovered $4,347,500, just on the field audit assessments. And 
also a new thing that was introduced in 1980-81 which we refer to as desk audit assessments — that 
resulted in another $3,034,000, just on the field audit assessments. And also a new thing that was 
introduced in 1980-81 which we refer to as desk audit assessments — that resulted in another 
$3,034,000 being recovered. So if our point . . . The point we like to make is that even with almost the 
same staff complement we have greatly and very significantly increased the recovery of E&H tax 
throughout the province, even though we don’t argue with his contention that we aren’t getting every 
dollar that’s out there. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What are you doing to solve the problem then? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I think the figures clearly state what we are doing. In 1972-73, 
$1,286,000 was recovered by field auditors; in ’80-81 that rose to $2,545,000; in ’81-82 it rose to 
$4,872,000; in ’82-83 it went down a bit to $4,347,500. And the desk audit, where they just do telephone 
calls and whatever, which was instituted in ’80-81, significantly increased the total of tax revenues 
flowing back to the province. So I think . . . What I’m saying is that even with the same, almost the same 
staff complement, the finances generated back to the province as a result of either a field audit or a desk 
audit has gone up significantly every year. And I think that’s attributed to the type of people that we 
have working in that particular branch. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t deny, you’ve got the very best. 
 
Does the department plan to institute any additional measures to ensure that the system doesn’t penalize 
honest businessmen? — and of course that’s what it does. To the extent that the system permits 
businessmen to avoid the remission of tax where it’s appropriate, you of course penalize those who are 
honest and do it and reward the dishonest and slothful who don’t. So I ask you, Madam Minister, do you 
plan any additional steps to further enhance the recover of tax by your department? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well I can indicate to the member that probably 90 or 95 per cent of the 
businesses that have E&H licences are honest. We go on a three-year cycle, where we do a compliance 
in-depth audit. Some of the people we just drop in on a morning or an afternoon. We select compliance 
audits by very strict audit criteria: whether there’s been any problems in the past, the age of the 
particular business, the type of business it might be. But we feel that using the resources we have 
available to us, the increased recovery of E&H tax — and plus the fact that the recovery of the E&H tax 
has significantly went up every year — we think we’re doing quite a good job. And I might add that the 
call from the auditor for increased auditors was resisted, and I might say somewhat strongly resisted by 
the previous administration, too, because I think you, too, must have recognized the figures that were 
available to you at that time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well I don’t intend to pursue the matter beyond their mutual . . . (inaudible) 
. . . Your department has agreed to come back to the public accounts committee with a detailed report in 
July, and we will look forward to discussing it with them at that time. That may be a more appropriate 
place for it. I really wanted your views on the subject. 
 
A subject which is more directly a matter of concern for Madam Minister if the Mortgage Interest 
Reduction Program. During the election, voters were urged to vote 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2444 

Progressive Conservative; some numbers of them did in fact. They were given reasons to do that. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (inaudible) . . . induced them with much money. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Right. You induced them with much money. I missed the source of that 
comment, but it’s quite accurate; promises of much money. 
 
For instance, Madam Minister, the voters in Maple Creek were urged to vote Progressive Conservative 
— indeed, urged to vote Joan Duncan — and the reasons for that extraordinary suggestion were 
contained in the advertisement. One of them was, ‘Your Home is Number One — The Progressive 
Conservative Mortgage Interest Reduction Plan.’ I don’t know how familiar this is to the member, but 
I’ll read it to you: 
 

Thirteen and a quarter guaranteed maximum mortgage rate . . . Maximum $50,000 mortgage . . . 
Principal residence . . . Current mortgages, renewal and mortgages on new homes . . . No means test 
. . . A real program to help real families. It’s that simple . . . PC . . . There’s so much more we can 
be. 

 
Madam Minister, the problem which has arisen seems to have arisen because in fact that promise wasn’t 
kept. To use the language of the ad, ‘thirteen and a quarter guaranteed maximum mortgage rate’ doesn’t 
appear to have been achieved by all of Saskatchewan’s citizens. 
 
Let me assist Madam Minister in understanding the nature of the problem by reading from an editorial in 
your favourite newspaper and mine, the Star-Phoenix. I want to read this to you verbatim because I 
know it’ll be of endless assistance to Madam Minister: 
 

Members of the governing Conservative Party continue to object strenuously to any suggestions that 
their mortgage interest reduction plan is anything but equitable, or that it in any way violates the 
promises of last spring’s election campaign. What these objections have accomplished has been to 
confirm that there is validity to the criticisms that have been made. 

 
AN HON. MEMBER: — . . . (inaudible) . . . letter to the editor? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, this is an editorial. 
 

The PC Party campaigned on the promise that no one in Saskatchewan would pay more then 13.15 
per cent for a residential mortgage (and I quoted you one that you may have been familiar with) and 
while party advertisements were still making that claim last month, the fact is that some mortgage 
holders are paying more. 

 
I could, Madam Minister, go on. Let me see. I want to ask you some questions about this program. 
 
As I understand it, Madam Minister, the subsidy represents the difference between what I believe you 
refer to in the mortgage as the composite rate and thirteen and a quarter per cent. Is that accurate? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, a home-owner’s assistance is equal to the difference 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2445 

between the required monthly principal interest amount that is payable under his own agreement and 
that amount that would be payable based on a thirteen and a quarter interest rate. And the level of 
assistance is, as you very well know, subject to a maximum interest rate that is calculated weekly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — And that is what I have referred to, I think, as the composite rate. I think 
that’s your phrase. How is that composite rate arrived at? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The average maximum interest rate is calculated weekly by taking the 
average interest rate for a one-year closed mortgage, based on the nine major lending institutes across 
Canada and it’s established under a Sask Housing Corporation weekly survey. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Could you tell me what the composite rate was on July 1, ’82, when this 
program went into effect? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — We’ll even do more than that if you’re willing just to let us send it to you. 
We’ll supply you with the maximum weekly rates since the institution of the program. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Have you got it there? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, we don’t have it all here. We definitely don’t have the July ’82 figures 
with us. We’ll give you each weekly figure from July ’82 right up to the present. We can get it to you 
fairly quickly. We don’t have it with us though, I’m sorry. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — For the purposes of my questions, are we on common ground that the 
composite rate on July 1st was 19.25 per cent? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Laxdal indicates that the fellow that knows all these figures is on his 
way down, so we’ll get that shortly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I gather he was in the government gallery. Okay, I’m just going to leave the 
subject for the moment until he arrives, and perhaps you’d be good enough to tell me when he arrives. 
 
Madam Minister, you have had a decrease in the subvote, administration, of two votes. I wonder if you 
could give me the details of those decreases in positions, and whether or not they were filled, and if so, 
what became of the incumbents. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It has to do with the reorganization, and it was the combination of 
administration and personnel and training, and moving most of them over to Supply and Services. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Did I understand . . . We’ll finish this up. I see that that official if with you, 
but let’s finish up this first. Did I understand you to say that the reductions of staff complements in 
subvotes 3 and 4, and the reduction of funding in subvote 3 and the static nature of the funding in 
subvote 4 are related to the abolition of the gas tax exclusively? If not, what other elements contributed 
to the lower staff complements and lower funding? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s primarily the gas tax positions, plus some of the people that 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2446 

were in MIRP whose jobs became redundant as the program wound down, but you know we had people 
hired to take care of the influx of applications at the beginning and as those sort of levelled off, those 
positions were no longer required. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Were all of the positions vacant, or were they people who were incumbents 
who were dismissed? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No one was, say, lost their jobs except the temporary employees that had 
been temporarily hired to facilitate the MIRP program. Some of them went to revenue, supply and 
services out of the fuel tax division, one went to mail and , some went to office services, and that type of 
thing. But the only people that actually lost their job were the temporary people that were hired to take 
care of that, what we expected and what resulted in a huge influx of applications for MIRP, but that was 
part of the understanding of that job. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay, let’s go back then to the Mortgage Interest Reduction Program. Was 
the interest rate 19.25 per cent — the composite interest rate on July 1, ’82? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — July 1, ’82; it was 19.25. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Will the person who received a mortgage on July 1, ’82 receive the same 
subsidy regardless of whether he took out a renewal for a one-two-, or three-year period? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That 19.25 would apply only to mortgages that were taken out or renewed 
on July 1st, and they would be subject to the maximum interest rate. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Right. And if he renewed on a two-year term, would he get the same subsidy 
as if he renewed for a one-year term? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay. I think we made it fairly clear during debate of the bill an din our kit 
that went out to the lending institutions that the 13.25 would apply to one-year closed mortgages. And 
that maximum interest rate was calculated on a weekly basis using a survey of the nine lending 
institutions. Two- and three-year mortgages generally are a bit higher than one-year closed. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, how do you square that with your campaign 
advertisements? I repeat your own . . . I repeat the advertisement in Maple Creek exhorting them to vote 
for one Joan Duncan . . . 13.25 per cent guaranteed maximum mortgage rate. The effect of ending the 
sentence there is that the ordinary and usual meaning of that sentence is that everybody is guaranteed 
13.25 per cent maximum. Now we find out that’s only true if you renew for a one-year period. If you 
renew for a two-year period, you’re not guaranteed 13.25. And of course, it is not an answer to say that, 
‘Why didn’t the poor brutes renew for a one-year period?’ The reason is because they didn’t know. 
These regulations were not in effect until many months after July 1st. So I ask you, Madam Minister, 
how do you square your performance with your promises? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You were trusted, but not tested. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, you were tested and not trusted. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2447 

Well, okay, I would like to say at this point that I think the Mortgage Interest Reduction Program 
instituted by our government shortly after we came into office, based on a campaign commitment that 
we made, I would say that the 43,000 people in the province that have applied for MIRP (Mortgage 
Interest Reduction Program) can’t be wrong. Can’t be wrong. Now let’s just do a little comparison to a 
program that was introduced on March 18, 1982 by the previous government, and they called it the 
home-owner’s mortgage entitlement protection program. Okay? Our program applies to all new 
mortgages, renewals; the home program proposed in your 1982 budget that the public didn’t accept, 
would have applied only to mortgage renewals occurring up to March 31, 1983. Our program will 
remain in effect until 1985. Similarly that the assistance was provided on an interest rate equal to the 
greater of 15 per cent or the lower rate paid on that mortgage since January 1, 1979, which was what 
your home program wanted to give us. And the maximum rate, or the maximum assistance proposed by 
your home program was limited to 2,400 minus 15 per cent of the family income in excess of 25,000. 
Ours is not income tested, and under our program there is no income limit. Under your program, 
families earning $34,600 or more a year were ineligible, and benefits were based on the first 50,000 of 
mortgage amounts. You know, I think if you just look at our program as compared to the program that 
didn’t get you elected . . . 
 
And I can only reiterate that the 43,000 people that have applied for MIRP (Mortgage Interest Reduction 
Program) are extremely happy to get the benefits. And I don’t get many complaints, either by phone or 
by letter. I get the odd person writing to me asking for a clarification of the maximum interest rates. But 
I really don’t get many complaints at all. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I dearly wish that the minister would undertake to answer my 
telephone, because I’m getting some on this thing. And they continue to come in. 
 
Madam Minister, let me give you some actual examples. And I’ve had difficulty explaining to these 
people why this program . . . how this program can operate. And if you can at all assist me, I’d 
appreciate it. Let me give you an actual example. I will go slow enough that you can copy down the 
figures. 
 
The credit institution, Madam Minister, was the Sherwood Credit Union. It was a 15-year mortgage. The 
term was one year. The renewal date was July 1, ’82. The principal owing when renewed was $49,984. 
Monthly payment was $748.84. the interest rate was 18.25. The monthly subsidy which went to the bank 
was $177. The interest rate was 18.25 per cent. So I assume that person deserves a subsidy equivalent of 
5 per cent on his mortgage, which is less than $50,000. It’s 49,000 and change. 
 
I calculated it out. You can do it, I think, fairly quickly if you have a calculator. The amount of the 
subsidy should have been $208, as this individual correctly pointed out. What he got was $177.62. His 
interest rate was from the Sherwood Credit Union. We, therefore, assumed that it was not above the 
composite — it would be in the average. 
 
So I ask you to explain to me how this person can wind up $40 short on his subsidy. Why was his 
subsidy not equal to the full 5 per cent? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think, perhaps, your assumptions are wrong. I understand that the 
Sherwood Credit Union do not offer one-year closed mortgages. And they are not always at the average 
of the other lending institutions. And I can only say if you have a very specific case, I would be more 
than willing to take it up, look into it for you. What 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2448 

we found . . . Most of the mistakes that have been made have not been made as a result of people in the 
department. There have been some delays because the forms weren’t filled out accurately. Sometimes 
the bank will fill in an interest rate on the day that the money went into a particular account rather than 
the day that the people first went in to apply for mortgage money when at that time the bank . . . 
(inaudible) . . . that in. 
 
And really I don’t know how many people have been rejected outright. I don’t think there’s more than 
. . . Out of the 43,157 applications received to date we have approved 41,965; we have returned 1,087, 
and that’s usually because they haven’t filled in everything. And surprisingly — this is the figure that I 
think you should appreciate, and you’ll know exactly what I mean when I say that the public in general 
appreciate and support the program — out of the 43,157 applications received only 83 applications were 
rejected, and those were rejected mainly because the second mortgage might not have been taken out for 
the purpose of a house; it was taken out more as a personal loan. Or else the people had an interest rate 
lower than 13.25. So in general I think you would be hard-pressed to really criticize the program. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No. I don’t think I would be hard-pressed. Madam Minister, I fail to 
understand what Sherwood Credit Union’s policy of having a floating interest rate has to do with the 
calculations. I made no such sophistication. Now there’s no such sophistication in my calculations. I just 
took 5 per cent of the principal and that should have been the amount of the subsidy and it wasn’t. It was 
440 short. I don’t know what the floating interest rate would have to do with that. In any event, the 
interest rate tracked downwards, not upwards. So I ask you, Madam Minister, why these subsidies fell so 
short of what they should have been. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay. It’s not simply a matter of deducting 5 percentage points and 
calculating the interest on that. As I indicated to you earlier, the mortgage interest subsidy program was 
based on the maximum interest rate, and it’s also based on the difference of your payment at 13.25 and 
your payment at 19.25 or whatever you might have. I can only indicate to the member if he wishes to 
supply me with the name and address and the hospitalization number of the specific case he’s talking 
about, we’d be more than pleased to look into it for you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, these examples do persist. I refer you to an article in the 
Leader-Post of April 2nd, ’83, which a squabble has broken out between officials in your department, 
one Russ Moore, and Hugh Hunt with the Imperial Bank of Commerce, and a Ron Perrault with The 
Royal Bank. A squabble between this government and The Royal Bank, I may say, is a falling out 
indeed, and this occurred before the debacle in New York. So I assume what happened in New York is 
not an explanation for this. Let me quote to you some comments out of the article. The headline is: 
Mortgage subsidy does not cut all loans down to 13.25. The headline sums it up. 
 

While subsidies received under terms of the province’s mortgage interest reduction plan have 
reduced the mortgage interest payments of most Saskatchewan home-owners to a maximum of 13.25 
per cent annually, some residents are paying more. Russ Moore, director of revenue operations with 
the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services, said an unspecified number of complaints have 
been received from citizens who did not receive as big a subsidy. 

 
He goes on to say: 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2449 

The government pays the difference between the average one-year rate at the time the mortgage is 
obtained — the date on which the interest rate is set — and 13.25 . . . Moore said he did not think the 
government was at fault for the misunderstanding. Adequate steps were taken by the government to 
explain the program, he said. The government relied upon the banks or the financial institutions to 
help explain the details of the program. 

 
Madam Minister, do you not think it would have been a better procedure to have been more candid with 
the electorate during the campaign and not relied upon Canada’s chartered banks to try and unravel your 
election campaign promises? Do you not think you should have been a little more candid with the public 
during the election campaign? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, that’s a bunch of malarkey, and you know it. Honestly. You talk about 
doom and gloom and negative. I can only stand here and say to you, while your program would have 
touched up to . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — 47,000. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — 47,000. You exaggerate. Families earning over $34,600 couldn’t even 
apply. Yours was income tested; ours isn’t. Your maximum assistance was limited to 24,000 minus 15 
per cent of family income in excess of 25,000. 
 
And if you are going to be so gullible and believe everything you read in the Leader-Post, and the 
Star-Phoenix, if you’re going to continue for the next two years or three years or four years to use the 
Star-Phoenix or the Leader-Post as your research base, fellows, I mean, that’s only good stuff for us. 
 
I can only say 43,000 people applying, 41,000 getting it, of course we had a maximum interest rate put 
in place. We wouldn’t be responsible if we didn’t. and if you think we’re going to accept any rate that’s 
sent in, you’re silly. You have to have some way of controlling it or we’d be irresponsible with the 
taxpayers’ dollars . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, you talk about promises. At least we were up front 
with the commitments that we made — more than you guys ever have been. And I’ll tell you, the people 
like our program. They’d like to see eight more of us sitting over there. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I guess I’m going to have to live with that unfortunate consequence, I 
say to the member from Regina North. 
 
Madam Minister, why didn’t you do what you had promised to do, that is, reduce mortgages to 13.25 
and provide a separate composite rate for two-year mortgages and three-year mortgages? There would 
have been no abuse, Madam Minister, in that. It would have simply been keeping the faith. I ask you, 
Madam Minister why you didn’t have a separate composite rate for two-year mortgages and three-year 
mortgages. 
 
You claim that the banks should have done your explaining for you. The banks didn’t take that view, 
Mr. Hunt said, ‘The government should have told us. The situation was embarrassing.’ It’s a sorry day 
when you’re quarrelling with The Royal Bank. Ron Perrault, The Royal Bank’s district mortgage 
manager said the bank had received a few 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2450 

complaints from people who had selected the wrong mortgage plan. Perreault said he could count the 
complaints . . . he could count his complaints. The government should have done more to publicize the 
details of the interest reduction program. That, Madam Minister, is what I am saying to you, is that you 
should have done more to publicize the details of that during the campaign. And having not been candid 
about your intentions, why did you not have a composite two-year mortgage and a three-year mortgage? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well listen, why don’t you read the whole article? I think somewhere in 
there it says you can count the complaints on one hand. Now on this one hand I have five fingers. And if 
I have only five complaints out of 43,000 applications, I’ll tell you I think our program is even better 
than we ever thought. 
 
Getting back to the establishment of a maximum interest rate, I think it would have been totally 
irresponsible of us, and there are reasons . . . there are reasons . . . there are reasons why a maximum 
interest rate was instituted. And one of the reasons is to make sure that home-owners do not receive 
assistance based on abnormally high interest rates, either from private lenders or others. I could lend you 
$50,000 at 40 per cent interest rate; we shouldn’t qualify. And you have to . . . You have to put in some 
safeguard mechanisms. And really, the banks did know, and we tried to communicate it. 
 
You say you have a great number of complaints. Well I would specifically like to know, do you have 
five, or 10, or 2,000, or 3,000? And put it in proper perspective, for gosh sakes. Put it in its proper 
perspective. Out of the 43,000 applications received, the 41,000-plus that are receiving benefits under 
MIRP . . . Now I would say to you, if you had 20,000 complaints, I would say, yes, you have had a great 
number of complaints. But if you tell me you only have had 10 or 20 or even 100 out of 41,000, I would 
say you’re greatly exaggerating again. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The research staff available to me, Madam Minister, is not what’s available 
to you. I do not have the research staff of cabinet at all. I’ll tell you that I have here 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 
complaints right here that I have notes on. Madam Minister, no I am not going to name them all. We 
know what happens to people — we know what happens to people who criticize this government. 
They’re out on their ear. Yeah, they’ll be gone. They will be gone because some of these people work 
for the provincial government. Your retribution knows no end. 
 
Madam Minister, if you can dissuade the Minister of Justice from giving you such invaluable assistance, 
I want to deal with another aspect of this program. It has to do with security of income tax returns which 
are available to you. Do I take it it is common ground that you have available . . . that you have access to 
the income tax return of anybody who is getting a subsidy? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I would ask the hon. member . . . I asked you before if you have a specific 
case I’d be more than pleased to look into it for you. Now you said you had seven complaints there. 
Now I would like to tell you that those seven complaints represent 0.0002 per cent of the total 
applications we have received. Now be reasonable; be reasonable about it. You know. And I would say 
to the hon. member, if he would care to pass over those seven complaints, I would be more than pleased 
to look 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2451 

into them immediately in the morning — table them, if nothing else. 
 
Now you were talking about the requirement to have access to income tax, and I’m sorry, I missed your 
question. I just wanted to say before you get up that that also is acting responsibly. Nowhere on the form 
are you asked for your social insurance number. You are just asked for permission to be able to get 
information from Revenue Canada. Now should a person be audited, they would be advised either in 
writing or by phone prior to an audit being done, at which time their SIN number would be requested. 
So the campaign that I can vaguely remember because I don’t like to remember little negative plays like 
that . . . The campaign that you people waged, I think, was unfair, uncalled for, and totally misleading, 
given that the same information is asked on SAP (Saskatchewan Assistance plan), and the former 
minister of social services is fully cognizant of that fact, and it isn’t something new as you people tried 
to imply at the time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, I would have no objection to tabling the examples. The 
problem is that I have written the names —I have written the names of the individuals on top of them, 
and I’m not going to table their names. I could give you the examples . . . I could give you the examples 
and I will do that. I will give Madam Minister the information and ask you to respond and explain to me 
why those individuals didn’t get the subsidies which I thought they should have. So let us deal with it in 
that fashion. I will correspond to the minister and give you the raw data without the names and ask you 
to respond and explain why they don’t get the subsidy that it appears they should. 
 
Madam Minister, I names seven complaints. I’m not suggesting that everyone who got less than what 
they were entitled to contacted me. I happen to have seven here, and that’s a fair number considering the 
number whose examples I have with me. 
 
Madam Minister, because we are running out of time, I want to deal with the income tax returns. A 
person’s individual income tax return is available to you if you decide to do an audit. The issue of the 
confidentiality of those files is no academic issue. We spent some days in this House dealing with an 
episode that occurred because an individual’s confidential file — a member of the legislature and my 
desk-mate — his confidential file was made available to members of your caucus who used it publicly. 
So the issue . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They had his confidential file. They didn’t deny it, so 
Madam Minister, the question of the security of those income tax returns is no academic question. I ask 
you, Madam Minister, what steps have you taken to secure the confidentiality of the information which 
you have? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — There you go again —either deliberately or otherwise trying to mislead the 
people of Saskatchewan and that’s shameful. Now, if you look at the MIRP (Mortgage Interest 
Reduction Program) application: nowhere on there are you required to put down your social insurance 
number, which is a federal number, but it does specify that you have to realize that should you be lucky 
enough to have your name come up for a spot audit, our department would contact you for your SIN 
(social insurance number) number so we in turn could write the federal government and have access to 
that information. 
 
Now, I am not sure. I don’t think they would just send your whole file. The only information we would 
be requiring was whether or not you, on your income tax file, were deducting interest costs as a business 
deduction. And for you to stand there and 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2452 

say that we’re going to pass these things around . . . We haven’t looked at one income tax file, nor have 
we requested one social insurance number. 
 
I’ll tell you why also, because the people on this side of the House feel that probably 99 per cent of the 
people in the province are honest, and they’re not trying to rip off the government. They’re honest, 
honest, basically honest people who appreciate the program. And this government has a different 
philosophy than you guys. We aren’t going to encumber a program with so darn many regulations and 
rules and stumbling-blocks that no one’s going to apply for it. At the time that MIRP was introduced, 
interest rates were at a record height . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Caused by you guys in part . . . 
Thank you. And we felt as a government that it was our responsibility to protect as many home-owners 
as possible. And when we say home-owners, we mean the person that might be making $40,000 a year, 
or $35,000 a year, or 20, or whatever. Not like you . . . Anybody over $34,000 were out of luck. But we 
feel that there is a whole class of people out there who are contributing to the province, paying taxes, 
buying goods, and contributing to the growth of our province, and they need as much protection as a lot 
of other people. And we have . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. The minister is trying to answer, and above this noise you can 
hardly hear her. Could we have some order here, please? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can only say that we don’t want to create programs that you have to put so 
many stumbling-blocks and so many regulations in place that it just becomes ludicrous to apply for 
them. I think our farm purchase program was done in the same vein —anything we do. 
 
And I might say with a bit of pride on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, we were a leading 
force in having programs such as this instituted across Canada. People from the MIRP (Mortgage 
Interest Rebate Program) program travelled to almost every province to help them set up similar 
programs. And we were a leader in this program. And I’ll tell you, the people know it, and the people 
appreciate it. 
 
And if you want me to look after those seven complaints that you have, I need more than just an 
example. I need the names, so we can look directly and see why those people are not getting some 
subsidies that they require, because I would like to have the pleasure to write to them personally, to 
either tell them why they didn’t or how a mistake was made and how it could be rectified. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, your description of what we’re going to get from the 
department varies markedly from the regulations. And that’s why I’m asking the question. May I read 
for your benefit the regulations which you passed? Section 4: 
 

For the purposes of subsection 6(1), the minister shall request, on every application, information 
relating to a principal residence, including (subsection g) a declaration by the home-owner stating 
that he is a resident of Saskatchewan and he authorizes the minister to request on his behalf any 
returns and supporting documents and schedules that he has filed pursuant to the Income Tax Act. 

 
What this authorizes you to get is the return and all supporting documents. And Madam Minister, that’s 
a good deal more than what you just described to me. And it is information which can be lethal if it’s not 
protected. And as I say, confidential files have no . . . Security of confidential files is not an academic 
issue any more, not with us or 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2453 

with anyone else. So I ask you, Madam Minister to direct your attention to the regulations which you 
passed. 
 
And if you’re saying these regulations are unnecessarily broad because you have no intention of asking 
for that information, then I would suggest, Madam Minister, you should amend your regulations. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, the statement made by the member from Regina Centre absolutely 
stymies me. You know full well that you cannot access Revenue Canada unless you have a social 
insurance number, plus the signature giving permission by the person you are trying to access 
information from. And you know full well that the SIN number is found nowhere — and I repeat, 
nowhere — on that MIRP form. 
 
Permission is asked to give us permission that if we do an audit, that you will provide us with your SIN 
number . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It is so. Now you read that form . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
You read the form! There’s nowhere on there where your SIN number is, and you, being a lawyer, 
should know better. You can’t access Revenue Canada for information without written permission plus a 
SIN number. 
 
And it’s not fair. I can tell you one more time: if we want to do an audit on you, you will be contacted by 
someone in MIRP, saying that ‘You have come up for a spot audit. Could we please have your social 
insurance number in order to access Revenue Canada?’ You would know everything —open 
government, up-front, eh? You would know if you were being audited. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t see how that’s relevant to my question. My question is . . . And it 
relates to the regulations. The regulations state, Madam Minister, ‘Authorizing the minister on his behalf 
to request any returns and supporting statements and schedules.’ What these regulations authorize you to 
ask for is everything that you’ve filed. And there is a great deal of confidential information in that. My 
question to you . . . And let’s deal with what you ask for. Did you tell me that you don’t want the 
returns; you don’t want the statements; you don’t want the schedules; you want something less than that, 
and that’s all you’ll be asking for? Is that what you just told me? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I would tell you that it would not be . . . We’re asking for approval, is what 
we’re doing, approval to access your income tax information. And I will reiterate that that income tax 
information cannot be accessed to without written signed consent, plus your social insurance number. 
 
And I am familiar with the regulations, but also I am familiar with the form — the application form that 
you fill out when you apply to MIRP. And if you go over that very carefully, you’ll find that nowhere on 
there is there a space for you to fill in your social insurance number, which we need, along with your 
written permission, to send to Revenue Canada, to be able to access your income tax. So what I’m 
saying to you: that anybody that we do an audit on — and we haven’t done any audits to date — anyone 
that we do an audit on would be contacted either by phone or by mail, informed that their MIRP benefits 
were under an audit, and we require his or her social insurance number to be able to access Revenue 
Canada for the information. 
 
Basically the information that we would be requiring would be that you weren’t using your interests cost 
as a write-off against a business. So that’s all that we would be interested in. And I can assure the hon. 
member that I wouldn’t even see them. And I really don’t care to see anybody’s income tax information. 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2454 

But for you to stand there and either imply deliberately or unwittingly that this is something new is just 
not right. Social Services requires income tax information. I believe Sask Housing requires income tax 
information. I believe banks sometimes require income tax information that you give voluntarily. So 
don’t try to say that it’s something sinister, because it isn’t. And I can only say to you in honesty that we 
believe that 99 per cent of the people are honest, appreciate the plan. The plan is being accepted, not 
only here, but in other provinces in the country, and what more can I say? Forty-one thousand people 
getting benefits under IRP; it’s a good program; it’s a simple program; it’s been a pleasure to administer; 
we’ve got a good group of people; the administration of it has been kept simple, by design I might add. 
And there’s a lot of new firsts — the electronic transfer of benefits is a first I think, not only in the 
province but elsewhere. So I think that we have a good thing going for us. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, when you contact the Department of National Revenue, 
they are going to tell you, they aren’t going to go through that form and tell you: yes, he was; or yes, he 
wasn’t; they’re not using this for income tax deduction. They’re going to send you the return and 
supporting statements, and your regulations recognize that. They’ll send you the return; they won’t do 
your work for you. 
 
My question, Madam Minister, is: what steps have you taken to ensure that this information will remain 
confidential and will not become the subject of public discussions, as has happened somewhat recently? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I can give this assurance to the member, that al people working 
within the civil service, I believe, have to take the oath of office, which also includes their commitment 
to confidentiality of documents. Now if you think that we have someone in the department that might 
not be quite honest, I would be pleased to know about it. But I think that you know full well the people 
that deal with that type of sensitive material are probably fully cognizant of their responsibility with that 
material. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I wouldn’t, Madam Minister, have made such a fuss about it. We did at the 
time it was passed. I would not have made such an outrageous fuss about it, if the use of confidential 
files had not become the matter of a public argument between your Premier and one of your members. 
And it did; and it did. 
 
Madam Minister, what steps have you taken to limit access by the employees of your department to this 
information? What steps have been taken to ensure that only the absolute minimum number of 
employees can get the information? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Any audits that are done using income tax files are done in a secure area; 
the files are secured; there’s a minimal number of people working on files — perhaps one or two. Those 
people know their responsibility, I believe. And as I said before, they’re fully cognizant of the sensitivity 
of that type of material and it isn’t something that’s just thrown around; it’s in a secure area, and what 
more can I say? 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 7 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, can you tell me what was actually spent in 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2455 

1982-83? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — About $27 million. I might add that that’s down from the projected 52 
when we first started working on the program in May of ’82. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 to 13 inclusive — Statutory. 
 
Item 14 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, could the minister advise what 
superannuation programs are operating? I’m aware of the old superannuation plan — the benefit plan 
which is based upon years of service and salary. What I am really asking is whether the employees’ 
savings plan that used to have matching contributions for employees who could not qualify for the 
defined benefit plan is still operating, or whether that has been merged with the new matching 
contribution plan? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Chairman, before I answer the hon. Leader of the Opposition’s 
question, I’d like to introduce to you the officials from the public employees benefits agency: Mr. Al 
Palmer, the director; and Bob Bishoff from the plan, executive secretary. 
 
It’s still in place, but it is being phased out. I believe the phase-out started in ’77; does that answer your 
question? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I think so, Madam Minister. Clearly no one would qualify for that now, 
because there’s no reason why they shouldn’t be in the new matching contribution plan. Is there any 
reason why the whole employee benefit plan couldn’t be sort of moved over into the matching 
contribution plan, holus-bolus, and get rid of one of our several plans? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — All I can say is that when the new plan was brought in, the participants of 
the old plan were not given the option of swinging into the new plan, and as you know that was not a 
decision made by the present administration. So, I couldn’t give you the reason why it wasn’t, because 
that was a decision made by your administration. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I don’t want to pursue this 
particularly, except that that employee benefit plan was, as I recall it, one wherein the employee simply 
paid an amount into the fund and the government matched it, and out of that combined sum an annuity 
was purchased and that’s exactly the same arrangement as the new plan. And I don’t know why they 
need to be segregated, and I ask the minister why they need to be segregated and administered 
separately. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Okay. I understand that prior to the new plan, that employees who entered 
the government service over a certain age had to contribute to the employee savings account because 
they couldn’t get into the different plan, and that, of course, now is gone because there is no age limit 
that you can’t start paying into the PEBA fund. 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2456 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I agree with the minister’s statement, 
but they paid into the savings account, and if I am not wrong, the government matched the amount. That 
may be my problem; maybe they didn’t match it at that time, but only on retirement. But, if they 
matched it at the time that the employee put the money into the savings account, then it’s exactly the 
same plan as the new one, and I don’t know why we need to keep them separate. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The other plan, the contribution was only matched on retirement, whereas 
in the new plan, the match is made on a monthly basis, month by month. 
 
Item 14 — Statutory. 
 
Items 15 to 17 inclusive — Statutory. 
 
Items 18 and 19 agreed to. 
 
Item 20 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Madam Minister, I wonder if the minister can tell us 
whether tat covers all employees in the public service, and whether any other classes of employees are 
covered by the dental plan, and have the employer contribution paid out of that amount. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It basically covers about 14,000 members; it covers everyone except SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union) who, in the bargaining process, chose not to participate 
in the dental plan, and a couple of smaller groups. 
 
Item 20 agreed to. 
 
Items 21 and 22 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PUBLIC EMPLOYEES BENEFITS AGENCY — Nil Vote 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’d like to thank the minister and her officials. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Chairman, I would also like to take this opportunity to thank my 
officials for their speed and help, and also to thank the members of the opposition for the pleasant 
questions asked and the lively debate that broke out at some time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also want to thank the minister for her courteous 
attention to our questions and her officials for their assistance in replying. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:00 p.m. 


