






















































Hansard: March 21, 1983


47 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 21, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Communication 
 
ASSISTANT CLERK: — Mr. Speaker, as chairman of the standing committee on communication, 
presents the third report of the said committee, which is as follows: 
 

That the committee has considered the matter of the division of radio time in the current session. 
The committee recommends to the Assembly that radio time be divided between government and 
opposition members on the basis of the ratio of their representation in the House. 

 
MR. YOUNG: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member for Rosthern: 
 
 That the third report of the standing committee on communications be now concurred in. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a particular comment with respect to the motion 
and the basis of the consideration made by the communication committee. 
 
I just want to point out to the House that there is a considerable imbalance in the number of government 
members in comparison to the number in the opposition. I want to say that we raised an amendment to 
recognize the imbalance and that was not accepted. I just want to say that the recommendation is that it 
goes on a formula on the number of members on the government side and the number of members on 
the opposition side. I want to point out, however, that on the previous occasion, with respect to the 
allocation of radio time, that in the 17th legislature, back in 1971, there was a fair imbalance with 
respect to the number of government members and the number of opposition members: 45, in fact, 
government members; 15 for the opposition. In the second session, the ratio was according to the 
number of members: that is allocation on a 3:1 basis. 
 
I just want to point out to the legislature that in the third session on the 17th legislature there was a 
reconsideration of the allocation of time because of the imbalance between the opposition and the 
government at that time. The ratio established during the 17th legislature, third session, was pretty well 
on a 2:1 basis rather than the old formula of 3:1. That was carried through in the fourth session of the 
legislature — the 2:1 basis — giving the opposition further radio time. Similarly, in the fifth session of 
the 17th legislature, the ratio of allocation of time was 2:1. Using strictly the formula that had been the 
practice, it would have been 3:1. 
 
I feel that, in this instance, it would have been wise for the government, with this very substantial 
majority, to have given the consideration and the practice which was used in the past, Mr. Speaker. 



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
48 

MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, re the committee report, which was agreed to, to follow the normal 
practices of this House over the last year . . . I wish to repeat that comment: the normal practices of this 
House, It is interesting to note that ever since I’ve been a member in this House the interesting practice 
was the total amount of time divided by the total amount of members. Since I’ve been a member of this 
House, that was the formula. It is interesting to know that the NDP now are suggesting the formula, that 
was great while they were government and we were in opposition, was good, but now that they’re in 
opposition it is no good. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, just in referring to the long-standing tradition that the 
member for Rosthern talks about, we would like to reiterate that in the 17th legislature, 1973, ’74, as 
well as ’72, the arrangement that he talks about, where it was split on a 3:1 ratio, was not in effect. In 
fact, the ratio at that time was 1:2. This was an attempt to balance what was, at that time, an imbalance 
in the number of members in the House, which I think is in evidence again today. That point we 
attempted to get across at that meeting. 
 
We would just like to have on the record that the agreement that they talked about — the long-standing 
agreement — that there was no such thing because it varied from time to time in the past. I think that 
this is just another example of large government using its majority to attempt to stifle the debate and the 
opposition in this House by trying to cancel radio time by the opposition. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, responding to the hon. member, I think the hon. members opposite 
should keep in mind that any change from the previous policy dealt with the situation when there were 
two opposition parties . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, yes, it did, because I can remember hon. 
members opposite insisting on maintaining the radio time based on the number of members. I suggest 
that the hon. member is mistaken when he says that in fact we are restricting debate. That is not correct, 
Mr. Speaker. The hon. embers opposite will have full opportunity, and I urge them to take that 
opportunity, to participate in the Speech from the Throne debate. They may not like to hear that . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You can should me down and take away my right to speak. But let me tell 
you that in fact you have every opportunity to participate to the full, and that is not being taken away 
from you, and I urge you to participate to the full in the debate. 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a new member in this Assembly, it has always been my 
opinion that radio time was to carry our message back to our constituents and on that basis it only stands 
to reason that this be divided equally. I recognize your argument about the large majority we have. But 
that was the people’s wish. Now we have 54 members here, Mr. Speaker, that would like to carry a 
message back to their constituents. And they are all entitled to carry that back. I can’t see why a pro rata 
situation is not totally acceptable. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to again put a few facts on the record. There 
have, in this House in the last 15 years, been occasions when two parties were in the House: namely 
from ’71 to ’75; and from ’75 to ’82, three parties; and from ’82 on, two parties . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I stand corrected in the sense that there were no Liberals between ’78 and ’82, so you 
are quite right. There were two parties from ’71 to ’75; three from ’75 to ’78 and two from ’78 on. I 
thank hon. members for calling my attention to that slip of my tongue. 



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
49 

I want now to make the obvious point that there have been two occasions when we have substantially 
unbalanced Houses. That was from ’71 to ’75, when the numbers were 45 to 15, and the current House 
where the imbalance is even greater. Between ’75 and ’82 the imbalance was nothing like the imbalance 
between ’71 and ’75, or following 1982. The practice followed was to assume that the opposition, its 
spokesperson on the Speech from the Throne and the budget, had an opportunity and a right to present 
the party’s point of view, not simply report to his or her constituency, and thereafter the numbers might 
be split evenly to follow the argument advanced by the member for Regina North. 
 
This was, in fact, done in the House in 1973, 1974, and 1975 when the relatively smaller opposition was 
given a greater allocation of radio time per members than the relatively larger government. It strikes us 
on this side, representing this party, that that was a reasonable and fair thing to do when the House was 
substantially imbalanced and is a reasonable and fair thing to do now. We make no particular point of it. 
If the government wishes to take the other view, that the courtesy which was accorded to the opposition 
in ’73, ’74 and ’75 when it was a small opposition will not be accorded to this opposition, that’s the 
government’s decision to make. They make it, but we record our regret that the government takes that 
view of the use of its majority in this Chamber. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to make a few comments on what I see as a 
rather unfortunate argument that is being put forth by the Leader of the Opposition and his colleagues. I 
just want to make this note, Mr. Speaker, for the opposition’s benefit. Up until this year, from the very 
day that I was elected, I was on that communications committee, since 1975. And I had to be the sole 
members, at one time when there were only seven of us, to fight for some time on radio. I recall one 
tactic that I even tried to employ. I said, ‘Well can we eliminate the Speaker? You know, he’s not in the 
debate. Can we take it over a fraction of 60 instead of 61?’ when we had 61 members in the House. And 
that wasn’t even permitted. Not one member, not one member in terms of a fraction were we allowed. 
Seven lonely members that sat right there and not one fraction of that 61st would you allow. 
 
Now then, that’s the history, and that’s since 1975 through to ’82. Now you people are eight, that’s one 
more than seven — yes, you can count that one extra over seven — and now you’re crying because you 
can’t get some more radio time. I’ll admit that it’s very difficult to try and make a case against this 
government under the leadership of Premier Grant Devine, and now you’re down to trying to make out 
this government as being a big, all-encompassing government that’s going to tread on your rights. I tell 
you we also have a very good Speaker in the House that will see to it that you have your right to speak. 
Further to that, Mr. Speaker, in case the members aren’t aware, we do have television now in the 
Chamber. We do have television, and you will not only be able to be heard, but you will be able to be 
seen, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite in opposition know that as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it would seem that those eight members in opposition have the opportunity to be on 
their feet every day on a variety of issue relative to a lot of backbenchers on this side of the House that 
don’t have those same opportunities. I know in talking to some of the member sin opposition, they’ve 
admitted that they’re having a good time over there because they have chance to speak now. When 
you’ve got 56 members strong, it’s very difficult to have them all up having a turn to speak every day 
and, Mr. Speaker, he opposition knows that very well. I say, Mr. Speaker, that’s very unfortunate — 
very unfortunate that this opposition could stoop that low, to that kind of a tactic, to try and make that 
kind of an argument against a government that  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
50 

is just following a practice and a precedent that was set by them when they were in government, and 44 
strong. 
 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure for me today to introduce, through you 
to the House, a group of 10 young Canadians from across the country, who are doing volunteer work for 
Katimavik, volunteers, as I say, from across Canada, presently located in Fort Qu’Appelle. They are 
accompanied by Gail Heinrichs. I’m sure all members will wish to join with me in welcoming them to 
the Assembly and appreciate their efforts in Saskatchewan, particularly Fort Qu’Appelle. I hope they 
have an enjoyable afternoon. I look forward to meeting with them after question period. Thank you. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with my colleague in welcoming to 
Saskatchewan the 10 young people. I hope they find today’s proceedings interesting and enlightening. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, if I may, I want to take this opportunity to ask you and the House to 
join in welcoming to the House some members of the trade union movement who have an interest in 
today’s proceedings. In one gallery is Nadine Hunt, president of the Saskatchewan Federation of 
Labour, and over my shoulder are some members of the RWDSU including Mr. Len Wallace and others. 
I know the government members will want to join us in welcoming these people to the Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. TUSA: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to the House through 
you, a group of 12 grade 12 students from Lestock, their teacher, Mr. Barry Davies, and their bus driver, 
Mr. Ed Kish. I trust that they will have an enjoyable tour of the Legislative Building this afternoon, and I 
look forward to meeting with them later after question period. 
 
I ask you all, on both sides of the House, to welcome these students. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Minimum Wage 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to welcome to the legislature, on his return 
from Saskatoon, the Minister of Labour. I want to say, by way of background, Mr. Speaker, that your 
timidity in not making your announcement on Friday and the way in which you handled it is your 
business, but the mockery, Mr. Minister, that you have made of the fundamental principles of 
parliamentary democracy and ministerial accountability, is everybody’s business. 



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
51 

My question, Mr. Minister, is: you said at 10 o’clock that you were not able to announce a decision until 
this week; it was announced at 3; precisely what time on Friday, Mr. Minister, did you change your 
mind? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that the opposition was so desirous to see 
me this afternoon, and that’s the reason I came back from Saskatoon. I had to cancel a bunch of 
appointments with compensation people, with people concerned about lay-offs, but I’m sure we’ll 
rearrange those appointments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at question period last Friday, I was still not aware of our total decision as far as the 
minimum wage was concerned. I had had my release ready as of March 2, but there were some other 
items that we wanted to check into, which we did, and we finally had our committee together on Friday 
at 3 o’clock in the afternoon. We arrived at our decision at that time, and the press release went out. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A supplementary. Was that a committee of cabinet that you met with Friday 
afternoon? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — We have our committee that I meet with. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A new question, in light of the minister’s refusal to answer the last one. Is 
the minister not aware that the fundamental principles of courtesy to the House suggest that 
announcements are made in the House, when the House is in session, where that’s reasonably possible? 
My question to the minister is: if you are really asking us to believe that you weren’t ready Friday, why 
didn’t you wait until today to make the announcement? Why make it at a time when you were out of the 
city, when the opposition was out of the city, and when you were not planning on being here today? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been asked for a number of days by the opposition and 
by a number of people what our decision was going to be on the minimum wage. On Friday afternoon 
we were able to give you that decision, and that’s what we did. We let our press release out at 3:30 on 
Friday afternoon. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Why didn’t you observe the traditional 
courtesies of the House and make it in the House today? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, my plans were to be in Saskatoon today to . . . It’s my cabinet 
day in Saskatoon, and if the opposition thinks, from the remarks that I just heard, that I’m going to go 
running around the legislature to get permission from you people to leave the Legislative Building, you 
have another thing coming. I had to go back to Yorkton on Friday afternoon. I had to go back to Yorkton 
on Friday afternoon to attend a benefit hockey game for a young high school student that broke his neck 
a year ago. We had set up a trust fund, and I intended to be at that function, minimum wage or no 
minimum wage. I wasn’t going to miss that function. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Let me repeat the question, since you spoke about everything else but my 
question. Why didn’t you wait until today to make the announcement? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I don’t see any difference, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s Friday or  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
52 

Monday. We let our decision out as soon as we arrived at our decision on the minimum wage, which 
was last Friday afternoon. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A supplementary. Is the minister really telling us that you don’t see the 
difference between making an announcement late Friday afternoon, after the House is adjourned and 
after you have left town, and making it today or tomorrow, when the House is in session and you could 
be called to answer for your decision? Are you really telling us you don’t see the difference? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t see any difference. They knew where I was; I missed 
the whole first period of the hockey game because I was talking to the people on the telephone. So they 
knew where I was. I was able to talk to the media and the press and anybody that wanted to talk to me. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Since the minister patently refuses to justify his 
behaviour on Friday, and it’s probably because there is no justification for your behaviour, Mr. Minister, 
let’s ask you about the decision itself. That is, I suspect, of equal concern to those on minimum wage. 
By way of background, Mr. Minister, let me remind you that Statistics Canada tell us that the poverty 
line for a family of four is 17,000 if you live in a city, and 13,000 if you live on a farm. The minimum 
wage gives people on $8,000 
 
My question is: where’s all the talk about compassion from this government? When you look at those 
figures, how does your government justify, on social or moral grounds, a two-year freeze of the 
minimum wage? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I have been torn for the last five or six months as to what 
direction to go as far as the minimum wage is concerned. When I look at the minimum wage of 
Saskatchewan and find out that it is the kind of Canada at 4.25 an hour, the highest in Canada . . . It’s the 
highest in Canada. We have no intention to be the super kings — especially when the economic 
conditions are such today that small businesses are going under. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please! The hon. member was asked a question; he’s on his feet trying to 
answer the question, but he is not being given an opportunity to answer. I would ask the House to give 
him that opportunity. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I would like to make a ministerial statement. I have 
given a copy to the opposition prior to 2:30 . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Well, I’m asking for leave to 
move off question period to make a statement, then we can come back. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave granted? Leave is not granted. Question 
period continues. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I was saying, Mr. Speaker, when we have the highest minimum wage in 
Canada — the average of all the provinces in Canada is $3.77 an hour — and when you look at small 
business today, and I’ve talked to lots of them in the last few months as well as employees (I’ve been 
listening!), the bottom line in a lot of these companies is just tilting, whether it’s in the black or the red. 
And to me, a job at $4.25 is better than no job at all and that’s what’s happening in this country. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: – Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I did not ask you to  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
53 

compare Saskatchewan with other provinces. I asked you, and I would ask you to address yourself to the 
issue, how you can justify freezing a minimum wage at half the poverty level. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, people want jobs in Saskatchewan. In the last few months 
I’ve taken the opportunity — every time I’ve been in a café to meet with waitresses, or whatever — and 
I have asked the question: ‘If you were the Minister of Labour, what would you do as far as the 
minimum wage is concerned?’ Nine out of ten said, ‘Don’t touch it if it’s going to meant that I’m going 
to lose my job.’ And I would like to suggest that a lot of people would. And I have letters here in my 
files. I’ll just read you one: 
 

Attention Mr. McLaren: This is to tell you that the minimum wage in Saskatchewan is too high 
at $4.25. Coffee at Fuller’s Restaurant is 60 cents a cup plus 40 cents for one refill. That’s 
because $4.25 is too high. The minimum wage should be the same right across Canada, but $4.25 
or more will just put more people on welfare. Two years ago, the Leader-Post carried two pages 
of ads. Today in 1983, it is less than one page because $4.25 is too high. From an employee who 
is quite happy with $4.25, it’s better than nothing. 

 
That’s from an employee in Regina. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Labour. As he will 
know, when he came to office and because Minister of Labour, the minimum wage in this province was 
$4.25 an hour, and the unemployment rate was the lowest in Canada. If $4.25 is too high a minimum 
wage, when did it get too high? When, in our term of office, did it become too high? 
 
MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, it didn’t get too high in my term of office. I can relate back to British 
Columbia. They haven’t had a minimum wage increase since December 1980. They are at $3.65. You 
look at Ontario — the same thing — 1981 October since they’ve had an increase. They’re at $3.50 an 
hour. I know that there are people out there, single mothers, young people, who are having a difficult 
time. I’m not knocking that; I realize that. It’s better to have a job at 4.25 than no job at all. That’s 
what’s happening in our province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I direct to the Minister of Labour. I ask the 
Minister of Labour: how does he justify not increasing the minimum wage and claiming that an increase 
would cost jobs when the provinces he cites, Ontario and B.C., have lower minimum wage and higher 
unemployment? How do you square those facts? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we in Saskatchewan . . . I don’t have to tell the members 
opposite that there are some difficult times out there. When you increase the minimum wage of 4.25, 
say, by 6 or 7 per cent, that will add 1 to 2 per cent onto the cost of doing business in this province. If 
that’s going to happen, I can assure you, because I know (I am a small businessman myself), that the 
$8,000 or $9,000 a year just makes the difference on whether you make profit or not in today’s times. If 
you’re going to arrive at that bottom line, jobs are going to go. You’ll do it yourself. You’ll do your 
books yourself to cut it out. I know that’s happening all over this province. I’ve got my files full  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
54 

of letters from small businessmen saying, ‘Don’t raise the minimum wage, because if I do, it could mean 
a reduction in staff.’ That’s what we’re hearing, and I have been listening. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a further supplementary to the Minister of Labour. He 
seems to be making the argument that an increase in the minimum wage will mean less employment. Is 
he now telling the House that a decrease in the minimum wage will increase employment, and is that 
likely to be his next policy statement made on a Friday afternoon? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I have no intention of reducing the minimum wage, but when 
I look at federally released figures, as far as the unemployment picture is concerned, our work force has 
gone up from 455,000 to 461,000 in February alone, and our unemployment figure has come down by 
1,000 people in February alone. It’s the only province in Canada that can make a statement. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Labour. My question to him is 
this. He will recall that when, last December, we were confirming the formula which gave to MLAs an 
increase of 6.5 per cent, we believe that to be fair. He will recall that at that time we moved in this 
House that that increase will become effective when the next increase in the minimum wage became 
effective, and he will recall that his colleagues voted down that amendment. The question I ask him is 
this: if 6.5 per cent was a fair and reasonable increase for MLAs, which I believe it was, why aren’t 
people on minimum wage entitled to at least a 6.5 per cent increase in minimum wage? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to remind the Leader of the Opposition that that the 
cabinet ministers voted zero for their increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can just go back to what I’ve said already, that just raising the minimum wage . . . 
Actually, what I’d like to do is bury the thing forever. I’d sooner be talking maximum wages, because 
this government on this side of the House is going to make it possible for people to take their skills and 
upgrade themselves to be able to earn the 6, 7, 8, and $9 an hour, instead of having this depressive 
mentality of a minimum thing placed over their heads all the time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Labour. He mentioned, in an 
earlier answer to a question, the number of people who he would see going on welfare, had they 
increased the minimum wage. I would like to, just for the record, ask him how he can explain the 12,000 
more people on welfare today than there were when they took over the government, and the minimum 
wage hasn’t gone up. Can you explain the rationale and the logic for that? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I can remind the members opposite that on April 25, 1982, 
your government had 29,000 people on unemployment and we have been hearing about the land of milk 
and honey, as of April 26, which you people were supposed to have left to us, and you had that kind of 
unemployment figure. Now just because of April. 26, all of a sudden it’s the government’s fault that it’s 
gone that way. It’s  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
55 

because of some recessionary thing, and it’s not just because of minimum wage. It’s hitting everybody. 
And the fact is that it’s starting to turn around and these people will have a chance to get higher than 
minimum wages because of the climate and the business that’s going to be created in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The minister will be aware that even now 
about 3,000 people in the province who are earning minimum wage, or near minimum wage, are already 
on welfare in this province. Can he give us an indication of how many more will go on welfare over the 
next year, during the freeze, as a result of that being in place? How many more people who are 
minimum wage will be also be collecting welfare, and be paid out of the taxpayers’ purse, so that 
McDonald’s and A&W can have cheap labour in this province? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I have no idea what the figures might change to. It may even 
come down. And the way things are going in this province, I think they will come down because I would 
have bet money in February that we would have had an increase in the amount of unemployment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — But it’s going to go down. The figure is going down because the potash 
workers weren’t even involved with that figure at the end of February. There’s 1,000 of them going back 
to work. All of a sudden, all last week all I heard was about the unemployment and lay-offs at Ipsco. 
There is some more of this coming. But the whole thing is going to start change around in this province. 
You know it and we know it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the minister has made an offer to make a bet that the 
welfare numbers would go down next month; I would be very willing to take him up on that. But what I 
would like to know is: how can he justify the fact that there are 3,000 people now earning minimum 
wage, who are also getting welfare from the government, from the taxpayers? How do you justify that 
by keeping the minimum wage down? All that will do in the end is put more and more people on 
welfare. And how can you justify that use of the taxpayers’ money? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, if I put it up they’d go into the same thing because the 
business people would not be able to afford to hire extra people. I’ve been telling you that from the very 
beginning. That is going to mean unemployment in this province, especially when we are king in 
Canada already. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Labour. By way of background let 
me suggest to you that if there were anything, any logic at all, to your position that freezing wages 
would increase the number of jobs, surely that’s an argument in favour of a general wage and price 
freeze. My question to the minister is: why place the burden of economic recovery on those who are lest 
able to bear it? Why make the poor pay for the mistakes which you people have made? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, is the member opposite suggesting that everybody have their 
wages frozen in the province? We want everybody to make more money — no freezes. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I suggested no such thing to the  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
56 

minister. I have just been suggesting to you for the last half-hour that your position’s illogical, but surely 
the logical . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The member can’t make himself heard to ask his question. I would 
ask all members to be quiet and let him ask the question. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Surely, Mr. Minister, if it is logical to freeze the wages of those on the 
minimum wage it’s logical to freeze everybody’s wages, and you’re not doing that. My question is: why 
be so inconsistent? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we don’t set wages. In the minimum wage we have to protect 
the people that are on welfare, and 4.25 an hour is the same as $9,000 a year . . . (inaudible) . . . $8,900, 
$8,800 plus fringe benefits, plus the works, right? So you’re looking at close to $9,000 to $10,000. I’m 
telling you that the small business out there can’t afford that kind of thing now, and that’s’ what’s been 
happening. As I’ve said earlier, I’ve had employees coming to me and telling me, ‘Please don’t raise the 
minimum wage because I want a job.’ That’s what we’re going to do. We’re going to give them that 
opportunity to have that job, and with the turnaround coming, they’ll all have their opportunity and 
you’ll see the social thing come down. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. I am not, Mr. Minister, interested in the details 
of all the people who have whispered in your ear. I am simply asking you how you justify asking the 
poorest in society to bear this burden of recovery. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, everybody in the province is bearing the results of the 
recovery. You are, I am, people on minimum wage — everybody is. The people that have been working 
for 20 years have been out of work off and on this past year or two. It’s a fact of life that we’re in that 
kind of a recession. That 4.25 is still a reasonable wage when you look at the rest of Canada. Ontario, for 
example: they’ve got young people, they’ve got single mothers, they’ve got handicapped people, and 
they’re looking after it at 3.50 an hour. So at 4.25 we should be able to do it here in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Supplementary. Just one more time, Mr. Minister, would you tell me why 
your wage and mine was increased, and those on minimum wage were not? What is it about the poor 
that makes them so special and so able to bear this burden? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — I heard the remark earlier about the McDonald’s and the A&Ws, the 
restaurants and the young people, and so on. These people make 4.25 an hour, plus tips. Most of them 
are staying at home; they don’t’ have to pay board and room. They’re part-time people. My answer is 
still the same. We’re going to be creating the jobs so people can maximize their salaries. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Grasslands Park Development 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources. 
A long time ago negotiations started on a grasslands park down in the south country. An agreement was 
signed with the federal government. The farmers in southern Saskatchewan are quite concerned that 
you’re dragging your feet on the proposed development of that park. Can the minister tell me if he’s 
following through on the plans to go ahead with the development of that park, to finish off the 
exploration in the area so they can delineate the borders? The farmers are quite anxious  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
57 

to know just what your government’s position is on that. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I understand the frustration that the hon. member talks about 
with a certain number, a small number, of farmers in that particular area of the grasslands park about 
making their future plans and so on — planning for the use of that land and so on The agreement was 
signed, I believe . . . I’m going from memory here now, but I believe it was signed in June of 1981. The 
time frame that was set out in that agreement was for two years, given to come up with an 
environmentally acceptable method of oil and gas exploration, and a further five years for that oil and 
gas exploration to in fact take place. So we’re operating well within the time frame that was set out. 
 
What I have said and what I would say to the hon. member today is that my colleague here has been 
talking about some recessionary times and so on. We as a government have set down some priorities to 
say, ‘Okay, what are the priorities in our province just now in terms of the best way to spend our 
money?’ While we are operating within that time frame, we believe in the concept of the park. There’s 
no argument about that, but we say we’ll be operating within the time frame of the former agreement. 
We will be doing the oil and gas exploration before any lands are turned over for the purposes of a park. 
 
I guess in a nutshell, Mr. Speaker, we could say that while my colleague, the Minister of Social 
Services, is attempting to deal with the very personal and important problems of finances today, the 
Minister of Labour . . . (inaudible) . . . One of the things we could do is go out there and worry, as the 
hon. members seems to be doing about Val Marie, Saskatchewan, and surrounding area going under 
cement and concrete in the next couple of years. I don’t believe that will happen. We believe in the 
concept of the park and when better times come, the money will be allocated. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Sale of Agra Industries Ltd. 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today as vice-chairman of the CIC board to make an 
announcement in place of the minister responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation. Mr. Speaker, 
I am pleased to announce that the Government of Saskatchewan and Benjamin Torchinsky, chairman 
and president of Agra Industries Ltd., have reached an agreement for the sale of the government shares 
of Agra to Mr. Torchinsky, who with his family is the controlling shareholder in the company. This 
transaction is subject to finalization of documents and regulatory approval. This sale to the founder 
fulfils two of this government’s objectives. 
 
Firstly, it is a concrete example of our policy to minimize the government’s involvement in private 
business. Secondly, it returns the equity to the original entrepreneur who has made Agra into the 
successful company that it is today. 
 
For the information of members, Mr. Speaker, this agreement means that we will sell our 390,530 shares 
in Agra to Mr. Torchinsky for a price of $12 per share for a total of $4,686,360. These shares were 
purchased in a number of transactions in the mid-1970s for an average price of $7.62 per share. With 
this sale, the return on overall investment amounts to about 8 per cent. Mr. Speaker, I might advise that 
they were carried on the books at $19.57 per share but never reached that level. As a matter of fact, the 
maximum level is the $12 share. 



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
58 

Agra Industries is a multi-faceted company with operations in the food and beverage industry, in 
consulting engineering and construction, and in the cable TV and radio businesses. Agra started in 
Saskatchewan and maintains its head office in Saskatchewan. Mr. Torchinsky has indicated and made it 
clear that he has no intention of moving that office, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment on the ministerial statement of the 
Hon. Attorney General, and to say that we welcome the announcement that a sale has been found for the 
shares of Agra Industries Ltd., which will assure that the industry will continue to be in Saskatchewan. 
As members will know, the funds were advanced to provide capital for an expansion of the company in 
the Nipawin area. At the time, the particular expansion would not support the advancing of money on a 
bond basis, since the expansion could not be expected to pay a return on the money on a quick basis. In 
effect, the money (some of it) which was advanced was equity money, in the sense that if the venture 
failed the money would be lost. 
 
The announcement illustrates the merit of that sort of a dealing. Money was provided, even though the 
company couldn’t pay a return on it immediately, in the belief that the profit would be generated in 
future years. That has, in fact, been the case, and now the shares can be sold, since the government never 
had any particular interest in owning 16 per cent of the shares, but rather had an interest in financing the 
expansion. 
 
That has now been achieved. A tolerable return, over the years, of something of the order of 8 per cent 
has been earned, and we have both had an expenditure of public funds which has not been costly to the 
taxpayer and an industrial expansion which we all wanted. That illustrates the wisdom of that particular 
policy, both the purchase and the sale. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION 
 

Rule 39 – Minimum Wages 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Before orders of the day, Mr. Speaker, I wish to ask for leave of the 
Assembly to move a motion pursuant to rule 39, a motion of urgent and pressing necessity, which 
motion will condemn the government for its decision with respect to minimum wages, and condemn the 
Minister of Labour for the fashion win which this matter was handled last Friday. If I have Mr. 
Speaker’s permission, I will proceed to explain briefly the urgency of the motion. 
 
It is urgent, Mr. Speaker, that this Assembly debate this issue, because the decision by the government is 
sharply discriminatory. Those who are poorest are being asked to bear the burden. That is not what is 
happening to other sectors of society; that’s not what happened to us as members. That’s not the position 
that the member for Melville and I are in, in our professional capacities. Only the poor are being asked 
to bear the burden of recovery. It is urgent that this matter be dealt with now. It is urgent that it be dealt 
with now, because these people are simply not able to bear this additional blow. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Speaker, in question period, that Statistics Canada states that the poverty line for a family 
of four living in a city is 17,000; for someone living on a farm it’s 13,000. These people will get a little 
over 8,000. When I heard the minister try to justify  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
59 

it, I can only assume that he was mistaken about these facts, and it is urgent that it be dealt with before 
the decision actually is implemented. 
 
It is urgent, Mr. Speaker, because it is the exact opposite of what our society needs. Our society needs, 
in order to sustain a recovery, expanded consumer spending. I think it is patently self-obvious that 
money put in the hands of those on minimum wage will be spent; it will not be saved. Dealing, Mr. 
Speaker, with the urgency of the second part of the motion the behaviour of the minister . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member is not allowed to make a speech at this point in time, but rather, if you 
have a motion, present your motion, and if you are given leave of the Assembly then proceed with the 
debate portion. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — If I have Mr. Speaker’s permission, I will very briefly explain the urgency of 
the last half of the motion, and I’ll be . . . I may say, Mr. Speaker, I understood it was customary to 
allow members to explain the urgency of the motion. Now I may have transgressed that, but I 
understood that members could explain the urgency of the motion. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — What you are quoting, really, is rule 17, and at that time you are allowed, but under 
this one you must obtain the leave of the Assembly, so if you will put your motion then we’ll see if you 
have leave. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member for Cumberland: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the government’s decision to freeze the wages of Saskatchewan’s 
working poor for a second straight year, with the announcement there will be no increases in the 
Saskatchewan minimum wage for all of 1983, and further, that this Assembly condemns the 
Minister of Labour for his actions in not announcing the government’s decision on this important 
issue here in the House where he would have been subject to the normal traditional 
parliamentary scrutiny. 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — The member has asked for leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Address in Reply 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Mr. Dutchak. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, when I began my remarks last Friday I had congratulated 
the mover and the seconder of the address in reply to the Speech from the Throne, the hon. members for 
Prince Albert—Duck Lake and Morse. They presented their case very well. Their presentation was 
good, their case was bad, but that was no  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
60 

fault of theirs. They were dealing with a Speech from the Throne which it was very, very difficult to say 
very much about that was incisive and which directed itself to the problems of the future and this 
province. 
 
Certainly, the speech was long enough. It kept mentioning things, but it failed to say very much. It 
would come up to an issue and back off, not indicating what the government had in mind in dealing with 
the particular problem or challenge which was alluded to throughout the 11 or 12 pages of the speech. 
 
There were a number of things we were looking for, Mr. Speaker, which were not there. During the past 
several months we have heard a number of suggestions that there would be legislation brought forward 
dealing with trade unions, with labour standards and with legal aid. These had been announced in the 
press, but there was nothing in the speech about any of those. 
 
Many people have been awaiting details of the promised rural development program of the government 
after it had cancelled the rural capital fund program. But there was nothing in the speech about that. No, 
I think the chief interest of this speech was not what was in the speech but what wasn’t in the speech. It 
was sort of like the fans of a fan dancer. The interest is not in what you see, but in what is concealed. 
This was certainly the overwhelming impression that one got when one listened to this speech: perhaps 
they have something in mind, but they’re not telling us. 
 
There was little discussion, Mr. Speaker, about Canada’s place in the world — Canada’s place in this 
nation or Canada’s place in the world. Little about what makes this province distinctive and different 
from other provinces. No, Saskatchewan is a very different province from most others, different indeed 
from most parts of the world. For one thing our people have come from all over the world. We area rich 
mixture of the world’s peoples. For another thing, we are overwhelmingly traders, a trading people. Few 
places in the world consume less of what they produce; few places in the world produce less of what 
they consume; we are forced to be traders. And because of these characteristics Saskatchewan people 
have a great interest in the world beyond our borders. This was not reflected in the Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
Now certainly in part this is because weather conditions in the Soviet Union or a political upheaval in 
the Persian Gulf can affect our income. That, therefore, is likely to peak our interest. But it’s also 
because Saskatchewan people have an interest in their fellow citizens in this global village. Reflecting 
that interest, during the 1970s Saskatchewan people developed a system of international aid second to 
none in Canada. It relied on the dedication and good sense of non-government organizations — 
non-government organizations like the Mennonite Central Committee, Lutheran World Relief, The 
United Church of Canada and the Canadian Catholic Organization for development, the Unitarian 
Service Committee and many others, Mr. Speaker. I’ve named just a few. 
 
They developed projects for people throughout the world, people in need. They developed projects out 
of their world—wide contacts, their on—the—spot knowledge of what should be done by Saskatchewan 
people and by Canadian people to help these people throughout the world. They developed a system 
whereby they could inaugurate a project and carry it through from Saskatchewan, seeing the money go 
to Africa or Asia, and seeing it used on the ground, knowing that there would be no waste, no diversion 
of funds, as regrettably happens so often with foreign aid dispensed through larger organizations. 



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
61 

The idea was simple. The sponsoring agency worked out a project, brought it forward to the 
Government of Saskatchewan to see whether or not it was within the government’s guidelines, and 
gained money from volunteers throughout the province — voluntary contributions — and the combined 
pool of money, which represented the voluntary contributions and the matching grant by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, was taken to the Canadian government, the Canadian International 
Development Agency, and they usually matched that. In a typical year, $2 million would be raised by 
these voluntary organizations in Saskatchewan, and $2 million would be provided by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, and another $4 million would be provided by the Government of Canada. They took this 
$8 million and they targeted it to the people who needed it most, with the assurance of top 
administration, with the assurance that these organizations had people on the ground. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan didn’t pass judgement on each one of these projects. Frankly, I don’t 
think that the Government of Saskatchewan has much to tell the Mennonite Central Committee on how 
money should be spent to bring about an improvement of the conditions in Zambia. All of these 
non-governmental organizations join together under the rubric of the Saskatchewan Council for 
International Co-operation and the system worked, and worked well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s how it did work, but not any more. When the new government came in they froze all 
of these grants. Now, eventually, they’ve released some, but only after a detailed study of each of the 
projects. Now, Mr. Speaker, when you think of it, merely to state it is to ridicule that idea. For the 
Saskatchewan government to review in detail how Lutheran World Relief, and the Unitarian Service 
Committee propose to spend money to assist the people of Somalia, when you think about that you will 
realize that that simply is an officious and bureaucratic waste to the public money. So long as the 
projects meet a general guideline set by the Government of Saskatchewan, then any page-by-page 
analysis by civil servants here in Regina is a waste of money and an impediment to these voluntary 
organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan doesn’t have staff to know what the conditions are in 
Zambia, or Somalia, nor should they have. But the Mennonite Central Committee does have, and for my 
part I would put more reliance on the informed judgement of the Zambia-based staff of the Mennonite 
Central Committee than I would on the uninformed judgement of the Regina-based staff of the Minister 
of Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it’s time the government stopped this 
pettifogging, junior bookkeeping approach to international aid and decided to renew its co-operation 
with the international agencies, the voluntary agencies who have done such an outstanding job in the 
past. It’s time that we began to co-operate once again to restore the good name of Saskatchewan as a 
leader of compassionate, practical help for people all over the world who need our assistance, and for 
whom Saskatchewan people are willing to make sacrifices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were a number of other omissions from that speech. I read nothing about cruise 
missile testing. Mr. Speaker, for many years we’ve had in northern Saskatchewan a missile testing range 
— an adjunct of the Canadian Forces Base at Cold Lake. It’s been the position of our party (and 
continues to be the position of our  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
62 

party) that western countries must possess arms. We favour, as do most Canadians, massive reductions 
in arms provided that all the major powers reduce their arms at the same time. But until that progress is 
made, until we are able to achieve those objectives, our party believes that western countries must have 
arms. But from this, Mr. Speaker, it does not follow that Canada should have any part of the nuclear 
arms race. Nuclear arms represent a danger to the world which is different in kind from the danger of 
conventional weapons. It’s not just a difference of degree, Mr. Speaker; it’s a difference of kind. Mr. 
Diefenbaker took that view when he was prime minister and when he held out against Bomarc missiles 
armed with nuclear warheads in this country. He said: 
 

No. Canada should not be a nuclear power. There are nuclear powers. It may be necessary that 
there be nuclear powers. It is by no means necessary that Canada be one of them. 

 
That’s what Mr. Diefenbaker said, and I believe Mr. Diefenbaker was right. 
 
Until sophisticated nuclear weapons can be eliminated from the world, they must be contained. One way 
to do this is to have nations declare themselves as nuclear—weapons—free zones. Many countries have 
already done so. Many countries which could readily manufacture nuclear arms have not done so — 
countries like Canada and like Japan. Canada can further this policy by declining to test any of their 
nuclear weapons, or any of their guidance systems. That was Mr. Diefenbaker’s position. I believe it 
ought to be the position of the Government of Canada. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, to be clear that a large number of Canadians oppose the testing of nuclear 
weapons on our soil, and oppose the testing of guidance systems associated with nuclear weapons. In 
short, Mr. Speaker, a very large number of Canadians oppose the testing of cruise missiles in Canada 
and in Saskatchewan. It take that position is no way an unfriendly act directed to the United States, any 
more for example, than Japan’s refusal to have nuclear weapons on its soil is an unfriendly act directed 
toward the United States — no such thing. 
 
Few governments in the world have a greater interest in limiting the number of nuclear powers than does 
the United States. We believe that the Government of Saskatchewan should, on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, express our opposition to the testing of the cruise missile on Saskatchewan soil. We in 
this party ask the Government of Saskatchewan to take that stand on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan, so that the people of Canada, wherever they may live, may know that we in 
Saskatchewan share Mr. Diefenbaker’s view that Canada ought to remain a nuclear-free zone. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would have expected that the Speech from the Throne 
would contain a good deal more than it did about our basic industry of farming. I would have thought 
that it would recognize the problems faced by the farming industry, and have outlined a blue-print of 
what the government proposed to do in the face of the challenges which farmers are facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker. I invite anyone to read that Speech from the Throne and see whether or not he or she 
believes it contains an outline of what the government should be doing about our farming industry. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, there’s trouble down on the farm. The greatest threat, of course, is the attack on 
the Crow rate. That threat, Mr. Speaker, has been crystal clear since Mr. Pepin announced his desire to 
change the Crow rate  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
63 

last February — February of 1982. He announced that the Crow must go in ’82. At that time he 
appointed Professor Gilson to shape up an alternative to the Crow rate. At that time, more than one year 
ago, everybody in this province knew that the Crow was under attack. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, was clear at that time, but it was absolutely clear when Mr. Gilson brought in his 
report back in June of 1982. It could not have been doubted. Nobody who looked even casually at the 
fact could have believed that the Crow rate was not under attack. It most assuredly was. And yet the 
government opposite did nothing. It took no steps to rally farm opinion; it took no steps to form an 
alliance with the other prairie governments; it took no steps to rally Progressive Conservative MPs at 
Ottawa. During all those months when Mr. Pepin and Professor Gilson were planning their schemes to 
slaughter the Crow, no action by the government opposite. They took no steps to explain to other 
Canadians just what the Crow rate and the agricultural industry based upon that Crow rate meant to 
them. NO explanation to the people who worked at Massey-Ferguson of what that would mean to them. 
No explanation to the people who worked at General Motors of what that could mean to them. In fact, 
the government opposite, Mr. Speaker, didn’t’ move a muscle, didn’t move a muscle to defend the Crow 
rate during all those long months. They didn’t, in fact, begin to act until Mr. Pepin announced in 
February of 1983 that he had a counter-proposal, one full year after the first announcement. Indeed, 
during much of that time when the Crow rate was under attack and everybody in Saskatchewan knew it 
was under attack, the government said over and over again that it had no position. To quote the Minister 
of Agriculture to many farm organizations, he, speaking to them, would say, ‘I know what your position. 
As soon as our government makes up its mind, I’ll let you know.’ This, when the Crow was under 
attack, and when everybody in Saskatchewan knew it was under attack. 
 
But by February of 1983, last month, Mr. Speaker, the farm organizations had been able to get the facts 
out to the public and to being to mobiles public opinion, things which the government should have been 
doing nine or 10 months ago. The government should have been mobilizing all of these forces who were 
more than willing to be mobilized in defence of the Crow, but they didn’t do so. Last month, with the 
publication of the Pepin proposal, people became galvanized. Farmers and businessmen in communities 
demanded action, and when this became clear to the government — that they could no longer get away 
with their policy of doing nothing to defend the Crow — they mounted their horse and they rode off, and 
they rode off in defence of the Crow, so they said. So they said. Over nine months after they had an 
opportunity to act, they took their first steps; and even today, Mr. Speaker, they are doing very little to 
weld the coalition in support of the Crow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make clear the position of the New Democratic Party. There never has been any 
doubt about the position of the New Democratic Party, but I will state it clearly now. Everywhere in 
Canada the New Democratic Party stands four-square against the Pepin plan, and no one has ever 
doubted that. So far as the New Democratic Party in the House of commons is concerned, and in every 
prairie legislature, every single New Democrat from wherever he comes, on these three prairies and in 
the House of Commons, is standing up in opposition to the Pepin plan. I’d like to know what other party 
can make that statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government opposite has not acted to defend the Crow rate in the way that would have 
been most helpful. They haven’t acted to get the support of the Alberta Progressive Conservative 
government. That would be a great help, but it hasn’t been done. Members opposite, the Minister of 
Agriculture, the Premier and others have not  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
64 

acted to get the support of Premier Lougheed and his government. 
 
The NDP in Manitoba took the resolution which was introduced in this House — took the very words of 
it, so as not to get into any partisan dispute — took the very words of the resolution introduced by the 
Minister of Agriculture, the member for Souris-Cannington, introduced it into the legislature of 
Manitoba, defended it, and it passed unanimously. Mr. Speaker, that is an indication of where the New 
Democrats in Manitoba stand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a similar resolution was introduced into the Alberta legislature. Where did the Progressive 
Conservatives stand in Alberta? They voted against the resolution introduced by the member for 
Souris-Cannington in this House, and they voted against it to a man. The only people who voted for it 
were the two New Democrats in that legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we would certainly believe that members opposite could do more, and should do 
more, to persuade their colleagues in Alberta to support the initiative of their government in opposition 
to the Pepin plan. 
 
I am asking the Premier to use his influence with Premier Lougheed, with Joe Clark and with other 
leaders of the Alberta Progressive Conservative Party, to urge them to join in a solid wall of opposition 
to the Pepin plan. And a New Democrat leader and caucus in the House of Commons has come out 
unanimously in opposition to the Pepin plan. I ask the Premier to see what he can do to get the 
legislature of Alberta to come out unanimously against the Pepin plan, and I ask him to use whatever 
influence he has to get the Progressive Conservative leaders and caucus at Ottawa to come out 
unanimously against the Pepin plan. 
 
I say it is vitally important, vitally important that we have this solid wall of opposition to Pepin here on 
the Prairies, because I say the Pepin plan is poison for our farmers, and we have got to take every step 
we can to derail it. 
 
My second plea to you, Mr. Premier, is to get the PC caucus in the House of Commons to use all the 
weapons it has at its disposal to oppose this bill when it comes before the House of Commons. 
 
Mr. Nielsen’s prowess in the House of Commons as an architect of defence plans is well known. Few 
people in the House of Commons can match Mr. Nielsen when it comes to putting up a battle in 
opposition to a particular bill, and he’s proved it many times. I asked the Premier to use his influence to 
get Mr. Nielsen to use those same skills in opposition to the Pepin plan. Well, I say this, Mr. Speaker: 
there are few better causes that it could be used in than to defeat the Pepin plan and to save the Crow for 
the Prairies. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And I say this. If the Crow rate should fall in parliament, it will stand as 
an indictment to the government opposite, who did not move for nine months, who on the record (which, 
unfortunately for them, cannot be denied) did not take any action in defence of the Crow rate until after 
Mr. Pepin made his announcement in February of 1983, one month ago. 



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
65 

If the farmers lose the Crow, they will know on whom to place the blame. They will certainly put it on 
the federal Liberals, but they will certainly also put it on the Tories of Saskatchewan and elsewhere who, 
for nine months, gave Jean—Luc Pepin a free ride without saying, ‘No, we defend the Crow. 
 
I want to advise this House once again of the plan of action that our party proposed in defence of the 
Crow, and I want to repeat it, so that people will know where we stand and where we stood, and ask 
them whether or not our proposals are still not pretty good proposals for defending the Crow. 
 
You will recall that my colleague, the member for Assiniboia—Gravelbourg, put forward his plan — 
our plan — and it had, in its first phase, four main steps. Number one, a plebiscite for prairie grain 
producers. We still think this would be a good idea. We think that a plebiscite would show, beyond the 
possibility of doubt, that there is no consensus in support of the Pepin plan, as sometimes alleged by 
federal Liberals. 
 
Two, we believe there should be an attempt to form a prairie alliance, a prairie alliance of the three 
prairie governments standing firm against the Pepin plan. 
 
Three, we believe there should be special delegations made up of farm leaders from the SARM and from 
the pool and from the federation of agriculture, and government leaders, like members opposite, going to 
eastern Canada, not once by many times, telling our story, telling the importance of the Crow to prairie 
agriculture and telling the importance of prairie agriculture to eastern manufacturing. 
 
Fourthly, we believe that the Premier should be meeting with Mr. Nielsen and the other leaders of the 
Conservative caucus at Ottawa to plan a strategy of defending against the Pepin plan in the House of 
Commons. 
 
The government has not acted to order a plebiscite, to organize one, either prairie-wide or 
Saskatchewan-wide. The government has not acted to form a solid prairie alliance and they have not got 
the support of the Government of Alberta and the Premier of Alberta. They have not acted to organize a 
joint farm group and a government blitz on eastern Canada telling our story. As far as I’m aware, they 
have not acted to obtain the unqualified support of the Progressive Conservative caucus in the House of 
Commons to oppose the Pepin plan. Now, when the battle is at this crucial stage, where is the Minister 
of Agriculture? Where is he? We are told that he’s gone to Bulgaria for 10 days. He’s gone to Bulgaria. 
Well of course we welcome his efforts to sell Saskatchewan cattle, but we wonder whether or not that 
couldn’t’ have been delayed for a month or two while he spent all his time organizing to defend against 
the Pepin plan here on the Prairies. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture is not in Ottawa where he might be, or not in Edmonton, where he might be, 
not in Quebec City where he might be, but he is in Bulgaria. When Saskatchewan farmers are fighting 
for their very economic life, when everybody who is a leader of the farm industry is attempting to 
organize to defeat the Pepin plan by generating opposition here on the Prairies, and by generating 
opposition in the House of Commons, where is our general? Where is the person leading the fight for 
Saskatchewan? Well, he’s in Bulgaria. I leave to Saskatchewan farmers the judgement of whether or not 
that is an adequate defence of the Crow rate, whether that is meeting the needs of Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the Pepin plan is the greatest threat, our farmers have other real  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
66 

problems. Grain prices are low. Initial prices are likely to be a good deal lower than last year. We’ve 
already had Senator Argue making his announcements of an 80 cent drop in initial payments, doubtless 
to make us feel good when it only turns out to be 50 cents. But we all know the signals. We all know 
that initial payments are going to be lower, costs are still rising, and for most farmers the cost-price 
squeeze is on, and on with a vengeance. 
 
The government opposite has decided that farmers should pay more taxes, as we are all paying more 
taxes, to provide roads free without charge to interprovincial truckers, to provide roads for streets for 
city commuters, to provide roads and streets for people who are just goin’ fishin’. All these people have 
had the cost of their fuel reduced. They’ve had the cost of their fuel reduced, but not farmers, not 
farmers who are buying fuel for their tractors and combines. They’ve had no decrease in the cost of their 
fuel, far from it. In fact, since this government took office, by actual check at a number of points in this 
province, the price of farm fuel and diesel has gone up by 23 per cent. It’s time, I say, that the farmers 
got a tax break the same as some other people are getting a tax break. If this government has $100 
million to give to the oil companies in tax breaks, if it has got 130 to $140 million to give to a lot of 
other people, including interprovincial truckers, then they should find some money to give to farmers 
who are caught in the cost-price squeeze. 
 
The tired argument, Mr. Speaker, that farmers do drive cars or their kids go to school in school buses is 
not enough. That’s a tiny, indeed an infinitesimal amount, of the fuel which most farmers burn, and to 
say that for this tiny amount of fuel you burn in your car you will get a tax break, but for those 
thousands of gallons you burn in your tractor and combine, you get no tax break, is not longer good 
enough. 
 
Major truckers like CP Express are saving hundreds of thousands of dollars because of the tax cut on 
fuel given by this government, and they’re getting their roads free. Farmers who don’t use the roads with 
their tractors and combines are paying the same amount, and they get no tax break at a time when 
farmers are in a tough cost-price squeeze, and if people deny it they haven’t been talking to young 
farmers who’ve got borrowed money. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that farmers are entitled to get some of this 
money that the government is handing out to the oil companies and to the interprovincial truckers. 
 
Members opposite feel, I gather, that this is not a serious problem on the farm. I am not suggesting that 
every farmer is in trouble, but I am suggesting that a lot of farmers are in trouble, and it’s time the 
government responded with something that addressed itself to the cost-price squeeze, and I suggest the 
best way is to tackle fuel costs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, others will undoubtedly be entering this debate, and I hope 
they decide on what they think is the most important issue for farmers. I think that when that debate is 
over and when we ask farmers what their real concerns are, more and more farmers will say that they 
had two main concerns: one, the Crow rate, and what’s going to happen to their shipping costs; and two, 
the cost—price squeeze, particularly the cost of inputs and what this government’s going to do to lower 
their  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
67 

cost of inputs. 
 
I suggest to you that those are the issues as seen by farmers. Members opposite can pooh-pooh them if 
they like, but I think they will find that farmers are not pooh-poohing them. Farmers are concerned. I’m 
not saying they’re panicking. Farmers are people who have rowed a good number of tough waves in the 
past, but they are concerned, and so should the government be concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I earlier said that this speech was noteworthy, if at all, for what was not in it. Certainly this 
is true respecting what this speech says to working people. Aside from the bald statement that the 
government is in favour of harmony between management and labour (and who isn’t?), the only 
reference in this speech to legislation that affects working people is The Workers’ Compensation Act. 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I hope this means that the government proposes to introduce legislation which will 
enact the recommendations of Jude Muir’s committee — unanimous recommendations of Judge Muir’s 
committee — and if it does that, then I will congratulate the government because it will deserve 
congratulations. We will look forward to seeing the bill in the hope that our already good workers’ 
compensation scheme will be further improved. 
 
There is, Mr. Speaker, pointedly no reference to The Trade Union Act or The Labour Standards Act. I 
hope this means that the government has decided not to bring in any legislation as recommended by the 
chamber of commerce and other employer groups, recommendations to dismantle this legislation. If the 
government does not bring in this legislation and doesn’t bow to that pressure, then once again the 
government should be commended, and will say that to the Minister of Labour. In labour legislation, as 
in so many other fields, Saskatchewan has been ahead of Canada, has introduced things which other 
provinces in later years have introduced. And no case has been made, Mr. Speaker, for turning back the 
clock. No case has been made for turning back the clock to days when it was more difficult for working 
people to get together to form a union to improve working conditions. No case can be made for turning 
back the clock to the dark days when there were fewer unions, and as a result. Poorer working 
conditions. I hope that the government opposite, by not mentioning any changes in the Speech from the 
Throne, does not intend to dismantle our trade union legislation. 
 
Nor was there mention, Mr. Speaker, of the minimum wage, but we had a mention on Friday about the 
minimum wage . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Late Friday. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Late Friday, about the minimum wage. What was the announcement? The 
announcement was this. After 10 months of consideration and of study, the government has made a 
decision. They have decided to do nothing. They have decided to do nothing for another 10 months. This 
decision to victimize 60,000 of the poorest people in our province is unable to be defended by any 
rational arguments. It’s noteworthy that the minister hasn’t really tried to defend it very much. The 
argument used is that if we increase the minimum wage we are going to lose jobs. And we’ve heard that 
argument again. Now this hasn’t been true for the last 11 years, Mr. Speaker. If it’s true today, it’s a 
sorry reflection on the government opposite. 
 
Indeed, when this government took office it has the highest minimum wage and the lowest 
unemployment in Canada. That’s hardly a convincing argument that a high minimum wage produces 
high unemployment. In fact, the argument is all the other way. I suspect that the government is intent on 
reversing this to try to get itself into the  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
68 

position where it has the lowest minimum wage in Canada, and I suggest as a result thereof, perhaps the 
highest unemployment. That will be a great thing for employers. They will then have the opportunity to 
hire people at low rates, and they will have lots of people to choose from. It’s perhaps unkind to suggest 
that the government opposite has that in mind, but the way they are acting, they’re going to bring about 
a result not too different from that. 
 
The argument is that if you increase the minimum wage you’re going to have fewer jobs. And the logic, 
of course, is that if you want more jobs you should decrease the minimum wage. I don’t know whether 
the government opposite would go that far, but if they follow their logic, they would. If they continue to 
have such a lack of success in creating jobs they may be tempted to go down that road; they nay be 
tempted to follow their logic, however perverted it may be. 
 
Well, I hope they don’t, because they are wrong; they are wrong with their logic. The truth is very 
different. If minimum wage is increased, there will be an increase in the amount of money spent, and the 
increase in the amount of money spent will create more jobs rather than less. Where they make their 
error is in believing that large number of people will be discharged if there is an increase in the 
minimum wage that the Hotel Saskatchewan or another hotel will lay off staff. 
 
In fact, by and large, the people who get minimum wage are in industries which are not competing with 
industries outside our province. The results of an increase in minimum wage will be an increase in the 
amount of money spent. You can depend upon people on minimum wage to spend the money you pay 
them. Not much of that money ends up in bond purchases, or down at the stockbrokers. By increasing 
the amount of purchasing power, we increase the employment. We increase retail sales, and that causes 
people to hire more people, not less. 
 
This move to freeze the minimum wage is clearly a move which protects employers like McDonald’s 
and like Woolworth’s. Just think of whether or not McDonald’s deserves very much assistance from this 
government. McDonald’s, who stick their thumb in the eye of Saskatchewan farmers by buying their 
buns made from non—Canadian wheat’ McDonald’s, who stick their thumb in the eye of Saskatchewan 
workers . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see I’m touching some tender sensitivities over there. Those people should know that 
they are giving additional assistance to McDonald’s, who, as I say, have been sticking their thumb in the 
eye of Saskatchewan farmers’ who have been sticking their thumb in the eye of Saskatchewan working 
people. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when this government lowered the road tax on diesel fuel, McDonald’s found 
that they could truck in buns from the United States, 1 cent-a-bun cheaper than Canadian buns. Without 
a thought, they said, ‘Fine. We owe no obligation to Canadian farmers, wheat growers; we owe no 
obligation to Canadian working people.’ This is the same organization which has consistently been 
using Australian or Oceanic beef in their hamburgers. With Oceanic beef and American buns and 
minimum wages, they now get this government giving them a freeze on their wages for two years, while 
they’re free to raise prices, of course. 
 
These are the industries who are primarily helped by freezes in minimum wages. I say to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that Canadian beef produces and Canadian grain producers and Canadian workers deserve 
something better from their government than assistance for  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
69 

industries like McDonald’s, who have consistently victimized all of us. 
 
I want to turn now, Mr. Speaker, to crown corporations and references in the throne speech to crown 
corporations. This government’s dealings with crown corporations reveals a good deal about its 
priorities and just who it believes the crown corporations ought to be operated for the benefit of. We’ve 
already seen it act. It has appointed the Wolfgang Wolff commission report, and we’ve had the report of 
that commission. Even before the report of that commission, we had some action by this government. 
 
We had the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Service. This service was inaugurated to assist farmers and 
trappers — fur farmers and trappers, primarily trappers and farmers who do some trapping in their spare 
time — market their furs. It operated, Mr. Speaker, for 35 years without ever having a loss, so far as I’m 
aware. A check back for 10 or 15 years — here is the most successful operation which has served 
Saskatchewan trappers well. It has been scrapped, Mr. Speaker; staff discharged and the trappers turned 
over to the Hudson’s Bay Company — the Hudson’s Bay Company whose 300-year record of dealing 
with trappers is part of the history of our country, and a part which does little credit to the Hudson’s Bay 
Company. This represents a straight transfer of an asset, a public asset, from the public sector to the 
private sector without compensation. 
 
Or take SaskMedia. Here was a corporation which was dismantled. Part of it was transferred to a 
government department and part of it to the private sector. 
 
Or take SGI. Not with some care, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, note with some care who was discharged 
when SGI employees en masse were fired. There were motor licence issuers. There were legal staff. 
There were salvage division staff. There were publicity and public relations staff. Now, Mr. Speaker, no 
one suggests that the publicity and public relations work won’t continue to be done, or the motor 
licences won’t continue to be issued, or the law work won’t continue to be done. Of course, it will, but 
by insurance agents, law firms, public relations firms selected by the government opposite, not by bid or 
tender but, as the president, ingenuously says, ‘by their suitability, by their suitability to the minister in 
charge.’ They will do the work. 
 
I don’t know whether there will be an unseemly scramble for patronage. We have seen some unseemly 
scrambles for patronage and some casualties as a result thereof, but I expect that there will be more, 
because very clearly the moves on SGI were efforts to carve out bits of the functions previously 
performed by SGI so that they could be performed by the friends of the government opposite. 
 
Let me just recall what is happening at SGI. Efforts, I am sure, will be made to see that SGI rates are a 
little less competitive than they have been in the past. I noted the recent announcements with respect to 
Auto Pak. Auto Pak rates, Mr. Speaker, have been increased by about 25 per cent — 24 per cent, 26 per 
cent, 27 per cent increases in Auto Pak — so that I suspect the private sectors companies will have a 
little bit easier time competing. 
 
Or take Sask Tel and SPC. Mr. Speaker, I am going to predict major lay-offs at Sask Tel. I’m going to 
predict major lay-offs at SPC. I am gong to predict that they are gong to arise because management 
practices, going back in some cases over 50 years, are going to be dismantled so that parts of the 
activities traditionally carried on by Sask Tel and SPC can be carved out and given to friends of the 
government opposite in the private sector. 



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
70 

I invite everybody to look at what happens over the next year or so. I invite them to see what happens 
with respect to, let us say, the sale of telephone sets. And we already know that part of the business 
that’s gone off to Radio Shack and others. What has happened to that part of the business which 
involved Sask Tel handling word processors and the like? We all know that’s off in the private sector. 
 
I invite people to look at what’s going on to happen with respect to legal work, with respect to public 
relations work, with respect to a good number of subcontracting activities in Sask Tel and SPC. I cannot 
give you the details because I don’t know the details, but knowing the way this government operates I 
think I can predict with some confidence that we will see an increasing degree of subletting, contracting 
out to friends of the government opposite. And, Mr. Speaker, this will have nothing to do with 
efficiency. IN fact consumers will pay more and I’ll predict that took that consumers of the services of 
Sask Tel and SPC will be paying more, quite a bit more, and some of it will be because work is being 
transferred to friends of the government opposite in the manner in which the government has already 
accustomed itself to. Clearly it is deciding that these crown corporations can be the source of a good 
deal of patronage and no opportunities are likely to be lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you might well ask, ‘Why should we have crown corporations anyway?’ This question was 
looked at by the Wolfgang Wolff commission. It was rather interesting that they didn’t find as many 
horror stories as they perhaps were confidently expecting to find. They made some recommendations 
and I want to take one or two of the basic recommendations and challenge them. One of the basic 
recommendations really as that the corporations, the utilities, ought to devote themselves solely to 
providing services and maximizing dividends. They didn’t quite say that with respect to the utilities but 
they certainly suggested that it was no function of the utilities to offer services at a loss. 
 
Let’s look at the history of Sask Tel. Sask Tel has been a public enterprise for over 70 years. It was 
started by Premier Walter Scott, and it was started because the private sector companies were unwilling 
or unable to provide effective telephone services for Saskatchewan people. Sask Tel was organized to do 
that; it’s done that and it’s done it well. Telephone rates have consistently been among the lowest in 
Canada. In fact, aside from its competing prairie provincial utilities, they have been well below others in 
Canada, frequently below their prairie competitors. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Sask Tel has done more. Critics say that Sask Tel should provide only telephone 
service. Just consider what Sask Tel has done for this province in the last two or three years. A few years 
ago, Sask Tel had to consider how it should expand its long distance telephone capabilities. With the 
advent of computer technology, they were going to need many more circuits or a much greeter ability to 
carry messages between urban centres in this province. They sat down and considered: how will we do 
this? Will we use the traditional copper wire? Will we use microwave? Or will we look at this new and 
developing technology called fibre optics, the glass fibres over which optical impulses are sent as 
opposed to copper wire over which electrical impulses are sent? 
 
They looked at this, for fibre optic technology was not tried and true. It was new. Perhaps if you’re only 
thinking of Sask Tel as a utility you would struck with the tried and true. But then Northern Telecom 
came along and they said, ‘We know you’re considering this. You’ve got a large system of many, many 
miles. We are introducing this new fibre optics technology, and if you will agree to use fibre optics, we 
will agree  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
71 

to build a plant in Saskatoon, and we will agree to make Saskatoon our Canadian headquarters for fibre 
optics.’ There’s no doubt what people like the Wolff commission would say about that. They would say 
industrial development is no concern of a utility: you get on with the business of dealing with your 
customers and don’t try to do the government’s job of industrial development. 
 
But I think that approach is wrong. Sask Tel thought it was wrong. They made the deal with Northern 
Telecom. The plant was built in Saskatoon. Saskatoon is the Canadian centre of fibre optics technology. 
Sask Tel is installing the largest fibre optics network in the world. And the Saskatoon plant has just 
recently received a contract for $100 million worth of product for a link between New York City and 
Washington. 
 
Now I think this is a sound approach. I think this is a progressive and imaginative use of the crown 
corporation. I know that some members don’t agree with that. I know that they believe that the model 
ought to be the private sector company only, and that any spin-off benefits for the community, but not 
for the corporation, ought to be considered by the board. I can only think that if this narrow approach, 
this narrow balance-sheet and operating statement approach, is always applied, we in Saskatchewan 
would have far poorer utility facilities for people, particularly in outlying areas, and we would have a far 
weaker industrial basis. 
 
I believe that the activities of Sask Tel in job creation, in attempting to get Saskatoon as a centre for this 
particular branch of the high tech industries, was a sound initiative. A base has been built upon which 
we can build. I believe that our crown corporations ought to be used this way in the future, as they were 
in the past. And we ought not to be held to any particular model. Surely we have to operate efficiently. 
But efficiency ought not only to be measure, and always to be measure, by the way the private sector 
companies operate, because they will, in many cases, have a much smaller horizon with a much 
narrower objectives than our crown corporations can have and should have. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to another subject which was not mentioned in the Speech from the 
Throne, in my judgement a sad omission, and that is the situation in northern Saskatchewan. There are 
28,000 people in the northern administration district of Saskatchewan, and many of them have special 
problems. Many of them are people of native origin, whose grandparents and frequently whose parents, 
lived a spartan and independent life of the trapper and the fisherman and the hunger. But the population 
in northern Saskatchewan has outgrown the resource base. The fish and game will simply not support all 
of the people who now live in the North. And the alternatives for many of them are very stark, Mr. 
Speaker, and simple: it’s either work or welfare. 
 
Now what everybody would wish would be that there would be jobs in ordinary commercial operations 
so that people in northern Saskatchewan could take their place in the labour force, those who did not 
wish to pursue the traditional ways of life. But there are simply not enough commercial jobs in northern 
Saskatchewan. Of course there are some. Mining has developed rapidly in the last 10 years, and it’s 
developed under circumstances which require that many of the ventures employ northerners, people who 
live and have lived in that area. 
 
I believe that was a good policy, and I urge the present government to continue that policy of ensuring 
that mining and other resource developments in the northern part of our province be carried on, on a 
basis which ensure the people who have spent their life in that part of Saskatchewan will have first crack 
at the jobs. I say that because  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
72 

employment is difficult to come by in the North. Opportunities are difficult to come by, and we need to 
do everything we can to give these people an assurance that, as there is activity in that area which in 
some cases impairs the carrying on of their traditional ways of life, they have alternative employment in 
substitution for the traditional hunting, trapping, and fishing economy. 
 
But even if we gave Northerners every kind of preference there still wouldn’t be enough private sector 
jobs, and we’re still looking at the stark choice — work or welfare. In this town work means at 
constructing roads and airfields and houses and community centres and other infrastructure which is 
needed in the North. Now, Mr. Speaker, many Northerners are not trained construction workers, and if 
they’re going to be the workforce for building roads and building rinks, sometimes but not always, 
expenses and cost are going to be high. 
 
What does it mean? Well, it means that sometimes if we build a rink or a house we are not going to get, 
in direct terms, an asset fully up to the amount we spent. As much as, say, 20 per cent of the spending 
might not be represented by a hard asset, and that is important when I say 20 per cent and comparing it 
against what might have been achieved if one had used trained labour. You might say that there are 
questions about whether or not we should spend our money when we are getting only, in one sense of 
the world, 80 per cent of the value. 
 
But what’s the alternative? That’s the key, Mr. Speaker. We’re finding that out now, because the 
government opposite has shut down many of the projects in northern Saskatchewan. Many of those 
construction projects are no more, and there are no jobs, and many, many hundreds of people are now on 
welfare who were not on welfare. What does that mean? Well, it means that in their case it’s not a 
situation where we’re spending a dollar and getting value only of 80 cents. It is the case of spending a 
dollar and getting no value in hard assets. That is the alternative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a whole lot worse than any situation whereby on an individual project, because of 
lack of training, costs may be higher than they would have been had trained labour been used. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not only worse to pay welfare rather than work, it’s not only worse to pay people not to 
work than to pay them to work in financial terms, it’s worse in human terms. Northerners want to work. 
They particularly want training. I say it’s far better to hire people, train them, and create assets than it is 
to pay out welfare and wring your hands because you say nothing can be done, because none of these 
private sector people, to whom you sent your invitation of open-to-business have come in and created 
employment. 
 
The government opposite will be judged by their record in providing jobs for the people in the North, 
and they will be judged by people who have seen the record of the last 10 years. They’ll se the record of 
this government and so far, Mr. Speaker, the record of this government is dismal, indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn now to the broad philosophy revealed by this speech. Governments raise 
money by taxation. They would very much like, of course, not to have to raise money, but just to spend 
it. Then, of course, some governments do that. The governments at Ottawa, Quebec, and other places 
have been spending money that they didn’t raise, and the results now are becoming awfully clear, and 
awfully catastrophic. So we can expect, Mr. Speaker, that this government which has given out large 
sums of money to the oil companies and has in other ways cut off its revenues, will have to pay in 
someway or will have to ask citizens of this province to pay. The question  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
73 

that we are all most interested in is: who is going to be asked to pay? Who is going to be asked to bear 
the burden? 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, this is already becoming very, very clear. We already are finding out who this 
government wishes to bear the burden. It is not their highly paid public servants, the deputy minister to 
the Premier whose salary the Premier didn’t know, but from other sources I understand to be at least 
$85,000 and due for an increase. He’s not being asked to bear any burdens. When he worked for the 
Government of Manitoba short months ago he got not $85,000, but $53,000. An increase from $53,000 
to $85,000 isn’t much of a burden. 
 
No, it’s not their senior public servants, but who is it? Well, we’ve already detected some of them. 
People on minimum wage are being asked to bear the burden. They’re being told that if they don’t 
shoulder this burden, unemployment is going to go up. So they’re being asked to bear the burden, and 
there are others. I want just before leaving that subject to mention once again that overwhelmingly the 
people who earn minimum wage are women — overwhelmingly they are women — who have some 
family responsibilities. These are not single women, but women who have dependants. These are the 
people who are being asked to bear the burden, but they’re not the only ones. Superannuated public 
servants are being asked to bear the burden — no mention of any increase in their pension in the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
Children, four-year-olds, who were struck out of the dental plan by the last budget of members opposite. 
They’ve being asked to bear the burden. 
 
Students. They’re being asked to bear the burden. There is nothing in the Speech from the Throne for 
any special employment projects for students, and they are particularly hard hit because they are going 
to have a difficult time earning money this year if they wish to go back to their studies next fall. And all 
I can say in this regard is to say quite simply, if the government opposite is not going to ensure that there 
will be employment for students this summer, then they’ll have to take steps to see that there is no 
increase in students fees either at the university or the technical institutes. I commend that to the 
Minister of Continuing Education because there is need to ensure, at a time when young people cannot 
get jobs that as many of them as possible can increase their education. If they can’t work then by all 
means let them go to university or a technical institute so that they can be spending their time profitably 
in the event that circumstances permit a change in the economy in this province. Perhaps we’ll need a 
change of government, I don’t know, but they ought to prepare themselves for the possibility of a job, if 
not in this province then in some other province. 
 
Other people being asked to bear the burden are natives generally. There was a native economic 
development program, which was well known to members opposite, which they simply bombed when 
they came to office. No action on it. I would have hoped that the Speech from the Throne would have 
included something new to provide an opportunity for native people to take their full share in our 
economy. 
 
Senior citizens. What was in the speech for senior citizens? Any reference to senior citizens shelter 
allowance legislation? Any reference to any increase in the many senior citizens benefits? None 
whatsoever. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the philosophy revealed is that we need to help business. We need to help the 
McDonald’s and the Woolworth’s. We need to do a great deal to open this province for business but we 
don’t need to do anything for farmers. We don’t need to  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
74 

do anything for women on minimum wage or superannuates, or children. We don’t need to do anything 
for natives or students or senior citizens. Because, Mr. Speaker, I feel that this speech fails to address the 
problems which are uppermost in the minds of Saskatchewan people. I am going to move an amendment 
as follows. Let there be added to the words of the motion, Mr. Speaker, the following. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion is seconded by my colleague, the member for Shaunavon, and it adds to the 
words of the motion the following: 
 

But regrets that, notwithstanding the admission by Your Honour’s advisers that unemployment 
in Saskatchewan is too high and that our economy is in recession, the legislative plan for the 
second session of the 20th legislature failed adequately to address the problems of: 
 
1. The more than 50,000 Saskatchewan people seeking employment; 

 
2. The thousands of high school, technical institute, and university students who will need 

employment this summer. 
 

3. Saskatchewan’s working poor who are to have their wages frozen for two full years. 
 

4. Saskatchewan farmers who require relief from a worsening cost-price squeeze, particularly in 
relation to the price of farm fuel. 

 
5. Saskatchewan native people who need assistance as they attempt to secure their economic 

future; 
 

6. The residents of northern Saskatchewan who are in desperate need of an economic 
development plan from the current government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the very 
outset that it’s a pleasure to again take my place here in the Legislative Assembly in debate of the throne 
speech. This obviously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is my first opportunity to speak respecting a throne speech 
that was moved by a government that I am a part of. I can say, Mr. Speaker, at the very outset that that is 
a very rewarding opportunity for myself and I’m sure for each member on the government side of the 
House. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not as if the members of the opposition did not 
have that opportunity because certainly they did. At that time, I had the opportunity to stand in 
opposition, and yes, like them, I found reasons to criticize the throne speech of the day. I suppose one of 
the differences, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that our criticism then was that the throne speech was so short 
that there was nothing in the throne speech, because of its brevity. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems 
that we’re being criticized in government, by the opposition, that the throne speech is too long and 
there’s still nothing in it. I suppose, Mr. Deputy Speaker, therein lie the battle 



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
75 

lines for the battle to take place over the next few days, concluding on Monday next, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Before I go into some of the comments I want to make, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to the throne 
speech, I would like very much to take this opportunity, as I have always done in the past — the first 
opportunity that I have had really — to thank the people of the Moosomin constituency for giving me 
the opportunity, the privilege and the honour to once again serve the people in that riding and represent 
them here in the legislature, the greatest debating forum that we have in the province, and one that in the 
most part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a great deal of respect for. Oh, certainly there are times when the 
barbs get a little sharp, but none the less, out of these great halls come great decisions. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of the Moosomin constituency have been very consistent, very 
consistent in one thing in particular that I want to note. That is that they have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
over 40 years rejected socialism. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — They did that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in fact for about 40 years, when they 
supported the Liberal members who ran in that constituency, a time when the Progressive Conservative 
fortunes were not so fortunate. But none the less they took the only avenue open to them at the time to 
vote against the CCF and the NDP. Now, Mr. Speaker, I believe that any region of part of this province 
or this country that so consistently has voted against a political party cannot surely be wrong. Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you that it was a very happy day for me when the balance of this province saw fit to 
vote in the same way that my riding has been for those many, many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well I would say that it’s a privilege to be one of the very few Conservative members 
ever to be elected in that riding. Prior to myself, there was the hon. member for Moosomin constituency, 
Dr. Munroe. Very briefly, for a bit of history, Dr. Munroe was the Minister of Health under the 
Anderson government, the coalition government of 1929. And more interesting, Mr. Speaker, he was 
from my old home town of Welwyn. To go even further, he delivered my father into the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I suppose that history repeats itself. Many, many years later, they elect a Tory, in 
1975. My responsibilities are in fact to work very closely with the Minister of Health, a minister of 
health, Mr. Speaker, who is keeping the health problems of this province on an even keel. I say not just 
on an even keel, but working to be number one in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — So, Mr. Speaker, a bit of history I thought was most appropriate, and it’s so often 
said that history repeats itself. I feel so much a part of history as I stand here being given that 
opportunity to be elected in the Moosomin constituency and represent those people. I have given them 
my commitments . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I just heard a member quipping over there — which 
quite often is the way’ that’s about the extent of their abilities, this quipping — that I was going to be the 
next federal member. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you of one thing: my role and responsibility to the 
Moosomin constituency is to represent them to the very best of my abilities, and I have been doing that 
since 1975. I will continue to do so as long as they so wish. 



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
76 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are other members who have broken new ground. I want at this time to 
compliment our member who moved the Speech from the Throne, the member for Prince Albert-Duck 
Lake. I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve had the opportunity to see a number of members speak in 
this House. I have met a number of members. Mr. Dutchak, the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake, is 
going to make one of the finest members that that riding has ever elected to this legislature. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, he has the ability to go now, not from his profession . . . Mr. 
Speaker, just for the member for Quill Lakes, (I wouldn’t want him to miss anything) the member for 
Prince Albert—Duck Lake comes from a legal back ground — he practised law. Now, Mr. Speaker, he 
has the opportunity not just to practise law, but to make law. And make he will as part of this 
government. So I say, Mr. Speaker, that the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake has certainly got off 
on the right foot in his speech, and I expect good things from the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Morse, as well, did an excellent job in seconding the Speech from the 
Throne, again, a member who has broken new ground for the Progressive Conservative Party. So I say, 
Mr. Speaker, that my compliments go out to both of those members and their excellent speeches. As I 
said, I expect to see many good things from those members in the Progressive Conservative Party . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, I heard someone across the way in the opposition suggesting 
that I might move into some topics on the throne speech. Well, certainly, Mr. Speaker, I have a few 
comments to make on the throne speech . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, it was very, very hard 
work, I would say — a very hard, yes. I had a terrible time getting it down, unlike the member for 
Regina Centre, who has some difficulties doing a couple of things, especially when he’s chewing gum. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to reply to some of the comments that the Leader of the Opposition made. They 
were most interesting, and I want to just set the record straight. I want to start, Mr. Speaker, with the 
Crow rate, and his comments with respect to the Crow rate. Before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I should 
really just remind some members of the House, since some of them many not have been here when the 
Leader of the Opposition started the debate on Friday. He got up and he referred to the throne speech 
that we have introduced to the throne speech that they introduced, as ‘Jaws 1’ and ‘Jaws II’ — ‘Jaws I’ 
being their throne speech, ‘Jaws II’ being ours. Well, I wish that Leader of the Opposition was here right 
now, Mr. Speaker, because I would just want to advise him that the difference between those two is that 
our ‘Jaws’ had some teeth in it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Secondly, Mr. Speaker, it makes some sense that those members would want to 
reflection old movies that have been seen many times. I’m sure that many of them must have seen the 
‘Towering Inferno.’ Obviously, they’re pretty much burned out. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very fitting that 
the members of the opposition talk about things that were, because, Mr. Speaker, consistently, since the 
day I was elected, when they were here in government, they talked about the way things were. They 
were always living in the past, always living in the past. And now they’re in opposition and they’re still 
living in the past. Now, I suppose, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say it is somewhat more comfort to them in 
talk about the past now, because they were government then and now they are in opposition. But it 
seems strange to me, Mr. Speaker, that they haven’t learned anything. They haven’t learned anything 
from the election of April 26. They  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
77 

haven’t learned anything from the Prince Albert-Duck Lake by-election, so, Mr. Speaker, it makes one 
wonder if they can learn anything. 
 
Now, what did the Leader of the Opposition, in espousing the opposition’s position on the Crow rate, 
say? What did he say? Well, it was difficult to grasp at times but he was saying that the NDP stood four 
square behind the farmers as it related to the Crow rate. Well, that’s maybe so, but it’s hard to 
understand how you can be four—square behind the farmers of Saskatchewan when you are at the same 
time four-square behind Pierre Trudeau and the federal Liberals. Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand 
that. It was the federal new Democratic members in Saskatchewan that took Joe Clarke and the federal 
government of that day out of office, and put Pierre Trudeau and the Liberals back in office. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, for members that maybe weren’t listening too closely, and I can appreciate that as 
the Leader of the Opposition whined and whined and roared, they might have noted, as I did . . . Did you 
hear the Leader of the Opposition state that they were opposed to the Liberals? No. No, they didn’t. 
They were opposed to the Pepin plan. That’s what they are opposed to, and he was very careful to say 
that, Mr. Speaker. Their opposition to the Pepin plan, that’s all I heard, not their opposition to the 
Liberals, because, Mr. Speaker, they do not oppose the Liberals. Furthermore, I would suspect that 
maybe the Leader of the Opposition is hoping for an appointment to the Senate, or some green pasture, 
because he certainly hasn’t any future as the Leader of the Opposition, because the Leader of the 
Opposition hasn’t any future. 
 
That’s not anyone’s fault, Mr. Speaker, but theirs. Certainly at one time I wondered if we had any future. 
Certainly I did. But we pulled together, Mr. Speaker, and we listened to the people of Saskatchewan. But 
we listened to the people of Saskatchewan, we formulated policies that were in line with the thinking of 
the people of Saskatchewan. We built our party on those grass roots foundations, and we took it to the 
people in three elections since I became involved. In 1978 we came very, very close to becoming 
government, and in 1982 we did become government, based on those solid policies. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
because those policies of the New Democrats are not in line with the thinking of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, I don’t want to give them any advice on how they could get back into power. I mean, far be it 
from me to do that. But I would advise any politician, Mr. Speaker, and it’s something I remind myself 
of as well, that you never ever want to stop listening to the people that elect you. Because whether you 
like to or not, you were not elected to represent your own thoughts and views particularly, but rather, 
those that elected you to hold this office. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, further, the Leader of the Opposition speaks of the Crow rate, and 
the cost of production going up, and the fact that the farmers can’t afford to pay more, and that their 
position has always been the same, and he tries to make the case, and I say he tries to make the case, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Progressive Conservatives now in government at onetime waffled on that issue or were 
not strong on that issue. Well, I want to remind them, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind all members of this 
House, Mr. Speaker, that prior to the election of April 26, our position was (and it was enunciated very 
clearly in the election campaign) that, number one, improvements were required to the railroads, but the 
farmers should not have to pay, rather the federal government should have to pay. In other words, when 
we say the farmers shouldn’t 



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
78 

have to pay a cent more, that is true — not a cent more than the average taxpayer of this province or of 
this country. So we had a solid position. 
 
In my mind, I saw no cracks in that position at all, Mr. Speaker. The NDP now attempt to make some 
case that it wasn’t strong. Even now after they voted with a resolution that was introduced in this House, 
even now after voting for that resolution, they attempt to make the case, Mr. Speaker, that in some way 
their position is better on the Crow than is ours. Now, how one could understand that, I don’t know. I 
can’t understand that. If two parties vote for the same resolution, then how can one’s position be uttered 
better than the other’s? All I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, is that in the interest of the farmers of 
Saskatchewan, I was very happy to see the New Democrats in this legislature support us on that 
resolution. That might have been the only sensible thing you’ve done since you’ve come in here. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go further to elaborate on the costs of production. 
The Leader of the Opposition, the former premier of this province, said, ‘You’ve got to do something 
about the farm costs.’ He said he had heard enough about us talking about the farmers driving cars as 
well, and taking some advantage of the fact that we removed the gasoline tax, the road tax, and they 
don’t have to pay that any more. We argue that that is in the interest of farmers. They argue that it is not. 
Now, we argue that, of course, they don’t’ always drive trucks. They don’t go to church in their trucks. 
They don’t always travel in their trucks when they take their holidays unless it’s got a camper on it. So, 
Mr. Speaker, one knows how flimsy their argument is. 
 
One knows how flimsy that argument is because you go back a ways and you take a look at a program 
called the farm cost reduction program. Now, we had a minister of agriculture and he was the member 
for Saltcoats. Prior to the election in 1975, they removed the farm cost reduction program. They 
removed that bit of assistance that the farmers had. They removed that from the books. I remember we 
in opposition said, ‘Oh no, you can’t do that. Their costs are rising fast enough. They need some 
protection in the cost area.’ But, none the less, they removed it. Come the election in 1975 it was right 
back on again. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that cost very dearly the member for Saltcoats. He lost the portfolio of agriculture 
and he was given the responsibility for rural affairs. So, they had a new minister of agriculture and he 
was the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood. He came along and he brought on the farm cost 
reduction program. Prior to the election in 1978 he removed it. We said the same thing, ‘We’re 
removing the farm cost reduction program; the farmers need the cost protection.’ Big Mac said, ‘No, we 
don’t need that.’ He removed the farm cost reduction program. So, Mr. Speaker, not only did the New 
Democratic Party in government remove the farm cost reduction program once, but they removed it 
twice. Now, Mr. Speaker, now we’re government, they’re opposition and they’re asking for us to come 
on with some kind of a farm cost reduction program or fuel petroleum relief program for the farmers. 
Well, I thought about that myself. I’ve thought about that. 
 
As a matter of fact, I spoke to the member for Indian Head-Wolseley, the now Minister of Health. We 
were discussing it one time; the member may not recall this but this was just not too long before the 
election on April 26. I said, ‘I wonder what we could do in that regard. How much would it cost us?’ so 
we took a look and we used the figure of 70,000-some-odd farmers. We said, ‘Well, what about $500 for 
each farmer, $500 for  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
79 

each one in the province?’ $35 million — that’s what it would cost to set up a program that would 
provide a $500 grant to every farmer in Saskatchewan. And then we began to think on that. I don’t know 
what the member for Indian Head—Wolseley’s final conclusions on it were because he had to go hoe 
and I went back home. But when I got home, I got thinking about that. Mr. Speaker, do you know what I 
thought? I figured it this way. If my farming operation was just balancing on $500 whether it made it or 
broke, I think I’d get out while the getting was good. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m telling you that the measures 
that have been taken by this government have been fair across the board, not just to farmers but to all of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit hypocritical because they argue that we shouldn’t have a deficit. They 
do that repeatedly, and on the same days or very shortly thereafter they argue that we should be giving 
more money over here and more money here. So they want us to give lots of money away on the one 
hand but balance the budget on the other. And if we ever considered any means of raising revenue, well, 
I’m sure they’d criticize that as well. So, Mr. Speaker, what we’re talking about here is whether or not 
the opposition in this 20th legislature is responsible. Well, Mr. Speaker, obviously they’re not 
responsible because nothing about what they’re saying on that issue alone makes any sense. To catch an 
old cliché, you can’t have your cake and eat it too. You just can’t have it both ways. So it makes it very 
clear, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition is just playing some politics with all of the issue, trying to dig 
themselves out of a hole. And I won’t deny they’re in a heck of a hole. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what the Leader of the Opposition on behalf of his members is trying to do is tie the 
Progressive Conservatives to the Crow rate, because he’s hoping the Crow rate does down, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what he’s hoping for. He’s hoping the Crow rate goes because then he can blame it on us and 
hopefully get back into power at the expense of the farmers. That’s what he’s up to. That’s his only 
motive for trying to tie it. 
 
He said it today. When he spoke I sat there and I thought, how irresponsible, Mr. Speaker, could a 
former premier of this province be? I never thought a man could slide down so fast. I mean, I go skiing 
and I don’t go downhill that fast. So, Mr. Speaker, I’m very disappointed. I’m not just disappointed in a 
former premier, now the Leader of the Opposition. I’m disappointed in all seven and a half members of 
the opposition. I think it’s a deplorable tactic, Mr. Speaker, to try and tie us to the Crow rate. Mind you, 
it’s better than what they were tied to. They were tied to the Titanic, Mr. Speaker, I tell you this. Like it 
or not, we are government and we like it. It’s like death and taxes. I wish they came in that order. Mr. 
Speaker, we have the Crow rate to deal with, and as a government, deal with it we will. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — If the Crow rate, Mr. Speaker, in fact does go, it certainly will not be because of 
the efforts of the Progressive Conservative Party in Saskatchewan, but it will be because of non-caring, 
irresponsible federal Liberal government supported by New Democrats consistently in Saskatchewan 
and across this country. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I tell you, I don’t mind being tied to the Crow rate. It’s a solid issue, and we stand with 
the farmers on that issue. We have members every day, Mr. Speaker, every day we have members that 
are somewhere in Saskatchewan at a meeting on the Crow rate. They’re taking our government’s 
position to the people and to the farmers. 
 
Before I move off that Crow rate issue, I just want, Mr. Speaker, to remind all members  



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
80 

of the House what the NDP’s position on the Crow was when they were in power, just in case some 
people have forgotten. Theirs, as set out by the then minister of agriculture, the former member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, was entitled ‘The Saskatchewan Solution.’ Now what was ‘The Saskatchewan 
Solution’? I’m going to tell you, Mr. Speaker, what ‘The Saskatchewan Solution’ was. It was very 
interesting, not just to the farmers, but to every taxpayer in Saskatchewan. 
 
‘The Saskatchewan Solution,’ very simply, Mr. Speaker, was an NDP plan to buy into the CPR. Now 
can you imagine that, Mr. Speaker? After hearing the debates in this House, and hearing them criticizing 
the CPR? All of those years, damnation for the CPR; then roll back the sheets and jump in. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, anyone in their right mind would know that that was in irresponsible solution. They 
took their position, in their election of April 26, on the Crow, to the people. I might add that to a large 
extend they took it at the taxpayers’ expense, as the minister of agriculture roamed around the province. 
We took our position to the people as well, on the Crow, and this, Mr. Speaker, is the result. We were 
not elected just on the Crow, but that was part of the parties’ platforms. — both parties. 
 
So to stand here now and hear the Leader of the Opposition, and see him as well . . .Difficult, but to see 
him criticize us for our position on the Crow is to know that, without a doubt, from henceforth they have 
no position that’s of any responsible nature at all, none whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. As I said to many 
farmers during the election campaign, ‘How many of you want to own some tunnel in B.C.?’ I didn’t 
hear any that wanted to. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have members that are out talking about the Crow all the time, and I’m 
not going to belabour that issue. I want to move on to some of the comments of the Leader of the 
Opposition with regard to the minimum wage. 
 
Again, a former premier of the province of Saskatchewan refers to the government’s position of the day, 
minimum wage, as perverted. I remember, Mr. Speaker, the day when I used to sit in opposition and 
look at the man who was the premier, who is now the Leader of the Opposition, and say to myself, ‘I 
don’t agree with the things he says but he has credibility. He’s a man I respect.’ As I said earlier, he’s’ 
gone down and he’s gone down fast. To hear him say that our government’s position on the minimum 
wage is perverted has to make one wonder what runs through the mind of the Leader of the Opposition; 
what runs through his mind when he uses those kinds of terminologies — those kinds of terminologies 
to describe a government’s position on minimum wage. 
 
What the New Democrats in this province fail to realize as it relates to the minimum wage, is that when 
you increase the minimum wage you don’t just increase the minimum wage, but you increase it right 
clean to the top. Right clean to the top, Mr. Speaker, because that variance, that difference has been 
there and it will remain for a long time. So, Mr. Speaker, when the opposition wants an increase in the 
minimum wage, and knowing full right well that as it vibrates its way to the top, it widens and the 
people at the top, the very people they criticized earlier — McDonald’s and all those kinds of people — 
the top executive officials would end up getting the increases. They don’t understand the economics of 
it. They don’t understand the economics of it, Mr. Speaker. Notwithstanding, as the Minister of Labour 
has said many time, we have the highest minimum wage in the country. 
 
Now, I’m not going to comment too much about the thumb in the eye of Saskatchewan farmers, as it 
relates to the minimum wage and Crow rate, and those kinds of things. I  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
81 

had a few comments to make on that, but I want to move along into the main address of my remarks, no, 
Mr. Speaker. I was just kind of making a few comments here. 
 
I want to talk about some of the items that we were criticized for by the leader of the Opposition. He 
talked about the water resources. He says, ‘Well you haven’t done anything about the water resources of 
our province. You haven’t addressed yourself to that.’ Whenever I hear the Leader of the Opposition 
talking in those terms I say, well, why would he want to criticize us? We just got here and they had 11 
years. On the water issue, Mr. Speaker, the fact is the problem didn’t just arrive when we became 
government. The water problem is along problem. It’s been here a long time. They did absolutely 
nothing with it. We undertook, through our member for Arm River, to study that particular problem. We 
have. The report has been delivered. The government has made a decision, and that is more, Mr. 
Speaker, than we can say for the opposition of the day. 
 
I suppose, Mr. Speaker, what it takes me back to is the doom and gloom attitude that is always employed 
by the members in the opposition. I’ve always thought, Mr. Speaker, that it must be a very saddening 
thing to one’s own personality to go about being unhappy and talking about gloom and doom, and 
everything’s bad and nothing’s good. I spoke to a very strong member of the NDP not too long ago — 
about a week or so ago. I told him, ‘Oh come on, you have to be optimistic.’ ‘Ah yes,’ he says ‘that’s 
what you guys would like us to be, optimistic, wouldn’t you? You’d like us to be optimistic because 
that’s a politician for you. Well,’ he says, ‘I tell you, it isn’t optimistic.’ He says, ‘It’s really bad.’ He 
says, ‘We’re going to blow up any day.’ Well, the NDP in Saskatchewan did blow up. But you know, I 
said to him, ‘Look, I’m happy as heck today and I’m going to be for the whole day whether you like it or 
not.’ And I was. I can’t understand how the members of the opposition continue to preach this gloom 
and doom. If you would start to be positive instead of critical — if you would start to advance positive 
proposals to the government — there’s nothing to say that we wouldn’t listen. You give us a good deal. 
Give us a good deal. Let us consider those ideas. We’re looking for that, Mr. Speaker. What they fail to 
understand is the election is over. Now is the time, Mr. Speaker, for all members of the legislature to 
earn the salary the taxpayers pay them, and work together in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan 
— not to nit—pick and criticize constantly. Mr. Speaker, that’s a lesson that they have to learn, and it 
could be that they’re going to take a long time to learn it. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is a tired and rusted leader. I won’t say any more than that. As I said, 
when I hear him using these words like perverted, I have to wonder. More than tired and rusted? Like a 
voice in the past, he cannot come to grips with the realities of the day; he cannot bring himself to admit 
that he had something to do with their party’s failure, and each and every member of the opposition had 
something to do with their party’s failure on April 26, 1982. 
 
Mr. Blakeney referred to the Speech from the Throne as barren. He would know about barren as he 
looks around behind him. The only thins that’s seriously barren, of course, is in the leader of the 
Opposition’s camp. They are barren — they’re barren of ideas; they’re barren of leadership; they’re 
barren of members. 
 
I won’t make the forecast the former attorney general made. He used to sit over here and take a look at 
us in opposition and give the old throat signal there, and the thumbs down; you’re gone, you’re gone, 
and you’re gone. I tell you, I learned my lesson when I watched the attorney general doing that. It turned 
out that it was he who was the one that was gone. So I’m not going to say that you’re gone, because 
you’re already gone. 



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
82 

I’m just going to say that, given enough time — 15 or 20 years — there’ll be an opportunity again for 
you people to serve in government — maybe. That depends entirely on whether or not you can find a 
leader. There are a number over there that espouse to be leaders. There are none there in their camp. 
They have no choice, Mr. Speaker, but to go with someone from outside their elected membership. 
 
I have some very important remarks that I want to make. Mr. Speaker, if you don’t mind, I want to refer 
to the comments that the Leader of the Opposition made with regard to crown corporations. I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that I should tell the members here what the definition of free enterprise is as I heard it 
spoken at a meeting not very long ago (just this past weekend) by our Attorney General. He said, ‘Their 
definition of free enterprise was one crown corporation competing with another.’ I thought that was 
pretty good. In fact, that’s the only room there was in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, for competition — 
within the government. There was no opportunity outside of government for free enterprise, for private 
initiative, none whatsoever. He has a lot of suspicions about how we’re going to run the crown 
corporations. It’s enough to make him blink, and blink he did today. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we have the crown corporations, in our minds and the mind of this 
government, figured out. We know there are crown corporations that should make money. Those are our 
commercial crown corporations. And then we have crown corporations that are utility corporations. 
Those are the ones that we would like to have to provide a service to people at a basic cost. Well, they 
had it all turned around, Mr. Speaker. They were making money on the utility corporations, and they 
were losing money through Saskoil, which was supposed to make money. In short, Mr. Speaker, they 
mismanaged. They mismanaged not just the government generally, but they mismanaged, in particular, 
the crown corporations. 
 
There was no need for the kind of advertising that they had through Sask Power and through Sask Tel. 
Here, you had to ask yourself: well, do I have any other source? Is there another source of power? Is 
there another telephone company that I could be using? 
 
They like to use quotes. I don’t often use them, Mr. Speaker, But I want to use one, and I want the 
members of the opposition to make sure that the Leader of the Opposition gets this quote. It’s made by 
the Premier of Manitoba — a member, of course, of the NDP, the NDP in power in Manitoba — 
Howard Pawley. The headline is: ‘Auto Pac Juggles Fees for ’83.’ So this is Howard Pawley. ‘Pawley 
said a sudden hailstorm could wreck MPIC if the insurance company didn’t have money in reserve.’ 
Now it’s continued on page 4, and we’ll just turn down over here: 
 

The Saskatchewan public insurance corporation failed to put away its earnings and had to charge 
its customers a 30 per cent increase two years ago, he noted. 

 
Now take this message, Mr. Speaker, and members of the opposition, take this message to your leader 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Here is what the Premier of Manitoba says . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, we’ll just have to wait until the member for Regina Centre finishes his babbling across the way so 
that I can get this quote off, Mr. Speaker, for the record, because the people of Saskatchewan are waiting 
right now with bated breath to hear this quote. Here’s what he says, the Premier of Manitoba. He says: 



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
83 

 
I don’t think Manitobans would want that kind of irresponsible handling of their crown 
corporations he told reporters. 

 
Now how about that? So, the Leader of the Opposition who thinks that they ran the corporations in a 
very efficient and right way, should maybe want to give his counterpart over in Manitoba a phone call 
and say, ‘Look. Watch what you say about us.’ Can you imagine Howard Pawley doesn’t want to run 
the crown corporations in Manitoba in that kind of irresponsible way that the Saskatchewan government 
did? 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously that had to be one of the main reasons the people of Saskatchewan rejected this 
government: because they mismanaged everything. We used to tell them, and tell the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it was so true, that it’s so bountiful here in this province that they could mismanage 
and still break even. And that, Mr. Speaker, that in essence was what they were doing. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Great business philosophy. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Great business philosophy is correct. Well, Mr. Speaker, let me move very 
briefly now into, and I say briefly because I’ve taken up a good amount of time and I know there are 
many other speakers and this is just the beginning, so you may want to take turns sitting in the House, I 
say to members opposite in the opposition, because it’s going to be hard for you to take . . . I want to 
speak very briefly of some of the matters that were contained in the throne speech that I thought were 
highlights. The speech contained the framework of the legislative program encompassing, I believe, 
initiatives in a wide variety of areas. They range from streamlining government structure and changes in 
taxation to new or expanded programs and policies dealing with adult education, municipal government, 
health, agriculture, business, mineral and industrial development, labour, co-ops and the justice system. 
 
The speech said the government has already undertaken a number of significant measures to strengthen 
the agricultural sector including establishment of the farm purchase program. The speech said there will 
be major initiatives to make the province’s adult education system an even greater engine for growth in 
Saskatchewan. The goal is substantially to increase the range of training programs offered, to broaden 
the range and greatly increase the number of people served, and to increase access to credit training 
programs for young people and adults throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the area of tax policy, the speech notes that steps have already been taken to lower 
the tax burden. It says the government remains committed, Mr. Speaker, to the overall objective of lower 
taxes and will continue to take steps to reduce taxes wherever they are excessive and reductions are 
possible. 
 
In the areas of social services and health care, the speech said the government is committed to improving 
independent living opportunities for the disabled and disadvantaged. Many changes, Mr. Speaker, some 
of the highlights of which I have touched on. I have touched on the crown corporations; we believe they 
will play a key role in the province’s economy. We don’t intend to mismanage them, Mr. Speaker, 
rather, what we intend to do is have a proper mix and balance of private sector and government crown 
corporations working hand in hand together for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 21, 1983 
 

 
84 

MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I enjoy the opportunity I have to speak here this afternoon, and the 
members who know me well know that I could go on for a considerable length of time; but I want to 
close on a highlight, Mr. Speaker, I want to close on a highlight of the throne speech. The throne speech 
said that the Government of Saskatchewan was going to take major initiatives respecting the ambulance 
industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, like they said they would remove the road tax, like they said they 
would reduce the mortgages of homeowners, like they said they would deliver to the farmers a farm 
purchase program and thrown out the land bank program, they too have delivered when they said they 
would improve the ambulance industry, and the proof, as they say in the old cliche, is in the pudding — 
there it is. Mr. Speaker, we have an ambulance program unlike the old program, the MRAP program as 
was commonly used to define it, that has set out a basic foundation and structure for an ambulance 
industry in the context of total emergency health care to grow here in Saskatchewan as technology and 
need became evident. We have that framework in this report, and we have a basis by which an industry 
now can work. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, but the report in itself is a credit to the people who are employed in 
government as well, who work with me, because they were able to assist me in correlating all of the 
ideas, and the thoughts, and the presentations that were brought to us, and they did a good job. They 
didn’t worry if it was past 5 o’clock or through a dinner hour, or if it was in the evenings; they worked 
hard and they worked diligently to help to put this report together. The report in itself, Mr. Speaker, is in 
fact a culmination of a great deal of work of a committee that received 69 submissions, met with 26 
agencies and associations. The questionnaire that we distributed to the ambulance industry provided a 71 
per cent — a 71 per cent response. That tells you, Mr. Speaker, two things: one, we’re prepared to go to 
the people of Saskatchewan and ask them, ‘How do you want to matters set out and resolved in your 
interest?’ It tells you the second point: that they’re prepared to speak with their new government. 
They’re prepared to come and visit with us and they feel free and comfortable in doing so. 
 
In conclusion I say, Mr. Speaker, the report itself is a reflection. It’s a reflection — not of my ideas, not 
of the ideas of a big government, not just of the ideas of the committee — it’s a reflection, Mr. Speaker, 
of all of the representations that were made to the committee. In effect we acted as think-tank to 
properly correlate all of the thoughts and concerns and ideas that were presented to us. All I can say is 
that it’s a credit, Mr. Speaker, to our Minister of Health for initiating the study and it’s a credit to 
everyone that worked so diligently to put it together. It’s my hope, and I’m very confidence, that it’s 
going to serve the people of Saskatchewan very well as it now unfolds and becomes a very real program 
in the minds of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So with those comments, Mr. Speaker, I just want to close by saying again that it’s been a pleasure to 
take an opportunity here to speak in the House and take my place. It always is, and I certainly look 
forward to hearing the other debates in the House. I would just advise you, Mr. Speaker, that I would be 
voting against the amendment and supporting the main motion. 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure that I listened to the throne  



 
March 21, 1983 

 

 
85 

speech a few days ago and I intended to start a rather lengthy address at this time. 
 
I notice that the Leader of the Opposition has been watching movies lately, and my colleague from 
Moosomin has pointed out that the Leader of the Opposition has watched ‘Jaws.’ Well, I remember 
watching a movie called ‘The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly’ and I can tell you that since April 16, the 
movie in Saskatchewan has been good and prior to April 26, it was bad. The first part of my speech . . . I 
was going to tell you about the ugly situation we found when we took over government. 
 
I see, Mr. Speaker, it’s approaching 5 o’clock. I wouldn’t want to spoil anybody’s supper talking about 
the ugliness we found and I would ask that we call 5 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7:00 p.m. 
 
 


