






















































Hansard: March 01, 1983


2253 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 1, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce to you, and through you to this committee, 
some eight young girls from the constituency of Regina North, sitting in the Speaker’s gallery up here. 
They are representing Girl Guide Company 11 from Ruth Pawson School. They are accompanied here 
tonight by their leader Judy Sveinbjornson. 
 
Hopefully they will find their visit to the legislature here this evening informational and educational. I 
look forward to meeting with them a little bit later, and determining how they enjoyed our committee of 
finance. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in welcoming them here tonight. 
 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CONTINUING EDUCATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just prior to our break for supper, we were 
questioning the rationale behind the cutbacks to basically two areas of your portfolio — mainly the 
continuing education branch cutbacks from the former administration to what is proposed in your ‘82-83 
budget and along with that we were questioning the cutbacks on funding allocation for the community 
colleges in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I have noted cutbacks in those two areas and as well, a total loss in both categories of moneys that were 
just definitely cut, like in the area of continuing education — $527,830 that wasn’t reappropriated to 
another line department in the South. That’s in regards to the Department of Continuing Education, and 
also with regard to the community colleges — capital grants to community colleges and educational 
institutions. 
 
There’s a definite cut of $582,490 that, as well, wasn’t reallocated into another line department in the 
South. I wonder if the minister may want to comment on the rationale behind those cutbacks that have 
accumulated over and above what was cut back from the former budget of 1981-82. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, if I could reply to the hon. member for Cumberland. The 1982 
April budget, from the figures that I have been handed for northern continuing education, was roughly 
$5 million and of that amount there was a 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2254 

reduction of $469,830, and I would like to account for the purposes for the reduction. First of all, there 
were two new programs that were entered into, one of which was located at La Ronge, and another for 
the northeast facility. Money was provided for planning for these programs to the extent of $150,000. So 
that accounts for $150,000 of that $469,830. The remainder was attributed to restraints and efficiencies. 
So that’s where the total reduction, according to the figures that I have of $469,830, came in, for that 
first portion of the question. 
 
Now I’d like to respond for the community colleges. For the community colleges, according to the 
figures that we have, there was an increase for the community colleges in the North to the extent of 14 
per cent over 1981-82. This was retained in the North — the 14 per cent increase was retained in the 
North — whereas in the South it was reduced by 7 per cent as I pointed out earlier. That’s according to 
our figures. If you wish to get further elaboration — and there is some difficulty in getting exactly where 
we are because of the realignment and money is going here and there — but if you are not satisfied with 
this, I would be pleased to equip you with something in writing. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, thank you very much for the offer to provide us with 
more specifics at a later date with regards to these reappropriations that you mentioned. I, for one, 
understood that there was a complete deliberate cutback on the community colleges portion of the 
estimates for ’82-83 but you’ve stated to me that actually this was not the case. So looking at the book of 
estimates here, I’ve mentioned it before and I’ll mention it again, there’s been asterisks . . . I took it for 
granted that certain portions of those budgets were reappropriated to various departments elsewhere. 
And this is very confusing to us up North and I’m sure it is confusing as well to a lot of other people 
involved, or who have some interest in the development of programs up North. 
 
However, getting back to your estimates, my apologies if I have missed a comment or two with regards 
to my next question. But with regards to the trades, special trades and vocational institute that was 
approved for La Ronge, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you might comment on what status this facility is at in 
this point in time. It’s quite an important matter for the residents of the immediate area and I would like 
to have an official comment from you on that. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, to respond, at the present time the plan is to use some of the 
underutilized government space that exists in La Ronge and area. One of these facilities that we have in 
mind at the present time is the upper Atco building, to turn this into classroom space in conjunction with 
Outreach programs that will eventually come from the Prince Albert technical institute. But in addition, 
what we have in mind is to extend the Outreach and to double the training spots that exist in the La 
Ronge area. 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you very much. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you might want to provide us with 
some detailed information as well with regard to what priorities and budget allocations you have for 
northern training programs — NTP, ABE (adult basic education), the northern careers program, the 
trapper training program and native outfitters program — those program areas that you have under the 
wing of nor.con.ed. I wonder if you could provide us with a list of your budget allocations, your policy 
with respect to those programs — your present policy and whatever future anticipated plans you might 
have — for those sections that you have under this particular portfolio? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Would it be in order for me to provide that to you in writing so that 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2255 

I could give you the detail on it? 
 
MR. YEW: — That would be just fine, Mr. Minister. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I won’t be taking too much of your 
time. I have a few questions I would like to direct to you and most of them will be pertaining to the West 
Side Community College and its operations. 
 
Before I get into that, I would like to ask you a question. You indicated when you first got up that there 
were 177,000 citizens in Saskatchewan who have grade 10 or less. I wonder if your department has 
broken that down any further to how many would be with grade 8 or less, or any other break down. I’ll 
let you answer that one first. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I could be wrong in responding to this, but as I recall — I read the report 
myself and perhaps not as intensely as I should have — I did not notice that there was a break down into 
different groups, like people with special needs, like women, handicapped people, and so on and so 
forth. Is that what you meant? 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — No, all I wanted, Mr. Minister, was the break down. You indicated that there 
were 177,000 that had grade 10 or less, regardless of who they are — the citizens of the province. I just 
wondered if you had broken that down any further to say 100,000 or 50,000, maybe, that have grade 8 or 
less. That was my question. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I can give you some information. We have a break down which shows 70 per 
cent of the people in the North have grade 9 or less education — 70 per cent, yes. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, when you bring 
figures like that out, it most certainly indicates that there is a great need for secondary education in 
northern Saskatchewan. I know that you’re fully in favour of a good educational system in the North and 
in the province as a whole, and I was quite impressed with your remarks the other night when you were 
talking about the West Side schools at Green Lake, Beauval, La Loche. 
 
I want to ask you this question. You indicated that there was a 14 per cent increase in the continuing 
education budget for northern Saskatchewan. I wonder if you could break down that 14 per cent and 
indicate how much was capital, how much went toward training programs, heavy duty mechanics, 
carpenters, etc., and how much of that 14 per cent would have gone into planning. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, Mr. Chairman and the hon. member for Athabasca. I’m not sure I have 
precisely what you’re looking for. The figures I have here and the percentage increase that I referred to 
for the grants to community colleges in the North refer to the administration only, not to programs. I 
have figures like West Side Community College, $399,000; La Ronge, $365,000; North East 
Community College, $304,000. So the total is roughly $1 million. But that does not refer to programs. 
 
When I referred to the amount of reduction in total, that was referring to the amount that was reduced in 
total in the north community colleges, that $460,000. Those were the program cuts. It came out of what 
would have gone into programs. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I guess I’m just not quite following you here. 
The question I was asking is: is the increase in the budget to northern 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2256 

Saskatchewan for community colleges? I wanted to find out how much of that 16 per cent went into 
capital planning, and how much went into programs. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I’ll try this again. As far as capital was concerned, there was no decrease. As 
far as program was concerned, $312,000; and planning, $150,000. But alongside of that, the basic 
commitment to running the northern community colleges went up by 14 per cent. Of the total of the $1 
million, it would roughly break down in these percentages, which prevail in what we call the southern 
community colleges: 20 to 25 per cent is spent on administration; 35 per cent is spent on program 
support; 40 to 50 per cent on direct program delivery. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, you are indicating then that there was over a 
$400,000 decrease in the budget for community colleges in northern Saskatchewan. There was no 
decrease in capital projects. I think when we are discussing the situation as it is in northern 
Saskatchewan, with the high unemployment rate that we have (the 70 per cent as you have indicated that 
have grade 9 or less), and we take a look at a community college budget where we should be 
emphasizing training and getting this labour force skilled (there’s just such a large unskilled labour force 
up there right now, and we cut over $300,000 off of programs), I’m sure, Mr. Minister, that you’d have 
to agree with me that we’re not going in the right direction. 
 
I think that there just has to be a lot more emphasis put on training and the type of programs that the 
community colleges can administer in northern Saskatchewan or any part of the province. There’s 
absolutely no way that we can wait around for the college, or the community college, or the training 
facility that you are going to establish in Prince Albert, to be built to handle the situation that we have. 
The situation has got so bad in the last couple of years, and is getting worse each year with more and 
more young people coming on to the labour force with the type of education — as you have indicated, 
70 per cent of them have grade 9 or less. We have to provide this type of training for them. Could you 
indicate to me at this time how much of a budget cut was incurred specifically for the West Side 
Community College, both in capital and program delivery? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — This is an approximation but it would have been approximately 100,000 or 
100,000-plus, as far as the program is concerned. That would have been the only cut in West Side 
Community College. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, could you indicate to the 
committee the reason why they would want $100,000 off of programs in an area that has that high 
unemployment rate and so much unskilled labour? When citizens up on the northwest side of the 
province where the West Side Community College serves need these types of programs so much, could 
you indicate why they would want to cut $100,000 off the programs? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Basically, the cause would have been just simple a general slowdown as far as 
the economy is concerned, a general restraint policy. This policy, as unfair as it seems, which you have 
pointed out, would have applied to all parts and to some parts perhaps more than others. At the same 
time, I think one of the encouraging factors is that we have been busy trying to put into gear a training 
program and an educational program for northern Saskatchewan which will have as much meaning as 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2257 

it possibly can have. We are trying to integrate it with the national training act and the basic skills 
program so that we can have it as cost efficient as possible. I think we are all aware of the fact that these 
are very, very costly programs and it doesn’t matter whether they occur in southern Saskatchewan or in 
northern Saskatchewan. It is really incumbent upon us to do everything we can in order to realize what 
savings we can. As far as the cuts were concerned, that would have been the primary reason for those 
holdbacks on money at that particular time. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I am not going to take much more time on this 
issue. I know we’ll be going through the same estimates in another month or six weeks. At that time 
we’ll have another chance to go over this. 
 
I would say to you, Mr. Minister, that I find it quite discouraging that when we run into tough times and 
we want to cut the budget down, we would cut it on the backs of the type of people who you have just 
indicated and we have been discussing in northern Saskatchewan. I think it is the wrong route to take. I 
think when we have tough times, and we have a situation like we do have in northern Saskatchewan 
with a high unemployment rate, with a high number of people who have grade 9 or less in education, we 
have to put more money into these types of programs, and I would just urge you and your department to 
reconsider. I sincerely hope that when you bring out the next budget that you will have a lot more money 
in there for programs, and will get the West Side Community College going, and going full bore, and 
especially build it up until you get the facility in Prince Albert on stream. I know that will relieve a lot of 
the pressure there. 
 
Another question I would like to have answered: could you give me the make-up of the West Side 
Community board, the number of individuals who sit on that board, and their names? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Would you like me to send this over? All right. There’s Florence Hansen 
from Beauval, Ben Siemens from Stony Rapids, Jonas Janvier from La Loche, Evelyn Fidler from Green 
Lake, Joyce Taylor from Buffalo Narrows, Joe Favel from Ile-a-la-Crosse, and Dana Spence from 
Uranium City. Seven in all the community colleges. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Two defeated candidates, yes, I know their qualifications. That board, Mr. 
Minister, has been changed, has it not, from a five-person board to seven individuals? Mr. Chairman, 
and Mr. Minister, I’ll just leave the department with that, and I want to sincerely stress once again that 
you put extra emphasis on training in the community colleges on the west side. I sincerely hope that the 
next budget will reflect that. Thank you very much for your answers. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A couple of comments I wish to express. I don’t know that they deserve a 
lengthy response from you; you have already commented this afternoon. The matters were raised this 
afternoon by my colleague for Elphinstone in a very articulate fashion. 
 
I want to express my regret, Mr. Minister, that your government should have been so indecisive with 
respect to facilities for the university. It would have been unfortunate enough if it merely had happened 
in a time of widespread unemployment and a time where we are already suffering from this Tory deep 
freeze with the widespread unemployment we have. It is doubly unfortunate, Mr. Minister, that you 
should do it in the period of such overwhelming needs by the university. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2258 

We had before the public accounts committee the universities commission, and they described for us in 
stark terms the needs that the universities have in terms of facilities. It has been brought on in part by the 
Tory deep freeze, the widespread unemployment and young people who are going to university because 
the kind of economic ship you run leaves them no alternative. In part, Mr. Minister, it comes about 
because a lot of those young people don’t believe the jobs that they can’t find are ever going to be here 
again, and they are going back to university because they believe many of those semi-skilled and 
unskilled jobs are just simply not going to be there. Universities are being overrun with students. The 
universities commission told us, Mr. Minister, that it would simply not be possible to accommodate the 
kind of enrolment they expected. They simply didn’t have the buildings or the classroom facilities to put 
them in, and they were going to have to find some way of restricting entrance to university, and that is 
nothing short of a tragedy. That is nothing short of a tragedy. 
 
For years this country has suffered because of a lack of productivity and everybody ascribes that to an 
inadequate level of education. At a time when you should be encouraging young people to seek more 
education, you are discouraging it by the sort of indecision which your government has exhibited over 
the last nine months. I simply have difficulty believing, Mr. Minister, that in nine months you’ve been 
unable to determine what, if anything, the university needs, and what, if any, buildings you should be 
starting on. That is simply not credible. 
 
I may say it’s surprising coming from someone with your brilliant record in working with young people, 
and, I readily acknowledge, the member’s brilliant record in working with young people. It’s something 
which people in the city of Regina are proud of, and I would have hoped that you could have taken your 
colleagues in cabinet and welded them into the sort of a team that you exhibited so brilliantly on the 
football field and rid them of some of the indecision which is killing this province. And I would ask you 
to assume a position of leadership in that cabinet — get rid of the indecision and do something for the 
universities, because their needs are critical. Their needs are more critical than any other group that we 
have dealt with, and you just told us this afternoon you’ve spent nine months wondering what, if 
anything, universities need. 
 
We left them in far better shape after 11 years than you have placed them in after one. The minister said 
this afternoon that he could not be expected to solve the problem in nine months, and I may concede that 
to you because the problem has overtaken you with some rapidity. But, I do think the public expects you 
to try, and what we found out this afternoon is that you have made no effort to solve the problem that the 
universities have with respect to facilities. And I urge upon the minister to make an effort and exhibit 
some interest and concern in the problem before your estimates come up next. 
 
I also want to raise the matter of the building for the provincial archives, and I want to express the same 
regret in this regard, in part for the same reasons, in part because those jobs were badly needed by a lot 
of people who are now the clients of the member for Swift Current. And they could have been 
something else, had we moved on some of these badly needed capital projects such as the archives 
building. 
 
But there is an even greater need for this building, because this building is needed to preserve the 
history, the tangible history, for our children, for our children’s children. We have documents which are 
deteriorating, which are in an essential part of our history, and without this building to preserve that 
tangible history, they are not going to be available for our children’s children, and our children’s 
grandchildren. I urge you to get on, Mr. Minister, with this badly needed facility so that we may 
preserve our history 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2259 

in a fashion which befits a province with the brilliant history that this one has. So I urge you, Mr. 
Minister, to get on and get started on the provincial archives building. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, Hon. Member for Regina Centre, I want to thank you for your 
generosity and your kindness extended to me in making reference to my work with young people, my 
work in coaching. Quite frankly, it was my good fortune to have had the opportunity to have worked for 
such a long period of time with young people, people for whom I had the utmost respect, and still do to 
this very day. Coming into this austere environment is not going to change my attitude or my thinking 
with regard to my belief in the young people of this province. I can assure you of that. 
 
Now, having gotten rid of that, in reference to your thought that perhaps I could generate and motivate 
some people in the direction of working together as a team, I couldn’t help but think (the thought just 
had to go through my head as I was sitting here), and I was wondering, now you know, perhaps you 
were getting to me so much there that for a moment I almost crossed the floor and I could have been 
associated with this team over here. The only thing, I was trying to figure out what the heck kind of a 
team could this be? Let’s see now. If I did join, it could be a baseball team. We’d have nine, wouldn’t 
we? 
 
In respect to your remarks, I think first of all, the one thing, at a time when we have to recognize that 
there is a degree of austerity, I think that it’s incumbent upon all people to practise a certain amount of 
restraint and saving and efficiencies. I think this refers to you and myself, who’ve worked with the 
government. I think it’s also incumbent upon those people who attend university, and those people who 
are teaching at the university. I think we all have to do our duty. You know, in time of war, there’s a 
military crisis and people ought to go off and do things that they don’t really care to do. 
 
In times of economic crisis, which is what we’re faced with, we’ve got the same kind of responsibility, 
just as important, except that we really don’t even have to lay down our lives for it. But I do think, I 
really do think, that all of us have to do a little bit of belt tightening, and a little bit of sacrificing, and 
putting out, in addition to what we normally expect is our right and our lot in life. I think that we have to 
expect the universities to do some of this. And I’m not saying to deprive them of quality and programs, 
unless it is absolutely essential for us to go that route. 
 
I think that the universities have, quite frankly, increased their productivity level considerably. They 
have responded. They have done certain things, such as the rescheduling of classes, such as the increase 
of sessional classes, such as increasing the use of lab time, and it goes on and on. This is one of the ways 
which we’re going to help to resolve our problem. 
 
As far as decision making is concerned, and the idea that we would be deliberately trying to stop the 
growth of the campuses at Regina and Saskatoon, you couldn’t be farther from the truth in that. I think, 
quite frankly, that our government has made decisions, very deliberate decisions, and some of the 
decisions were: “Hold the phone! Let’s stop and regroup. Let’s take a look at where we are going and be 
darned sure that we have to spend the money!” As far as many of the projects were concerned, I think 
that that is what we did. I think that we’ve addressed ourselves to very deliberate decisions. 
 
Now, if you think for one moment that in nine months we are going to revolutionize 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2260 

things as far as facilities or programs are concerned, well, go ahead and think that, because I don’t think 
it’s realistic to feel that that can be done. I think that you are asking for something that just can’t be. 
 
As far as the archives building is concerned, sure, I feel the same way as you do. I think most of us in 
here have a heritage and feel that we want to identify with this province and we’re proud of having 
grown up in this area. My father homesteaded in this area, too. So, you know, we certainly have a 
feeling that we should preserve as much as possible our heritage for the future and for future 
generations. We would be very, very quick to go ahead and do something like that in the case of the 
archives building. It was simply a matter that we considered it alongside of many other expenditures. 
When you consider that we were looking at a good, healthy deficit as far as our budget was concerned, 
the decision was that we would not build it this particular year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to turn now, Mr. Minister, to a number of questions. If indeed you want to 
send the information over to some of them, you could indicate that to speed up the process. I want to 
wind this down as fast as possible. 
 
I am impressed each time you get up to give your speech in respect to your devotion to education. I have 
no doubt about your sincerity. I just want to say that, in my opinion, in closing off on this particular 
item, I really have a strong feeling that many of the cuts, and the ones which have been alluded to this 
afternoon — the archives building, the geological science building, the institute in Prince Albert, the STI 
— in my view, were delayed probably by the input of cabinet to allow an opportunity to put your 
political input into decisions which have firmly been made. To that extent, I am disappointed, but I don’t 
want to go any further than that. 
 
Certainly we look forward to the subsequent budgets in order to determine indeed the direction and the 
commitment of this government to education. I just want to ask a few additional questions, many of 
which we ask as a routine for each department, and I think we can wind down. 
 
I would like to know, Mr. Minister: what are the names, the positions, and salaries of all members of the 
minister’s staff? I think you are clear on what I am asking for. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Would it be all right with the hon. member if we sent this information, or did 
you want it right now? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — You can send over the details, Mr. Minister, to save time. If you could just mention 
the names, just so that I am clear as to who, in fact, is on your staff, on your personal staff. You can send 
that . . . 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — On my staff in the minister’s office, there are two people: Bill Barry, who is a 
special assistant to the minister and Judith Bergen, assistant secretary to the minister. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Fine. Just in respect to Mr. Bill Barry: could the minister indicate to me the 
professional qualifications of that individual? I think if you could, that’s what I want. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, I think I can remember this because Bill was on my staff at one time 
when I was at the Balfour Technical School, and then at Cochrane High 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2261 

School. 
 
Bill is a graduate of the University of Saskatchewan. I know he had a military career and has taught for, 
I would say, 15 to 20 years. He has been the superintendent in schools in Saskatchewan and he has had 
an educational background. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Fine. With respect to the minister’s staff: are any of the individuals on contract as 
opposed to being hired through OC? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — As I recall, they are all OC. The other person, Judy Bergen, was an OC 
appointment by the previous government and is in my office, and so was the other secretary. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I would like it if the minister could provide me with this: we’d like the total amount 
of what we term, again, as entertainment expenses, incurred since May 8th, 1982 by the minister, the 
deputy, each special assistant, and each executive assistant, if you could. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — We’ll provide this information to you. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — We would like also the names of each person in the department who is on contract 
— whether you have any contracts with any individuals or any consulting firms, if you’d indicate how 
they are, when the contract was entered into and the rate of remuneration in respect to it. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — All right. We’d be pleased to send that information over. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Can the minister indicate how many vacant permanent positions there are in the 
department? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — The number is 27 vacant positions at the present time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And do any of the minister’s staff have an assigned CVA vehicle, and if so, what are 
their names and positions? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — None of them presently have a CVA vehicle. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, we would like a record of all CVA aircraft flights charged to the 
department since May 8, indicating the date, place of departure, destination, names of persons whose 
flight was charged to the department, if you can provide that. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — We’ll provide that information. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — We’d also like the number of all charter flights charged to the department since May 
8, indicating the date, place of departure, destination, person whose flight was charged in the department 
and the cost of each such charter, if you could. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, sir. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, could you indicate (and this may not be relevant), but do you 
have a press agent or a communication or a public relations person associated with your office? 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2262 

HON. MR. CURRIE: — No. No. I do not have one. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And I would like also a list of all the persons whose employment, whose services, 
were terminated or who were in fact fired from the Department of Continuing Education since May 8, 
1982, and the particular positions that they held at the time. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — We’ll provide that information, yes. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you. And I’d also like, Mr. Minister, if you would give us a list of all the 
persons whose services were terminated from any of the boards, commissions, or agencies under the 
jurisdiction of the Department of Education since you took over on May 8. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, we’ll have that information. You meant Department of Continuing 
Education, right? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And I just want a clarification here. I wonder if the minister, in respect to any of the 
employees whose services were in fact terminated or fired or however you wish to word it, if you could 
indicate out of that number how many of those employees that were dismissed were, in fact, for cause. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, we’ll include that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you. I would like also the names of any consulting firms which the 
department may have been using during the course of the year. That may be covered under the previous 
question, indeed, but I know that the department often has consultants hired, and I would like a list of all 
the consultants and the particular purpose for which they were hired, the nature of their consulting work, 
and also the indication of the amount being paid. Can you do that? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, we’ll provide that information. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, I note that in choosing a deputy minister you did in fact go to a 
consulting firm and back sometime around September there were ads on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan through a consulting firm. I would ask the minister to indicate who the consulting firm 
was, and could he indicate the amount it cost for the consulting services in the search for the deputy 
minister? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Would you want that information now, or can I provide that with the other 
information? 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, if you have it, I guess we could take it now. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I would be pleased to provide that information, but I understand that there is a 
bill or two to come in yet. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Okay. Well that’s fine, you’ll undertake to provide it, that’s all we want. Good. 
 
I note that within the ad by the consulting firm — and I found it a little strange — it indicated the 
compensation level will appeal to those now earning in the ’60s range, and it went on to say: “An 
employment contract is offered.” 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2263 

I am wondering whether it was the intention of the government at the time of placing this to go by way 
of contract, rather than the normal appointment of the deputies by OC. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — The answer to that is no. There was some consideration being given at that 
time to go the method of contract, but there has been a change of heart. So the deputies will be appointed 
in the normal manner. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Would the minister also provide me with, not the names, but the number of 
applicants that replied to the advertisement? In other words, applied, submitted their credentials and 
applied for the deputy minister’s position. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, sir, we’ll do so. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — You indicated that your deputy minister . . . Not deputy minister, but assistant, I 
guess. I was wondering what duties with the provincial government did your assistant deputy minister 
have prior to his moving to continuing education? Mr. Evancio, if I’m pronouncing correctly, what were 
his duties prior to joining continuing ed? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Lawyer. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Evancio was with the Canada Employment and Immigration 
Commission. He went from there into the Department of Finance with the provincial government, where 
he was working for the special adviser to the Executive Council in an organizational capacity. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’m just wondering whether the minister can indicate whether or not you anticipate 
any major organizational changes in the department. I know that you can’t probably spell out the details, 
but I’m wondering whether or not, during the year that we’re discussing, some organizational structure 
of the department is being reviewed. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — This is actually under continuous review right now. We don’t have any 
immediate plans for any major changes. But it is something that we have done as one of the things that 
we felt was pretty essential to bring about a reorganizing with regard to the structure and the 
organization of the Department of Continuing Education. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to indicate, Mr. Minister, as you will know, the average annual increase 
in provincial operating grants on a full-time equivalent basis, the FTE, was in fact 10.2 per cent from 
1974-75 through to 1981-82. The record will indicate that. I wonder if the minister will be able to give 
to the House a commitment that the policy that he will adopt will in fact keep the funding at an 
equivalent to the average which has been established from the ’74-75 to the ’81-82 at 10.2 per cent. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the hon. member for Quill Lakes could be a little 
more specific. We’re having difficulty zeroing in on exactly what information he would like us to give 
him. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want quiet; I just want to repeat this once. The average annual increase in the 
provincial operating grants on a full-time equivalent basis, the FTE, was 10.2 per cent from 1974-75 
through to ’81-82. What I’m asking is: can the minister 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2264 

give a commitment in the House today that it is his policy to see that next year, and in later years, the 
budget will be maintained at that particular level? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, after giving some consideration to this question, I really feel 
this would be a cabinet decision. It would have to be made at that level, and I don’t feel that I can 
unilaterally go ahead and make that decision. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — It took all that time to come up with that answer? I just want one other closing 
remark: as the minister will also know, in every year from 1975-76 through to 1980-81, the proportion 
of the total university expenditure borne by tuition fees declined and it declined from 11.6 per cent of 
the total expenditure in 1975-76 to 10.5 per cent in 1980-81. I would like to ask the minister if he would 
indicate and give us a commitment that the trend whereby tuition fees would carry a less and less 
percentage of the cost. Can he give us that commitment? That trend, I think, is much appreciated by the 
students attending, particularly under these very difficult economic times, since April 8th, 1982. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I’d like the hon. member to realize that I share his empathy for the young 
people. The only thing is, once again I think I’m out of my territory because this is a decision that should 
be made by the board of governors, and I would respect that decision. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want really to impress upon the minister that the students, of course, with the 
economic times . . . I don’t want to be facetious in respect to that. I want also to indicate that the job 
opportunities are less available than they were two or three years ago. I want to say that many of them 
now will be forced into taking ordinary jobs, maybe at the minimum wage. I want the minister to 
understand that tuition fees are an ever-increasing burden on students. That is, the minimum wage hasn’t 
been increased and any of them who get employment on this reduced minimum wage — not reduced, 
but a minimum wage that wasn’t increased . . . In other words, to many of the students, their income 
potential has been frozen by no increase in the minimum wage. 
 
Secondly, the job opportunities are very, very difficult. I would ask the minister to consider the 
financing of the universities, treat the students in a way which I think is fitting and agree with the board 
of governors (and certainly they’ll agree to it if you give them enough financing) that a freeze on the 
tuition fees can be implemented during the rather difficult economic times. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I would be pleased to take notice of what you have said, and treat it in the 
manner in which I am able to. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

RESOURCES DIVISION 
 

CONTINUING EDUCATION 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2265 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CONTINUING EDUCATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CONTINUING EDUCATION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 5 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
PROVINCIAL LIBRARY 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 29 

 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — I’d like to introduce the officials from the Provincial Library. This is Leah 
Siebold, the acting provincial librarian. Sitting behind Leah is Marcel deLaforest, who is the director of 
administration. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I only have two or three questions here, Mr. Minister. First of all, I think that 
throughout Saskatchewan we have a library system that is pretty commendable and I just wonder 
whether the minister could indicate whether he has received any representation in respect to funding or 
areas of concern out in the field. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — In responding, Mr. Chairman, to the areas of concern and funding, I am 
pleased to say that the increases that were given for this year to the regional libraries were 14.8 per cent, 
16 per cent to Regina and Saskatoon, plus a substantial increase in the northern grants from 2,000 to 
15,000. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And you solved all the problems, I take it, with that? I just want to ask the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2266 

minister. The previous government had established a new formula for the funding of the libraries. Very 
much dialogue had taken place . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, sir, a lot of consultation, and I want 
to say that there was considerable support throughout and a lot of anticipation of the implementation of 
the formula that was developed by the previous government. What I want to ask is whether or not your 
government, in its funding of the libraries, adopted that formula. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, the hon. member will be pleased to know that we did implement that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I can understand why the problems have been resolved, and I’m glad to hear that. 
Just one further question. In the first subvote, there is in fact a decrease in the number of positions. 
Could the minister outline what deletions have taken place? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — There were 4.5 decreases and 4 added, so the overall change is a decrease of 
0.5. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Similarly, can the minister indicate to me, and you can send this over, whether the 
services of any employees were no longer required by the present government, whether there were any 
dismissals and the positions that they held at the time? You can send that over, Mr. Minister. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Yes, I’d be pleased to. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Finally, can you indicate the number of vacant positions throughout the Provincial 
Library estimate? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — The number of vacant positions is 10. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — If my colleagues have no further questions, I have no further questions. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, for once I’m not going to be abrasive, neither abrasive nor 
aggressive. I have a passing interest in the automation system. I would appreciate a report from you on 
how the automation of the library system is coming along. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, for the information of the hon. member for Regina Centre, the 
current cataloguing is done by using the University of Toronto library automation system. The 
retrospective cataloguing — as far as that is concerned, a joint venture agreement has been signed with 
the Regina and Saskatoon libraries. The third thing that I could point out is that a request for a proposal 
has been approved to research an in-province data base to replace the . . . (inaudible) . . . system. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — By what period in time do you expect to have the card system entirely 
automated? That’s not an easy question. Let me divide it into two parts. By what period of time do you 
expect to have the card system, the card cataloguing, in Regina and Saskatoon automated, and by what 
period of time, if ever, do you expect to do that throughout the entire province? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, for Regina and Saskatoon, probably around January of 1984, 
and for the regional libraries, largely depending upon what their wishes are, probably a year to two years 
for automation. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2267 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m interested to hear that you will have the regional libraries automated by 
1975. I’m going to be asking you that one again . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . ’85, yes. Well, ’95 
would have been more my guess than ’85. I’m surprised that you can do it in a year or two. I want to 
congratulate the minister for once, in this area at least, not suffering from any indecision, if you can do 
all that in a year’s time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, well, you’ve followed in some very 
competent footsteps, I have to say. 
 
I want to ask you as well about the ongoing problem with municipalities who drop out. The library 
structure has long wanted mandatory participation in libraries, just as we have mandatory participation 
in hospitals and schools, and frankly, logic has every recommendation for that proposal. On the other 
hand, the municipalities, I think, are less enthusiastic about such a system and some have dropped out. 
I’d appreciate knowing at this point in time how many rural municipalities have dropped out, how many 
urban municipalities have dropped out, and where you stand on the ongoing controversy between the 
municipalities and the libraries, the library system which wants mandatory participation. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Chairman, in 1981 there were 57 notices of withdrawal in effect and there 
are less than half that in December of 1982. Altogether there were 21 notices at that time. It’s interesting 
to note that 93 per cent of the population is participating so that really the withdrawal notices indicate a 
pretty small portion of the population in its entirety. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, just very briefly, does the minister have any intention of legislating 
mandatory participation in the library system? Is that a proposal that you are seriously considering? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — No, I don’t think that the minister has any idea of proposing that. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I just have one question. I think it is appropriate under this last item. Does 
the minister have any intention to abolish the structure of the Provincial Library and amalgamate the 
services provided by your staff into another department? Do you have any intention of abolishing the 
agency itself? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — The answer to that would be no. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Vote 29 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PROVINCIAL LIBRARY 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2268 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 29 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 29 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 33 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — My officials were introduced last night. Is that satisfactory? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I have a number of issues I want to raise. I think we have thoroughly 
canvassed the Van Mulligen-Sharon Young-hiring guidelines issues. I think we’ve thoroughly canvassed 
that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to take you back in time to last July. You, after considerable criticism from the 
opposition that you had done nothing for the superannuates, did bring in a bill on July 5 and 6, I believe, 
which did provide the superannuates, as I recall, with the same benefits we would have provided had we 
been returned to office, although it was somewhat belated. 
 
At that time, we raised with you the issue of the right of people to transfer from the old to the new plan. 
It had reference to section 38. We urged upon you at that point in time, Mr. Minister, that the 
amendments we would have made be incorporated in the bill you passed. You accused us of panicking 
and indicated that you were going to give it due consideration and in a short period of time would have a 
decision on it. 
 
Well, no one, I think, will accuse you of panicking, having not acted on it in this period of time. I would 
appreciate a statement of what your intentions are with respect to this matter, which is important for 
those involved. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, we have met with the superannuates. They also advanced that 
particular argument. I think that there will be legislation forthcoming in this session. Whether it will deal 
with that problem remains to be seen. Clearly, I think I indicated to the Leader of the Opposition last 
night, an overall look at pensions is being undertaken by government. Although maybe not quite into 
that area, we’re trying to address the question with the amount of money that we do have, and in the 
most equitable way we possibly can. 
 
I know your concern there. We have looked at it. Any decision will be announced in due course, with 
legislation as to what we’re going to do. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I assume when the minister says he’s going with legislation in this session, 
you mean the next session of the legislature, not the one we’re concluding. Can we take it from that that 
you will deal with the question of increments to 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2269 

superannuates in a timely fashion this year? We’ll deal with it in the spring? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — You can take from that statement anything you want — that the legislation 
will be introduced. I think, as the normal tradition of this House, when the legislation is introduced, it 
states the policy. Until such time, I wouldn’t want to speculate, or have you speculate, what might be in 
that bill. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I think the superannuates are hoping I’m not wrong. 
 
I want to deal with an issue which, Mr. Minister, is permeating the entire public service. It is corroding 
the morale of the public service. That is the ongoing firings that continue and continue and continue and 
continue. 
 
Mr. Minister, I can go and meet public servants as I do, and in the old days, I used to be able to say, 
“Well, Bill, how’s it going?” And they’d tell you what they’re doing in their department. They’d have 
some project that they’re working on in their department. They’d stop and tell you about it, and it was 
usually of interest to myself as well. Now you get a stock response: “Well, Bill, how’s it going?” “Well, 
still working, still working.” 
 
The morale in the public service is as low as the earl of hell’s boots, and that comes about, not 
particularly, Mr. Minister, because of your approach to the issue. It comes about because of the 
continuous ongoing firings, the lack of security. And I beseech the minister in the name of good 
government to bring the firings to an end. And it just doesn’t come to an end; it just goes on and on and 
on. 
 
I know that SGI is a crown corporation, but it is symptomatic of the problem. You continue to decimate 
the public service. You could do yourselves and the public of Saskatchewan a great favour if you could 
get it over with. And it might look like a Saint Valentine’s Day massacre if you could get it over with, 
but you might be able to do something about the morale in the public service, and frankly it’s terrible. 
It’s terrible, and it is affecting your ability to implement programs. 
 
As partisan as I may be, I hate to see the public service become what it has today. I simply can’t find a 
public servant who is cheerful about his work these days. It simply doesn’t exist in this city or in the 
province, and it’s these ongoing firings. I beseech the minister in the name of good government to bring 
the process to an end. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I take it that you are referring to the various dismissals at SGI was the basis 
of the ongoing question as it relates to this, if that was in fact meant. So I interpret your question to be 
then clearly that’s not in the purview of the public service commission. That is something more 
appropriately brought up to the minister as you did in question period today. With regard to SGI, 
certainly it is a question to be brought up in crown corporations. 
 
With regard to the implementation of programs, I would say that, quite frankly, the programs that have 
been implemented have been in fact done in a very, in a very good manner. I think we’ve delivered our 
programs very well. The changes that we’ve made have been implemented by the civil service very well, 
and I suppose you indicate that the morale is at such and such a level. I suppose that’s your opinion. I 
suppose everyone’s entitled to their opinion, but I don’t think I can say a lot more than simply that’s 
your opinion with regard to the morale. I would tend to disagree with you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t frankly know, if I were in your position, how I’d respond to 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2270 

these comments because I don’t expect you to admit it. And I don’t think there’s any real way you can 
deny it. So as I say, I don’t know quite how I’d respond to it, but I tell you it is corroding the public 
service. I’ve been around long enough to have known the public service in the last days of the Thatcher 
government, and it was terrible. 
 
But I’ll tell you quite frankly, Mr. Minister, it’s worse right now than it was in the latter days of the 
Thatcher government. The morale is awful! It is awful! . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it is not 
among party members. It is among all kinds of public servants who don’t have . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . They’d all be gone tomorrow if I named 50. If I named 50, they’d all be gone 
tomorrow. They’d all be gone tomorrow if I named 50. 
 
I want to get off the subject. As I say, I frankly don’t know quite how the minister would respond to it. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Could we have order, please. May I have order, please, so that we can continue 
with the process. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to ask you to comment on something else; it’s part of the same 
problem. It’s part of what contributes to the lack of the deportment in the public service. I want to refer 
you to a remark made by the Premier on May 13, 1982. He said, 
 

We expect the public service to be thoroughly professional and entirely loyal at all times and, to that 
end, we want to ensure that no civil servants hold membership cards in any political party. 

 
Is that still the policy of the government? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I wouldn’t want to comment with regard to that question. The Premier’s 
estimates are coming up, and I think you can ask the Premier that question. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Surely, Mr. Minister, the public service has an overall responsibility for 
policy with respect to the public servants. Surely that is your responsibility in a direct fashion, not the 
Premier’s. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I don’t think there is anything in the laws or the regulations or the 
policies that basically say a civil servant cannot hold a political card. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — So you’ve refuted the Premier. I’m glad to hear that. Glad to hear that. 
 
I want to ask you some questions about employment contracts. I want to ask you how many employment 
contracts there are. I want to know if there are some standard terms that go into employment contracts. 
I’m particularly interested in what provisions there are with respect to termination of the contracts and 
severance. And I will ask those one at a time, if that’s confusing. I want to know how many employment 
contracts the government has entered into. As the minister will note, by way of background, the 
opposition has suspected that you are overutilizing employment contracts as distinct from OC 
appointments, a practical effect of which is to give a very considerable degree 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2271 

of security to positions which used to be high-risk positions. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Any employment contract of course, as you well know, is not subject to the 
public service commission. I think if you want to ask those particular questions, as the Leader of the 
Opposition did, in the Department of Finance. I indicated that there were two in the Department of 
Finance. I undertook to get the amounts of that to the Leader of the Opposition. There are obviously 
contracts within the government. There were contracts within the previous government. I don’t think 
you would deny that. The likes of Roy Atkinson, etc., had contracts on an ongoing basis with the 
previous government. That has existed in lots of governments. And I’m sure it exists in the province of 
Manitoba, in that particular government. That doesn’t fall under the purview of the public service 
commission. I don’t think it’s a proper question for us to try to answer. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, we’re not suggesting that there’s anything wrong with an employment 
contract per se; it has a place in government. What we’re suggesting is that the number shave increased 
very dramatically under this administration. Do I take it that you have no central record of how many 
employment contracts you have? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I can only speak from the public service commission, which is what is on 
trial here tonight. And I can say that the public service commission is not involved in it at all, and I 
would not be able to answer that question in my capacity. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would be interested in knowing — and if you have the figures I’d 
appreciate them now; if you can’t, I would accept them in writing later on — I’d be interested in 
knowing the total amount of severance which has been paid by this government to employees who have 
been permanently laid off, which is a current euphemism that’s making the rounds —permanent layoff 
— or who have been severed, or OCs terminated. I’d be interested in knowing the total amount of 
severance which has been paid. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — As I understand it, and I will undertake to get the numbers to you, if you like 
— they’re all by way of OC, which you could check through the orders in council — I understand the 
total is $1.3 million. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’d also appreciate, when you’re getting that, knowing the total number of 
people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yeah, check the OCs. I’d be delighted to do that if you people 
gave us any amount of staff. We haven’t got anywhere near enough staff to do that sort of research. We 
don’t have the vast resources . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You guys had a good deal and you people 
had more than we had. You had 17; we have eight. And that affects the amount of research capacity 
which you have very dramatically. If you’d treat us with anywhere near the generosity the opposition in 
Alberta is treated, we could do that kind of research ourselves. 
 
I want to know (and you may have to supply this in writing) how many positions are vacant in the 
government at this point in time. Of the positions which are vacant I would like to know . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Chairman, it is absolutely impossible to carry on estimates with this ruckus that is 
going on right now. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Could we have order, please, so that we could continue with the public service 
commission, so we can wrap it up. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would like to know, Mr. Minister, if I might, how many of those 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2272 

positions are frozen in the sense that a determination has been made not to fill them for an indefinite 
period of time. So, how many positions are vacant? Of those, how many positions are frozen? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’ll deal with the first two points you raised. Number one, with regard to the 
staff component from research, you are, of course, covered by exactly the same rules that were put into 
place while you folks were in government, not us, with regard to the number of research staff you had. 
And I can assure you that I was on that side as well with the amount of research that one has. Sure, we 
had 17 members. I suppose if you had one member over there, you’d want it the same as if you had 34. 
That’s hardly valid. 
 
I won’t go any further than that, other than to say that you haven’t been treated in any way different and 
the matter came up and was approved unanimously in the board of internal economy, which I’m sure 
your members would have passed on. 
 
And with regard to vacant positions in the government today, there’s 1,625. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I also asked how many of those had been frozen in the sense that there was 
no intention to fill them for an indefinite period of time. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 500. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to deal with a topical issue, Mr. Minister. It has to do with the 
employee disability plan, the dispute between the public service commission and the SGEU. I don’t 
think I have to outline for the benefit of the minister the nature of the problem. I have gathered some 
information on it. I would like to know where the public service commission is heading with this 
problem. The SGEU say, as they have said publicly, that they had a commitment, first of all, that it 
would be done on January 1 and that was moved back to January 20. A scant few days before January 
20 of this year, the commitment became inoperative, and the deductions have not been made. The SGEU 
alleged they have been put in a difficult position, because some of their members discontinued other 
plans on the assumption that this would be going forward. I would be interested in knowing what the 
public service commission is doing to resolve what I think is a legitimate complaint from SGEU. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — If we look at the thing, I think you say the dispute is between SGEU and the 
public service commission. Our interpretation is that the dispute is between the SGEU and some of the 
members of the SGEU. In fact, a number of members of the SGEU have sued the union, as the labour 
standards officers brought the action against the union, challenging the legality of the deductions. 
Clearly, we stand as a third party, or an outside party, with regard to that. They’ve had ample 
opportunity as a third party, or an outside party, with regard to that. They’ve had ample opportunity to 
bring the action either before the labour relations board or before the arbitration board. Now they are, in 
the most recent letter to me, requesting that we change the regulations. The legal advice we have is that 
to change the regulations per their request would be an illegal act by us in the public service 
commission. I don’t think we would want to do that. I’m sure you wouldn’t want to suggest that we do 
that. 
 
What we are doing to try to expedite the thing is simply sending out authorization cards to members of 
the union, so they can sign the card and then that can be deducted from them. We can maybe get around 
it that way. That’s what we’ve tried to do. 
 
Surely you wouldn’t suggest that we do something that somebody is challenging as 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2273 

illegal. And surely if SGEU are serious with regard to this, they could bring the matter to the appropriate 
authorities and have the matter resolved. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — But, Mr. Minister, the SGEU has agreed to indemnify the public service 
commission for any liability. Surely that ought to be adequate. The principle is important, and I want to 
spend a moment on it, no more. I’ll get to it in a moment. But the sums are not earth-shattering. Surely 
the undertaking of SGEU to indemnify the public service commission ought to be sufficient. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The argument against that is that no one can indemnify someone against 
breaking the law. That’s like saying that I will indemnify you if you rob a bank. It doesn’t work that 
way. It’s legal or it’s not legal. There is a form by which you can determine the legality of it. It’s not 
simply the court system., it’s also the labour relations board or an arbitration board here. And that’s the 
proper form to go in, and not simply to try to pull us into it. Once that decision, and it should be easy; 
you as a lawyer should know that, it should be easy to appear before that, determine the case (the 
legality or the illegality of it), and certainly once that is determined we will act according to that 
judgement, or that ruling of that particular tribunal. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — It seems to me, Mr. Minister, and I’m going to leave it with this, that there is 
a substantive issue here. It is the right of the unions to determine via their own constitution the level of 
dues. It strikes me that in some ways this is in fact a due. It’s a union due. It is earmarked for a specific 
purpose, but it strikes me that this is a union due. 
 
It has heretofore been axiomatic that a union, in accordance with its own constitution, could determine 
what the dues are. If the public service commission takes the position that, on the strength of a 
complaint, they aren’t going to allow the dues to be increased, then you are going to emasculate, over a 
period of time, trade unions. And surely there is a substantive issue here of the right of unions to 
determine, in accordance with their constitution, the dues which they are charging their members. And it 
has been suggested by the SGEU that you are in fact thwarting that right, and I would appreciate your 
comment on it. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay, as I understand it, on the advice that we have with regard to and why, 
and you said it’s a fundamental question, and surely if it’s that fundamental a question, it should have a 
resolve of a tribunal. But the understanding and the challenges, I understand, from the members is that 
the deductions are not in accordance with the constitution of the SGEU and it hasn’t been before their 
convention and that’s apparently the legal argument. Until such time as it comes before their convention 
there’s no legality to it. So that’s the argument that you’re talking about; it becomes an internal thing 
and I think you can see, as an internal problem, where it puts the public service commission. As I say, if 
it’s so fundamental as the member opposite seems to indicate, then surely it could be resolved quite 
quickly at one of those tribunals and clearly that’s what tribunals are there for. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — The minister is assuming that it’s the sort of issue which can be arbitrated as 
distinct from litigated. If it can be arbitrated, it can be done with some dispatch; if it’s got to be litigated, 
which was the assumption I was operating on, that is going to be a time-consuming process. It will be 
some years before the thing quits bouncing around in the various appellate courts. 
 
I want to ask you a question, Mr. Minister, about your affirmative action program. I 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2274 

would appreciate a status report on them. How many women have you succeeded in moving into senior 
positions, how many natives has your affirmative action program succeeded with, and how many 
disabled people have you succeeded with? I would appreciate a status report on this. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — You had two questions there. The first question as to how, what remedies 
they could seek, the advice that I have is, number one, they could go to the arbitration board through the 
grievance process, they could litigate it in the courts, they could take it to the labour relations board, or 
they could send out authorizations — the member authorizing the union to do that. The only option that 
we can do in that particular regard is to send the authorizations out, get the authorizations, then we’re 
protected and then we can make those deductions. And that’s the process that we’re trying. 
 
With regard to that other information, if you could bear with us, or do you want me to send the material 
over to you when it’s recovered? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — It would be satisfactory if you sent it over. I say this not particularly as a 
criticism of the current administration, because I remember the frustrations of being in office: I 
remember being minister of culture and youth, the member from — I don’t know the name of the 
Saskatoon riding — I remember being a minister, and I remember announcing that it was policy that we 
were going to hire some native people. I remember eight months later having two people in the 
Department of Culture and Youth, both of which were working in my office, and that was the extent of 
my success. 
 
I know it is a difficult problem and I know the difficulties in moving natives into senior positions in the 
government. I say this not as a criticism, but I urge the government, and I urge the minister in charge of 
the public service commission, to make every effort to see that this program succeeds; every effort to see 
that women are represented in senior positions in government in a more equitable fashion than they are, 
and every . . . I’m not sure what the minister is saying — if he’s saying he’s got two people in senior 
positions, I’m will regard that as a stunning success . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s a political 
success. That’s not the affirmative action program. The affirmative action program is intended to get 
women into administrative positions in government, of which there are not nearly enough. 
 
I will readily admit that the problem didn’t begin with your administration. It began long before the 
former administrations. It’s been an ongoing problem. It has been an ongoing problem with women; it 
has been an ongoing problem with natives, and I would urge the government to redouble its efforts to try 
and make these programs succeed. 
 
I gathered from a discussion with the human rights commission before the public accounts committee 
that the success with respect to the disabled is almost non-existent. Virtually nothing has been 
accomplished with respect to the disabled. I urge the government again to redouble your efforts to assist 
these people in attaining some positions in government. 
 
It is simply a tragedy that in a government which hires 20,000 people, there isn’t anything a man in a 
wheel chair can do. That is just something not believable. I know it’s the mentality of the public service, 
and it’s only going to come to an end if the political arm of the government makes a decision that 
they’re going to bring it to an end and if 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2275 

you’ve got the steel in your backbone to make it happen. It takes that. It takes the will and it takes a 
good deal of determination. So I urge you to continue, and I would be prepared to accept the status 
report in writing. I would be very appreciative to have it. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I can give you a rough answer, if you would like, with regard to the natives 
and the handicapped that have been hired to date. The women — the question would have to be directed 
to the Minister of Labour as those statistics are kept over there and not through the public service 
commission, but we can arrange to try to get those for you. 
 
In 1981-1982 year, there were 2,684 people hired by the government. Of those, 160 fitted into the class 
of natives and handicapped. In the year April to February, which is not quite a full year, there has been 
less than half that number of people hired — 1,056 have been hired through government of which 70 
have been natives or handicapped; 60 of those were native; 10 of those were disabled people. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I admit, Mr. Minister, that’s progress. I’m not satisfied with that and I 
would be surprised if the minister opposite were satisfied with that degree of progress either. It’s an 
ongoing problem. I urge the government to make every effort to see that the program succeeds to a 
degree it hasn’t. I’m glad to see we’ve got virtually unanimous agreement from the front benches, from 
the members that sit opposite. 
 
I would appreciate, Mr. Minister, receiving the names of the members of the public service commission. 
I gather the members of the public service commission were chanted, were they not? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — In response to that question: Roland Muir, Isabelle Butters, Harold 
Hoffman. Bill Fyles is a new member on, replacing one Roland Crowe who had requested that he be 
removed from that position as he was not interested in doing the job and had not attended the meetings. 
Bill Fyles is a former . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, okay. That’s the only change that was made. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would like, Mr. Minister, a list of the positions transferred to the 
unclassified division or excluded from the operation of the act, pursuant to section 46 of The Public 
Service Act. I have heard rumours (but no evidence of this) but I have heard rumours that the numbers 
transferred have increased quite dramatically over the last year, and I would be delighted to be told that 
this rumour is unfounded. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — As of March 31, 1982 — that’s when you were in office — there were 627 
positions OC classification. As of January 31, 1983, when we were in office, there was 586 positions 
classified OC. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I think that’s virtually it, Mr. Minister. I want to thank you and your 
staff for your courteous and co-operative attention to the questions we’ve put to you during your 
estimates. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I wonder, with leave of the House, if I might ask for some information in 
writing. I’ve asked for it in other departments. With respect to subvote 7 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2276 

and subvote 3 of vote 33, the public service commission — in all of the other subvotes you in fact have 
modest increases over what we had budgeted in March. In subvote 3 and subvote 7 — and that’s training 
and staff development, which is subvote 3 and communications which is subvote 7 — you have 
budgeted less than what we budgeted in March, the only two subvotes you have. If you could supply me 
in writing with an explanation as to how the decreases in spending were achieved, I would appreciate it. 
And I well appreciate, Mr. Chairman, that I do this with leave of the House. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The information I can give to you is some of that is vacant positions that 
were recognized into the budget. The other I will undertake to get to you and send over to you, if that’s 
fine. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 33 
 

Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 26 
 

Item 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, I have with me the acting deputy minister, Mr. Dick Bailey, 
on my right. On his right is Jim Paul, acting manager of the administration branch. Directly behind me is 
Gerry Stinson, director of municipal services. And behind Mr. Bailey is Marcel L’Heureux, director of 
the economic development branch. 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I want to begin my line of 
questioning with regard to the dismantling of DNS. Basically, I would like to have your comments on: 
what was the consultation process used by your department to determine the need to dismantle DNS in 
such a rapid, immediate format that you have initiated over the past several months? I wonder if the 
minister may want to respond to that. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, if I caught it right the hon. member asked what the 
consultation process was. Is that right? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s right. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2277 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Okay. I know the hon. member for Cumberland has asked this question a 
couple of times in various forms, and here in question period before, regarding the consultation process 
and asking why we didn’t have a major consultation with the people in the North about the way in which 
the department would be administered, the way in which government services or government programs 
would be delivered in northern Saskatchewan. And my response at that time was the same as it is 
tonight. It hasn’t changed. We didn’t see the need for consultation on how those services would be 
provided to people in there any more than in 1972 or . . . I’m not sure of the date there, but about 1972 
the former administration did not carry out major consultation processes before the establishment of 
DNS. The former administration decided that that would be the establishment of this one 
all-encompassing department would be the way in which they would deliver services to northern 
Saskatchewan. And we can get into the pros and cons of some things that happened there and some 
things that didn’t happen. But, you know, it’s not my intention to do that now. 
 
But it was our belief when we came into power . . . I believe if you’re honest with yourself in your heart 
of hearts you’ll know that it was a very necessary thing. And if you’re also honest with the House, you’ll 
say that many people in your riding are also saying that we did it in a good way, in a very clean way, in 
a solid way — that we broke it down and realigned the department with the rest of the province. And I 
think that the people that live in northern Saskatchewan, from what I’ve seen, have been very pleased 
with the good results. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to respond further to the minister’s comment. And I for one 
would certainly like to agree with you, Mr. Minister, that the people in my constituency and people in 
general throughout the northern administration district would sympathize with the way that you handled 
the dismantling process of the department in such an expedient way, in such a way that it didn’t entail 
the consultation process with the majority of local government with the majority of various interest 
groups. And I mentioned a few — the Northern Contractors Association, the Saskatchewan Trappers 
Association and Northern Outfitters Association, the Northern Lights School Division, the LCAs, the 
LACs, the trade corporated centre and there’s dozens more of various organizations and particularly 
people at the local level. 
 
You mentioned the issue of how this department, how government set up this single agency concept 
back in ’71-72 and the lack of consultation in those days. But I just want to explain to the minister that 
in those days I just started to be involved in community issues and developments with respect to local 
government. I just left the trapline in those days and I was very nil, nil in political awareness. But I do 
recall there were some consultations held with northern residents. I recall distinctly two major large 
northern area meetings to discuss the single agency concept, to discuss the various departments: social, 
cultural, education, local government, concepts of the single agency (the concept was introduced) and 
what it would be responsible for. Those meetings were held in La Ronge in ’71-72. 
 
And also there was discussion about the establishment of a northern municipal council. It wasn’t 
referred to as a northern municipal council in those days, but, however, that process was also discussed 
— the possibility of electing a northern municipal council that would be responsible for local 
government throughout the northern administration district. 
 
And in respect to economic development, there was discussion in those days about 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2278 

how the communities would have input by way of local loans committees, district loans committees, etc. 
So, I have to differ with you. There was some consultation, probably not satisfactory, but certainly the 
dismantling of DNS in recent months has, from my opinion (and I want to be very sincere and honest 
with you, Mr. Minister), from my discussions with the people in my constituency, and people in general 
throughout the northern administration district, have raised serious concern about the process. There is a 
lot to be desired as far as I can conclude from my discussions and my findings throughout the northern 
administration district about the dismantling process. 
 
Getting back to the line of questioning with regard to the dismantling process, what is your government 
doing to ensure that decisions concerning northern people’s lives are not going to revert back to the 
pre-1970s or the ’60s, etc.; that the communities in the North, the people living in the northern 
administration district, will have some input, some understanding, of what type of government programs 
and policies — of how those programs and policies will be applicable to them — what type of input and 
information they can acquire through your department? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — As the hon. member will know, and you did readily admit, the way in which 
the process was carried on, as far as the people in the various communities are concerned (and I’ve 
heard this from many of them) they’ve seen little change. They didn’t have the daily consultation, or 
weekly consultation, with senior officials within the department in any case. The people that delivered 
programs before, by and large, are still delivering programs under a different auspices, under the 
auspices of the Department of Health, or education, or continuing ed, or whatever other receiving 
departments. 
 
You ask what we will do as a government to ensure that there isn’t a return to, you say, pre-1972 days, 
and I understand that. I want to assure the hon. member and people in northern Saskatchewan that I very 
much understand. The hon. member will also know that I have lived for a major portion of my life very 
close to that situation. I understand what you’re talking about when you say pre-1972, where perhaps the 
conservation officer and the RCMP officer were everything in that community from doctor to taxi driver 
to whatever you want to name. So okay, I understand the situation. 
 
Certainly we’ve come a long way past that in the last number of years. I will say to you that as far as our 
government is concerned what I’ve been responsible for, what my colleagues have been responsible for, 
is to make sure that there is a liaison there. That’s the role that has been well stated of the new DNS, or 
the new department, that’s much smaller, much more manageable, I might add, in a liaison role with 
other ministers. 
 
You readily admitted and mentioned to my colleague, the Minister of Education, about his trip into the 
North, that about his feeling for the young people he has jurisdiction over. The Minister of Health has 
been into the North on several occasions — excellent feeling for the people of the North and for the 
needs and the health care in the North, as he has for the need of health care throughout the province. We 
feel from an administrative and a delivery of programs point of view health services can best be 
delivered by the Department of Health, education by the Department of Education, and so on. We just 
feel that the single agency concept didn’t work. And I think, as mentioned before, your colleagues will 
search into their heart of hearts and realize that it didn’t work for them either. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Minister, are you then satisfied with the process to date in terms of the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2279 

dismantling of DNS? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I had to ask if I should be satisfied. No, I very much am satisfied with the 
process of realignment to date. I suppose you take the hypothetical situation and say, if we could come 
in and decide that this is the way that the department should operate ideally, it would be in a realigned 
situation. Okay, we believe that. 
 
As the hon. member will know, there were plans within the former administration for what was then 
called decanting. I never could understand that word. I never did understand why that word was used. 
Decanting to me is something you do with wine, and you leave the dregs behind. Well, that’s not 
something we wanted to do with the people in the North or with the North. But we call it realignment, 
we call it with the rest of the province, so that people in northern Saskatchewan can feel very much a 
part of Saskatchewan, as they are very much a part of Saskatchewan and the future of this province. 
 
So, when you ask if I’m satisfied, certainly if we could have carried out the process to date, what has 
been accomplished to date — and I call it an accomplishment — if we could have carried it out and kept 
it — oh, how can I best say it? — kept it as clean as we did and as decisive as we did in a shorter period 
of time, well, I would have been happier. Okay, anything that you do, you must say that it could be done 
better. And maybe we could have done it better; maybe we could have speeded the process up even 
more. I’m not sure if the hon. member would agree with that, but in any case it’s been going on 
relatively well, and to this point we’re relatively satisfied. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, with regard to the dismantling process, just one more question, briefly. 
Were the trappers’ associations, fishermen’s federated co-ops, and the two native organizations, FSI and 
AMNSIS, consulted in that process? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — As I mentioned to you before, they weren’t consulted in the process of 
whether or not there would be realignment. That was a decision that we took as a government in the way 
in which we would administer government programs. So we took that decision, and we did not consult 
with the various organizations regarding realignment as such. There was consultation with the various 
groups as it related to the various activities they’re involved in. You mentioned the fishermen’s co-op; 
you mentioned the trappers’ association. There have been consultations with all of the groups, I think, 
that you mentioned, as well as many others — local government groups when it dealt with their 
particular area of concern. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, I want to ask the minister in respect to economic development and job 
creation for northern Saskatchewan, what is your overall policy approach to economic development for 
the North? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, right at the present time we are now developing a list of what 
we would call feasible projects — and I want to emphasize the word “feasible” — viable projects that 
we think would work well in northern Saskatchewan to address a problem that I know the hon. member 
is extremely concerned about, and I think he is assured that I’m extremely concerned about too, and 
that’s unemployment in northern Saskatchewan. Unemployment throughout the province and the 
country, we know, is certainly a problem, but we know it’s an extreme problem in the North. As I have 
pointed out to you on several occasions before, it’s not a new problem in northern Saskatchewan. It’s an 
extreme problem; it’s one we must address. And my colleague, the Minister of Continuing Education, 
mentioned some of the things today about 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2280 

training and the things that are needed. 
 
So we’re developing a list of feasible projects in consultation with other departments, with the receiving 
departments. As a matter of fact, Mr. Bailey is meeting tomorrow with, I believe, about four deputies 
from other departments to go through these projects and to just come forward with a proposal. I would 
say to you that until now, as we just mentioned in our earlier discussion here a few moments ago, major 
attention in the department has been toward the realignment process. We’re now ready to get under way 
with economic development -—we know it is important. 
 
I say feasible and viable projects, I’m talking about. I know the hon. member may say, “Well now, it’s 
been eight or nine months, and where are your projects?” and so on. But, I would say to you, in the 
single agency department that was there, with an economic development branch that was quite large, in 
fact very large, there were projects there that made me shake my head when I go into northern 
Saskatchewan or my knowledge of it. Things like — and I’ll just throw it out — market garden 
proposals and all of the kinds of things that people were coming forward with, that I don’t think feasible 
or viable. I say that’s not the kind of thing we are looking at. We’re looking at something more 
long-term than that. 
 
And, I just want to say that it took 10 or 12 years to come up with some big zingers like market gardens, 
and that’s not the way we want to do it. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in terms of the economic development initiative that 
your government is planning to take, when do you expect to begin to produce results? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Okay, the question you have as far as results are concerned, I hope that as 
soon as possible once we can get under way. But, the specific question you asked is basically associated 
with the ’83-’84 budget year, because the consultation that I just referred to earlier between the deputies 
of the various departments has to do with projects that could be, perhaps, included in the 1983-84 budget 
year, and certainly there will be announcements about each of them in due course. That’s the best I can 
say to you at this point. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, in terms of economic development loans and grants, 
could you advise the legislature how many loans and grants have been processed and approved since 
May 8th, for what reasons, and to whom? 
 
Mr. Chairman, before the minister responds, could I mention “to whom”. I didn’t clarify that question. I 
must apologize to the House. By whom, I meant various organizations, such as the wild rice harvesters 
association, Saskatchewan Trappers Association, and Northern Contractors Association, the various 
local community development corporations that exist, etc. There are associations and co-operatives. 
 
If you can provide this information, that would be tremendous. In terms of the individuals who did 
receive loans and grants, I’m sure that the individuals concerned would want to keep that quite 
confidential. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Okay, in terms of loans since ’82-83, we had 10 of the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2281 

commercial variety — all, I believe, that were there as commitments, that were there from the former 
administration, and I’ll be honest about that. As you know we put a freeze on the economic development 
loan and grant fund for a very good reason, and I could get into that if you like. Ten commercial, 1 
trapping, 44 fishing, 4 grants, fish transportation subsidies — one of them Fresh Water Fish Marketing 
Corporation, ongoing — to these ones for Co-op conference, $200. That’s it. Okay? 
 
MR. YEW: — A specific question. With respect to the Saskatchewan Trappers Association, I 
understand they received only 25,000 out of an average government support previously somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of 121,000 or 127,000 for various programs that the association ministers with 
respect to their zones — respective programs to trappers. Could you advise the legislature just how 
much has been approved to date to the trappers association and if in fact, you will approve any more 
moneys to the association? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, there has been nothing approved from the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan to the trappers association, but I would say to you: ask those questions under Department 
of Tourism and Renewable Resources where we deal with the fur industry and the trappers association, 
and we’ll be pleased to answer them there. 
 
MR. YEW: — I wonder if the minister might provide us with the names, titles and salaries of all the 
minister'’ personal staff since May 8, 1982. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I can provide you with a list. Would that be satisfactory? 
 
MR. YEW: — I should maybe go on further there. In terms of that information, could you also provide 
the names and positions of all persons fired from DNS since May 8, 1982 and also the amount of 
severance pay paid to each individual? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Yes, we can provide that. It may take some time. I don’t think it would take 
very long at all, really. 
 
MR. YEW: — I wonder if you could provide us also, with regards to your expenses, entertainment 
expenses incurred by the minister, and as well, by each one of his personal staff members since May 8th. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I can provide that with no difficulty. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you might provide us with the status report for two of your 
former, or should I say your present, staff members, namely Butch McDougall and Edward Charlette. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Neither are employed by the department. 
 
MR. YEW: — With respect to the NEED program, Mr. Minister. How much of the moneys available to 
the province was actually allotted to the northern administration district? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Just a point of clarification. Was the hon. member referring to the program, 
the job creation program, ours that was dovetailed in with the federal NEED program? Okay. I indicated 
very clearly to the local governments in the North, during one of the several meetings I’ve had with 
them, while we were discussing the development of Bill 61, that they should individually get their 
applications in to the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2282 

government, and I know that a number of them did. I think they did, anyway. I stand to be corrected, but 
I believe that a number of them did. 
 
I don’t have that information for you — exactly how much was allotted to the northern administration 
district. As you will know, I think it’s safe to say the line that once divided us is diminishing in 
importance in some areas, and that would be one of them. I would say that I believe my colleague, the 
Minister of Social Services, and I’m not sure who else is involved in that, I think maybe the Minister of 
Finance, but that information could probably be available; I don’t have it with me tonight though. 
 
MR. YEW: — I’m led to believe, then, that there is no specific amount allotted for the northern 
administration district. There’s no specified amount allotted. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, what I would say to you is that there was an emphasis in the program 
as was announced by my colleagues; there was an emphasis for areas of high unemployment. And as we 
said earlier, certainly the northern administration district, or northern Saskatchewan in general, just 
communities of northern Saskatchewan and people in northern Saskatchewan, would certainly qualify 
there, and I’m sure that they did, if the applications were in. I think, as I said before, that there were a 
number in. 
 
MR. YEW: — With respect to capital projects, Mr. Minister, do you plan to proceed with the special 
trades training and vocational centre for La Ronge? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I believe you asked my colleague that question in continuing education, not 
many hours ago, on this same day. I would say that whatever he told you would be what’s going to 
happen there. Okay? 
 
MR. YEW: — I recall a question that was put forth here a few days ago, with respect to industry and 
commerce -—the minister responsible, Mr. Rousseau. I distinctly recall that question was placed before 
the minister regarding economic development in northern Saskatchewan, and the minister responded by 
saying that this was under your portfolio. 
 
Am I to understand then, that anything pertaining to education has been transferred and is officially now 
the responsibility of education? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — That’s right. It is transferred to education — continuing education. When you 
say economic development, although you may well have just only been referring to the particular 
incident with the Minister of Industry and Commerce, but we don’t . . . When I talk about economic 
development in northern Saskatchewan, we’re not really talking about the capital projects that may or 
may not be built by government. 
 
MR. YEW: — With respect to health services, Mr. Minister, my question with respect to health would 
be the proposed hospital for La Ronge and I’m not sure now whether the process of realignment has 
been completed. If it has, then I pass that question. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — It would be best asked to my colleague, the Minister of Health. His estimates 
are still coming, I understand. 
 
MR. YEW: — With respect to reforestation, Mr. Minister, would that again have been realigned? 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2283 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Under DTRR once again, although that would be one of the types of things 
that would be talked about between the deputies of the two departments in terms of economic 
development, something with some kind of future to it. But basically it’s a tourism, renewable resources 
issue under the forestry branch. 
 
MR. YEW: — With respect to economic development again, I just want to go back to that area once 
more, Mr. Minister, and it falls back to the realignment question again. I have a copy of a letter which 
you sent to all your department staff dated July 16, 1982. And in that memo, you emphasized . . . Well, 
I’ll quote from the letter: 
 

The government recognizes the valuable service that the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
(DNS) has provided to Northerners over the past 10 years. However, the government also recognizes 
the need for greater emphasis on local self-government and the development of economic 
self-sufficiency. It is therefore the policy of this government to develop and support responsible and 
effective municipal self-government in the North and to develop, in consultation with the residents of 
northern Saskatchewan, a long-term comprehensive economic strategy that will result in making 
residents of northern Saskatchewan self-sufficient partners in the economic, political and social 
development of Saskatchewan. 

 
Now my question with respect to your letter is this: what again is the process that you have used or will 
use to try to establish this goal of economic self-sufficiency and self-government? What process are you 
proposing? If in fact there is a plan, would you give us some details of what that plan is? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Okay. I think I answered that question . . . By and large, I answered that 
question a little earlier when I said that we are looking at projects and the feasibility and viability of 
them right now. That certainly is the first step toward anything that could be honestly termed long-term. 
But we believe that that’s the right step and it’s a positive step, and certainly there will be opportunities 
for people in northern Saskatchewan in economic development to have their input into what’s going on, 
as there has been an opportunity for them to have a considerable amount of input into the development 
of local government, which, as I mentioned in the letter that you read, is also a major priority of our new 
leaner department. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, I’m just not sure what your colleagues are overly enthusiastic about. I 
just couldn’t get the drift of the answer, really, honestly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ll get back to 
the question. Maybe this time I’ll be able tog et the answer straight. 
 
How do you link this process with local, say, in put, local consultation with various local governments, 
various special community interest organizations? How do you foresee that process linking community 
input, involvement, participation, consultation, the whole works? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, the role that we see ourselves taking on in the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan is one of a catalyst or a liaison between various other government departments. 
But more importantly in this new administration — certainly the departments can come forward with 
their ideas and proposals and so on — but more importantly we want to also be a catalyst with potential 
entrepreneurs, with 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2284 

entrepreneurs that are now in northern Saskatchewan or potential entrepreneurs. With the private sector, 
we believe that there’s a good deal that can be done in terms of economic development type of projects 
in northern Saskatchewan as well as in southern Saskatchewan. And you’ve heard my colleague, the 
Minister of Industry and Commerce, reiterate that on many occasions. I certainly concur with that idea, 
as we all do on this side of the House. 
 
I believe that there’s room (and I know the former administration made some attempts in this area) in 
northern Saskatchewan for some type of a banking outlet, especially on the west side, but I know there 
are other communities on the east side of the North as well. But especially on the west side where, I 
think, about two-thirds of the population live and there’s no banking outlet, we think that’s an important 
step toward any kind of economic development. The banking service is important for people who would 
aspire to be entrepreneurs or get into the private business world. 
 
Now, in terms of the consultation process or the input that communities would have, certainly any 
project that is proposed in any part of Saskatchewan for a community — community X; it doesn’t matter 
which community it is — certainly there is input from that community and its council and so on. That 
certainly would be the same process in northern Saskatchewan. I don’t think it would be reasonable to 
suggest that if there’s a project going into . . . I’ll use the analogy again between a southern community 
of Davidson, for example, I don’t think there’s consultation that goes on with SUMA, because 
consultation will go on with the particular council of Davidson, and that’s the kind of consultation that I 
would envisage for northern Saskatchewan. If there’s a project suggested for Buffalo Narrows or La 
Loche or Green Lake, well, then certainly the consultation would go with the local elected people and 
the business people of Buffalo Narrows, La Loche or Green Lake, whichever community the project was 
being proposed in. 
 
MR. YEW: — Now, Mr. Minister, I note then that you have no formal process other than to meet with 
the various committees or local governments in the communities with regard to specific policy matters 
or program matters, and that you haven’t got a general overall approach as was the case with the former 
administration. 
 
I then want to refer back to the meetings that we had in ’71 and ’72 to discuss the single agency concept. 
Again, the Northerners had once — the first time in history probably — an opportunity to meet with the 
Premier of Saskatchewan and seven cabinet ministers on June 4, 1974, at which time there were 
meetings held to discuss northern development in general, DNS and many of its programs and policies. 
This was the first time that the North was able to bring forth their concerns, their issues and their 
problems directly to the cabinet members of various portfolios, and bring them as well directly to the 
Premier of the province in those days. 
 
This was a very interesting meeting. I wasn’t affiliated in any way with any political party, and I was 
always a critic of DNS myself. And I, with my colleague, Mr. Thompson, the member for Athabasca, 
were members of the northern municipal council in those days. I distinctly recall that we met with 34 
local governments, two native organizations and various special interest groups to discuss programs and 
policies with respect to DNS. That was the first time in history for people in northern Saskatchewan to 
have the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2285 

opportunity to present their views, to present their issues and concerns. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you, your colleagues, your government, envisages, sees itself, as following the 
same trend, or maybe initiating a meeting of this sort in the future, say in the short-term future, to 
discuss northern development in general. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — The particular type of meeting the member mentions . . . You know, I 
haven’t got any plans and we haven’t discussed anything in particular just like that. I will say, however, 
I’ve been suggesting, and I believe that suggestion has been heeded by several of my colleagues, as I’ve 
mentioned, that they do sincerely want to get into the northern part of the province and sincerely want to 
understand northern issues and northern people. The best way, as you and I both know, to do that is to 
spend some time there and get a feet-on-the-ground feel for the area and for the people. Certainly I 
would suggest that to anyone, but I would even go further than that., I have said that to many of our 
colleagues here, and you will see, and northern people will see, over the term of this administration, 
more elected people within the legislature of their province around in the various communities of 
northern Saskatchewan than they have ever seen before. 
 
What they’ve seen before, basically, has been one agency and a minister who’s responsible for all of 
those, and the situation that developed where the agency was much removed from the government — 
basically from the total government — and had their minister. What I would like to see better done, I 
think for the benefit of northern people in terms of laws that are made here in this Chamber on their 
behalf, is more people with some first-hand experience there. As I said, you’ll see more of our people in 
northern Saskatchewan over the term of our term in office. 
 
MR. YEW: — I have, Mr. Minister, just one more question, and we can probably give some of my 
colleagues an opportunity to raise some concerns with respect to the department. 
 
The final question I have is in regard to The Planning and Development Act. This has been a growing 
concern with the Saskatchewan Association of Local governments. Have you in fact set up a planning 
commission or initiated some discussion with the Saskatchewan Association of Northern Local 
Governments, to establish a district planning commission? Prior to, or following that, has your 
department allotted any funds to the association, or to local governments in general in northern 
Saskatchewan, to assist the local government structures that we have up there to study, to review, and to 
give you recommendations with respect to their aspirations with regards to The Planning and 
Development Act? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, The Planning and Development Act that 
you refer to . . . I guess after the letters went out sometime just before Christmas, there was some 
concern, and I believe undue concern, among northern local governments, because this letter came out at 
about the same time as the process of consultation was going on regarding Bill 61, or the Northern 
Municipalities Act as we better know it. 
 
The Planning and Development Act won’t have any jurisdiction in northern Saskatchewan until after the 
implementation of that act. First of all the act must be passed in this House, and following that, 
boundaries, corporate boundaries for the various communities (I believe they number 36) must be 
negotiated and put into place in a legal way. Once that is done then The Planning and Development Act 
and the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2286 

district boundaries commission, those kinds of things could well be put. But there’s no reason to talk 
about districts until corporate boundaries of communities are set up. And I know the hon. member 
understands that process well, having worked on Options 80 and so on. 
 
I think if there is concern and I think . . . I don’t recall it exactly now, but I believe I have responded to a 
couple of the concerns from some of the communities and associations. And I would say that if there is a 
concern there now, it may be from a lack of understanding of the process here and I think it’s undue. 
 
As for your specific question about money in this budget for a study of the commission and its 
possibilities — in this 82-83 budget there isn’t, but there will be no need for it in this year either. We 
could talk about it in estimates in another year’s budget. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I won’t take too much time and I think 
we can maybe get this department finished. And if we’ve agreed to stop the clock, then we can. I know 
your officials from tourism have been here for a couple of days, and we’ll get that one through as soon 
as possible. 
 
I want to make a few comments about the Department of Northern Saskatchewan and I want to say that I 
think that when you dismantled the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, I think you’ve done it too 
hastily. I always said and I always did agree with you that we had to dismantle DNS and put them back 
into the old line departments, but we had to make darn sure that we replaced the programs that were in 
Northern Saskatchewan with other programs before we completely dismantled it. And the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan, as it stands right now, has done a tremendously poor job in the dismantling of 
DNS. 
 
By your own admission, that of your executive assistant . . . I have a letter on file from your special 
assistant, Mr. Roy, who wrote to you a couple of months ago indicating that the situation was serious in 
northern Saskatchewan. The unemployment rate was serious. And I tell you, and I tell this House 
tonight, we are looking at 80, 85 and 90 per cent unemployment in just about every town in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We are back to the pre-1971 era, and I tell you it’s a serious situation. Not only is it a serious situation in 
northern Saskatchewan, but go to Meadow Lake and talk to the business community in Meadow Lake, 
and you see the problems that they’re having. And they tell me, “What’s going on up north? The people 
are not coming down here and spending their money anymore,” and they’re not. And they are not for a 
reason — because they’re not working. And you just take a look at the welfare roll that we have in 
northern Saskatchewan, and the amount of people that are on social assistance because their stamps have 
run out. And when you are dealing with 80 to 90 per cent unemployment in northern communities, let 
me tell you it’s a serious situation. 
 
I look forward to the budget, as you have indicated that you are going to be announcing worth-while 
projects in the new budget for northern Saskatchewan. I do get a little edgy, though, when you talk about 
feasible and worth-while projects. If they are not feasible or they’re not viable, then you don’t want to 
have any projects in northern Saskatchewan. And I say to the minister of northern Saskatchewan that 
northern Saskatchewan is a unique place. We realized that when we set up the department in 1971. And 
you have to subsidize projects. There’s no way that you can develop northern Saskatchewan without 
subsidizing the projects that we have up there, or that you are going to announce, and I sincerely look 
forward to it and I hope that you’re 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2287 

sincere about these projects that are going to give people jobs and not set them back. 
 
The people of northern Saskatchewan have come a long way in the last 12 years and I sincerely hope 
that they will continue that progress and I really look forward to your programs. 
 
I’m not asking a question, I’m just making some comments. I want to say that I’m very pleased that you 
have retained the economic development branch within DNS and the municipal branch. I think these are 
two key departments that you had to retain and you have to utilize them to the best of your ability as a 
minister and your department officials. The economic development branch, as I have said, we have to 
pump a lot of money in there to projects, and the municipal branch I think is really key, because if you 
take a look at the municipal governments that we had in northern Saskatchewan in 1971 and in that era, 
and how the local governments have advanced over the years to where they are today, I think that there 
is now way that we can let them slip backwards. It’s vitally important that they retain what they have 
and continue to progress, continue to go ahead the way they have in the last six, seven years. 
 
With that, Mr. Minister, if you would like to respond to some of the comments I have made, I am 
through with my comments and we will push your department through as quickly as possible. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Okay, I’ll be very brief in a response. The member for Athabasca (I know 
we’re neighbours in a constituency sort of way), and I believe that he knows that I am serious when I 
say that I understand the serious unemployment situation in northern Saskatchewan. I don’t think there’s 
any question about that and I know you’ll concede that to me. 
 
When you say that you’ll be looking forward to these viable projects, I would say to you, as you know 
well, my door has been open in fact to your former colleague, the former member for Cumberland who 
has been to see me a couple of times since. In fact he told me that I’ve been much more accessible to 
him as a Minister of Northern Saskatchewan than what he was able to find in the past when he was 
sitting here in these benches. You know, I take that as a great compliment because I had great respect for 
that man. 
 
I would say to you, and a challenge to you and to your colleague that’s sitting directly behind you, if you 
have viable projects that you can think about, our doors are open for them as well. If things were being 
stonewalled before, then certainly let’s hear about them. Our doors are open from that point of view as 
well from elected members, and you have a responsibility there as MLAs and certainly let’s talk about 
it. 
 
When you say, “Don’t set the people back. Don’t set the people back,” I believe your comment was in 
terms of back onto the unemployment rolls and so on. Well, certainly that’s true. If people are on 
unemployment rolls, it’s certainly a setback, and I can say that, not from my own experience of being 
unemployed, but having lived in a household as a kid where the breadwinner was unemployed. I know 
what it’s all about. Okay. But you say, “Don’t set them back.” 
 
I’ll say that the people of northern Saskatchewan, and I’ve said this as a critic of the department before, 
were set back a good deal when the Department of Northern Saskatchewan came in with some of this 
planned sort of economy that they developed inside those boundaries — very artificial kind of a 
boundary — and said to people, 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2288 

“Here, we are now going to pay you — give you subsidies and grants and so on to do things that you’ve 
done all your life,” and in a viable way in many cases. I don’t think the hon. member will disagree with 
me on some of those things — some of the ongoing commercial enterprises and some that you yourself 
have been involved in. So when you start to pay people to do some of the things that their families have 
done traditionally for an awfully long time, you start to pay people to cut wood for their own 
grandmother, because they’re just not doing it. Otherwise then I say that you’re setting people back by 
embedding into them a very dangerous philosophy, and that’s that socialist idea that Big Brother 
government is going to look after you. That’s bad stuff and we can lay it off at that, but I’d say that’s not 
the way to go. And that’s not the way we’re going in the department, and hopefully with help from the 
challenge that I put out to you and to people in northern Saskatchewan, many of whom I respect greatly, 
we can get down and talk about viability and feasibility of projects. Hopefully we can get some 
economic development that will mean some jobs for people, off the unemployment rolls, some pride, 
some dignity, all of the things that go with jobs. And let’s work at it together and go on. Thank you very 
much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before we close off and go to item by item on the budget for 
the department, DNS, I wonder if the minister would provide us with information as to what type of 
personnel will be kept to continue the programs and program development in northern Saskatchewan. 
How many of those personnel will be retained in northern Saskatchewan and also what level or 
classification of personnel will remain in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Just a quick answer. The department that now exists is about 10 per cent of 
what was DNS as you folks knew it, about 150 people remaining in this catalyst and liaison role. Senior 
staff, and I say senior staff within the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, the new department, will 
continue to be located in northern Saskatchewan for the foreseeable future in any case. 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I wonder if you may be able to provide me 
with written information on this. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — What do you mean by written information? Was the answer that I just gave 
you satisfactory in terms of the type of answer that you wanted? 
 
MR. YEW: — It wasn’t specific. You mentioned 10 per cent of the total work force at present may be 
retained, somewhere in the neighbourhood of 150. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — When I say 10 per cent, I say 10 per cent of what was DNS. There were in 
the order of something like 1300 employees at peak times in the DNS, the old DNS. Okay? The DNS 
that we now have after the realignment process that we talked about earlier is down to a staff of 
approximately 150 people. Okay? And like I say, that’s a round number, and I don’t know if you need 
any more than that. 
 
MR. YEW: — Yes. I suppose, Mr. Chairman, we can go on with estimates seeing as how the money 
that is being discussed here has already been appropriated and that portion of the fiscal budget is 
actually yesterday’s budget. I suppose we can go ahead. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just have a couple of questions to the minister. He seems to have indicated that he 
has an economic policy being developed in the North, based on the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2289 

concept of feasible and viable economic projects. I believe those were his words: “I’d like certainly to 
put into place a concept based on projects which are feasible and viable.” The minister surely can outline 
in a general way some of the areas in which he feels that feasible and viable projects will be developing 
in the North. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, I guess very briefly I could outline the ideas behind it. Certainly I think 
they’re ideas that thinking people would say are reasonable and feasible and viable, and whatever other 
words you’d like to use. First of all, the projects would provide jobs, as has been suggested by your 
colleagues, those members who have been in northern Saskatchewan and understand it. It would provide 
jobs. 
 
What I call feasible and viable projects that would not be a drain on the provincial treasury or on the 
taxpayers of the province. It would not be a continual drain. Certainly I believe that tax dollars can be 
used s an engine to start something; certainly that’s fine I think that’s the case of our economic 
development policies of our administration — but certainly not for a continual and ongoing drain on the 
provincial treasury. Projects that would make their own way, projects that would develop products that 
could be of some use into the markets of Saskatchewan and potentially outside of Saskatchewan, but 
certainly even just within northern Saskatchewan itself; projects that would develop products that could 
be of some use, and I say we can talk about processing some of those things that might relate to the 
traditional industries. All of those things relate to jobs that are ongoing, and I think that the hon. member 
will not disagree that that’s the way to go. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I really think that the minister is mouthing off some terminology in using feasible 
and viable economic projects. This is indeed what he is saying is the concept for the development of the 
North. When you ask him what are the projects that he is looking at that will be feasible and viable, he is 
unable to come forward with any concrete examples in respect to mining; they said in respect to 
trapping, you said in respect to timber, forestry. 
 
What are the areas which you are going to be addressing? Certainly government has been dealing with 
this problem of employment in the North, and they have discussed it with northerners, as my colleague 
has indicated. All of a sudden you come forward, and you’re going to have a great new economic 
program with feasible and viable projects, and you’re unable to indicate to those members . . . They 
indicate that unemployment is increasing rapidly since you put a freeze on all of the current economic 
development that was going on; you come forward with no explanation. All you say is that you’re going 
to provide jobs. You’re not going to continue to put extra money of government into stimulating it. You 
tell us right here what you have in mind in respect to the North which in fact will produce the feasible 
and viable projects that you’re mouthing off. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I’ll tell you right here, first of all, that I believe and I think that everyone in 
the House tonight, in the galleries and everywhere else, would believe that you don’t know, Mr. 
Member, as much about northern Saskatchewan as your two colleagues over there, who understand 
northern Saskatchewan and the problems that are ongoing and the way in which they carried it out. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — You asked me a question. That’s right. And you’ll get . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2290 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order! Let the minister answer. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — As I indicated in a reasonable way to the reasonable member, when he was 
asking me the similar question before, those feasible and viable projects must be something that will 
create jobs and so on. You call that rhetoric, you can call that whatever you like, but I’ll tell you that in 
eight months or nine months at least we’re into the process of developing those kinds of projects and 
putting them together in consultation with private sector people — something that you never did in 10 
years in there — to come up with feasible and viable projects. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — And if you want to call developing a market garden a feasible and viable 
project where someone won’t go and plant spuds without a $30,000 grant, then you don’t know much 
about northern Saskatchewan or gardening or anything else. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I see. I see, Mr. Chairman, that I have struck a sensitive nerve with the minister. He 
has been unable to put before this House any program other than phraseology. Let us . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Let us have the minister name some of the feasible and viable projects which he is 
looking at. Go ahead. Stand up here and name any 10 projects; if you could name five I’d be satisfied 
and I would sit down. Name the five basic projects that you are looking at that are feasible and viable. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I know that you spent a month in Prince Albert-Duck Lake just recently and 
you call that northern Saskatchewan, but it’s not. Now, Prince Albert-Duck Lake is not as far into 
northern Saskatchewan as you might think. I think you’ve been there. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Oh, forget it. Come on, get on and answer the question. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Never mind. You’ll get your answer. You said something about being 
sensitive to northern Saskatchewan. You’re not very sensitive to it, but I’ll say to you this, and I will 
give you nothing more tonight in terms of the specifics of projects, because as I indicated they’re just in 
the development process. You go into northern Saskatchewan in the next few months and study about 
northern Saskatchewan a little bit so that you know something of it, Mr. Member, and come back into 
the ‘83-84 estimates and we will have a good discussion about the projects. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, I am very pleased that the minister has indicated . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, please! Order, order! Order! . . . (inaudible) . . . We’d like to carry on this 
business so that we could proceed with the estimates and get it over with. The member for Quill Lakes 
has a question. Let’s hear it. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I am very pleased. Mr. Chairman, that as a result of this discussion the minister 
indicated that he has no projects . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If he doesn’t want to name specific 
projects then I ask him to name the particular areas. Is it in the 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2291 

mining area? Is it in the forestry area? Where is the emphasis of these viable and feasible projects? Can 
you name the specific areas? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — We could get into more specifics, certainly, if we wanted to, if I wanted to 
tell the member. His colleagues asked me a while ago, about the communities nearest the projects or 
communities most affected by any project that might go ahead, if they could have some input. I 
indicated that, yes, they would have; if it’s in that particular community’s area they would have some 
input. This member now, who has some more seniority involved, and has been at the cabinet table of the 
former administration, with their dictatorial ways, is coming out now and saying that they want us to be 
like they were and say: “Here are the projects, and this is what’s going to have to happen and you’ll 
have no input.” 
 
Well, I’ll tell you that you come into ’83-84 estimates and we’ll talk about projects. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We’ll be here. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I’m sure you will. You may not be. 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would . . . earlier in 
the discussion . . . 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I must remind the members that we’d like to get on with the estimates. The 
questions are there. We’d like to finish this and wrap it up. Would you at least let the member ask the 
question? 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier in the process of the expenditures, the estimate 
questioning, you indicated to us that officials of your department, along with possibly four or five other 
related branches, were putting together an economic self-sufficiency type program. You’re looking at 
viable, feasible projects that would be applicable for this economic package. Am I to understand 
correctly? 
 
You indicated that your department is preparing a program of some economic development initiative 
that you are prepared to undertake for northern Saskatchewan. Now in the process you are studying 
feasible and viable possibilities. 
 
Once you have determined what those viabilities are, what those possible programs will be, would you 
be kind enough to provide us with information regarding this economic self-sufficiency program or 
economic development initiative that your government is prepared to undertake in the near future? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — As I indicated to you before, and the reasonable way that you asked the 
question, I indicated to you that, yes, when these decisions are made certainly things are open. We’ll be 
discussing with the local government of the community that’s most affected by any particular project. 
Certainly it’ll be open at that time, and sure it’ll be open to hon. members opposite as it is to the general 
public. 
 
MR. YEW: — Just one final comment, then we can follow on with item-by-item discussions on the 
DNS estimates. 
 
I just want to confirm and agree with my colleagues, the member for Athabasca and the member for 
Quill Lakes, that the people in the communities throughout the northern administration district, as I’ve 
know it, and quite sincerely put that area of this 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2292 

province does not want to be classified as the “Parti Quebecois of Canada,” if you understand what I 
mean. I use that phrase because I’ve heard it so much through the national news, when Levesque was 
getting to be quite a controversial figure in those days. 
 
We don’t classify ourselves as special people, higher than any other ethnic group, so to speak. But in 
terms of our vast area, the area, if I may repeat myself, is isolated. It’s an area that is disadvantaged. 
There’s a lot of despair out there in some of the communities. I am almost certain that the majority of 
those communities face anywhere from 85 per cent unemployment, anywhere from 85 to 95 per cent 
unemployment. Ever since the realignment of DNS, particularly, a lot of capital projects have been put 
on hold, a lot of programs have been uncertain. A lot of projects have been uncertain. And that is a very 
serious issue. 
 
Like I said before, we don’t want to class ourselves as a special organization or a special group of 
people, but the people in the northern administration district deserve the same amount of services and 
programs and emphasis and priority as the rest of this province. 
 
The farmers in the South have been getting a lot of emphasis and a lot of priority and I don’t argue with 
that. The crow has been receiving a lot of attention lately, but what about the fishermen in northern 
Saskatchewan? The fishermen in northern Saskatchewan haven’t received any priority that I know of, 
and certainly we are justified — it is legitimate when we raise questions with respect to DNS, with 
respect to the high unemployment, with respect to the inadequacies, with regard to services and 
programs applicable for the people of northern Saskatchewan. So, sincerely from the bottom of my 
heart, I hope to heck we can try to work together and try to bring about the type of developments that are 
direly needed for the people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Just very short. I certainly concur with what the member says and I believe 
his concerns to be sincere. Certainly I know he believes mine to be sincere. And the challenge I laid out 
to him and to the member for Athabasca still sits there, and to any other members opposite who would 
care to learn something of northern Saskatchewan certainly it will be excellent. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I have a comment. I don’t need the minister to start evaluating my knowledge of the 
North. And I don’t intend to accept it and I intend to be able to ask questions any time I feel like it. 
 
The previous government had established the economic development foundation of Saskatchewan. It 
was under the Department of Industry and Commerce. Can the minister indicate what is the status of that 
foundation? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — It’s not in the budget this year. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — When I talked to the Minister of Industry and Commerce, he indicated it was not in 
his budget but the foundation had in fact been transferred under the jurisdiction of the Department of 
Northern Saskatchewan. Can I ask the minister a simple question? Have you in fact scrapped the idea 
that was developed in consultation with the Northerners — a policy of economic development through 
the foundation? Has that in fact been scrapped by this government? 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2293 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — I can say that the concept was developed in your government in terms of the 
way that you felt that you would address the extreme problem that the other members have been talking 
about here tonight, and that I’ve been attempting to address. We don’t see it as the way to go. That 
foundation that was to be developed within industry and commerce had, as you will recall, a southern 
and a northern foundation. And it’s not the way that we have decided to go with economic development 
either in the South or the North. And that’s where it sits in this year’s budget. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 22 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 23 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Mr. Chairman, one short comment here. Mr. Minister, in your reply to my 
comments, you stated that when you were talking about viable projects you indicated that you didn’t 
want to get involved in any projects that involved (and you specifically were speaking about) getting 
wood for their grandmothers. I think that you know what kind of a program that is in northern 
Saskatchewan. It’s service to the elderly, the same as you have with meals on wheels and whatever you 
have in southern Saskatchewan. And I think it’s unfair to say that when you bring in projects, that 
they’re getting wood for their grandmothers because in northern Saskatchewan there are a lot of people, 
and especially senior citizens, elderly people, who still live in their older homes where they do use 
wood, and that’s the programs that are being used to get wood for the grandmothers that you referred to. 
 
I just wanted to make that comment. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, as the hon. member well knows, when I said that about somebody 
being paid to go and get wood for his own grandmother when he wasn’t really doing . . . it’s no 
reflection on the idea or the concept of home care and of that kind of thing that’s needed by elderly 
people in any place in our society today. Certainly, there is some need for some of that, but it all comes 
down to a matter of degree and I know that you know inside your own community where you live or in 
many of the other communities in the North that under those programs there are people receiving 
payment for doing things that they really should be doing for their own grandmother in any case. And, 
you know, it’s all a matter of degree — there’s a difference between scratching your back and ripping 
the hide right off it and I’d say that giving that money to some of those folks for some of the things that 
they do is very nebulous, to say the least. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — I didn’t want to get into any more discussions. I indicated that we would be 
through with this department and go onto tourism but I guess we’ve cancelled the tourism for the night. 
Just to go back to that, I most certainly would not agree. I most certainly would not agree that there are 
individuals in northern Saskatchewan who are getting paid to go out and cut wood and bring it home for 
their grandmothers and it shouldn’t be done. I most certainly don’t agree with that, and I don’t think that 
you do. Maybe there is some abuse of programs in northern Saskatchewan, but let me tell you that there 
is also abuse of programs in southern Saskatchewan, many of them. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2294 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You call them pork barrels. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Yes, pork barrels or the hog marketing commission — these farmers that get all 
these grants for raising pigs. I just want to make that very clear, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I most 
certainly don’t agree that programs for getting wood for the grandmothers and grandfathers in northern 
Saskatchewan is being abused. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Okay, well, we’ve agreed to disagree on that particular thing and what you 
say about abuse, and I guess that’s really what I was referring to, any program that is good can be 
abused, and some are, and certainly I was referring to examples of abuse that I know of and I know that 
you know of some cases as well. You did make reference to abuse of programs in southern 
Saskatchewan. Many of my colleagues have been addressing that throughout the departments that we 
inherited and we are trying to clean some of that up as well, and that goes on and we’ll clean up abuse 
throughout government, the Department of Northern Saskatchewan included. 
 
Item 23 agreed. 
 
Items 24 to 28 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Capital Expenditure — Vote 27 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
MR. YEW: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister might give us some indication as to whether 
or not the department will proceed with an extension of sewer and water services (if that is the right 
category) for both Sandy Bay and Cumberland House. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — The specific question you asked is if we will proceed with Sandy Bay and 
Cumberland House? Certainly both those questions would relate to a budget that will be announced by 
my colleague, but I can say to you that both are under consideration for that next budget. 
 
MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to express my appreciation to the minister for having 
confirmed the need for such, because I just want to reaffirm, with the minister in the legislature, that the 
water in Cumberland House is just as bad as it is in Esterhazy. It is just as bad as Esterhazy. The 
plumbing fixtures and everything that has to do with running water in Cumberland House is deteriorated 
really badly. And that’s been going for a couple of years or so. 
 
And the system in Sandy Bay, as the minister may realize, is just inadequate. That system was built for a 
population of somewhere around 450 to 500 people. And today there is an estimated population of 
1,000, so I commend the minister for putting priority in those two areas. 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2295 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, as I said, we are aware of both problems and I would say water issues 
as they relate to those communities and many others across the province. And, you will know and you 
will have heard that we are addressing that as a major problem in various areas of Saskatchewan. My 
colleagues, several of them, have been travelling the province and getting an extremely good reception 
in all areas of the province regarding that. And your particular concerns will also be forwarded to them 
on behalf of those communities. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to ask the minister whether he made representation to the cabinet 
committee looking into water supplies and water resources in the province, whether he made 
representation to have the committee go to the North and have a hearing to represent those people in the 
North. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — The LCA for the community of Cumberland House was here in the 
Legislative Building and gave us their water concerns in a very concise way. The Sandy Bay concern 
has been raised with the committee and I know that the hon. member for Cumberland raised it here one 
day in this House in question period, regarding the problem with my colleague, the minister of health. 
That problem in Sandy Bay — the committee is very much aware of it; and the Cumberland House 
question — we of the government are very much aware of it. The LCA made a good presentation, and 
we are aware of both problems. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Items 5 and 6 agreed to. 
 
Item 7 
 
MR. YEW: — With respect to the educational facilities section, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you might 
indicate to the House if you will proceed with the joint school facility at Wollaston Lake. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — I might ask the member just to clarify that. Maybe would you just clarify that 
again; I’m just not sure what you are referring to. Are you referring to a proposal for a school jointly 
funded by the federal Department of Indian Affairs and the Department of Education provincially? 
 
MR. YEW: — That’s right. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, I could best say, and you’ll notice in the estimate book, with the small 
asterisk, that section, acquisition and construction of educational facilities, is under the jurisdiction of 
education. That would be best asked in education, but certainly I know his estimates are gone. If you 
have a particular concern you want me to raise with him, you’ve raised it here and I’ll draw it to his 
attention. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Vote 27 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 



 
March 1, 1983 

 
2296 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Vote 69 — Statutory 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Provincial Development Expenditure 
 

Nil vote. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (No. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 26 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF NORTHERN SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 28 
 
Items 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:48 p.m. 


