






















































Hansard: April 18, 1983


(1078) 1079 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 18, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, 14 grade 8 students, situated in the Speaker’s gallery, from St. Oliver School in Radville. 
They are accompanied here today by Robert Biss and Eddie Martin. I will be meeting with them in the 
rotunda area after question period, and then downstairs for drinks. I hope they find their visit here 
informational, perhaps educational; and I hope all members will join with me in wishing them a pleasant 
stay and a safe journey back home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Air Canada Silver Broom 
 
Hon. Mr. Folk: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I would ask all members of the legislature at this time to join with 
me in congratulating the Ed Werenich team from Toronto, which had the pleasure of representing 
Canada this past week, in winning the Air Canada Silver Broom world curling championship of Canada. 
They did a tremendous job this week. And certainly I’d be remiss if I did not also congratulate the 
Regina organizing committee for doing another tremendous job in focusing a lot of attention on our 
province, and indeed the city of Regina, on their tremendous job this week. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the member who has just taken his seat in 
congratulating the Ed Werenich rink and Laurie Artiss and his committee who did such an outstanding 
job in organizing the Silver Broom here in Regina. It is a credit to Regina, a credit to Saskatchewan; and 
it is a very considerable accomplishment for Canada to have won the Silver Broom again. One of the 
interesting and I think appropriate parts of the ceremonies were the recognition of previous Silver Broom 
winners, and in that regard I’m pleased to note that one of them sits in this House, and we are pleased to 
acknowledge his prowess at curling. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Pepin Plan 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture, I 
direct my question to the Minister of Finance. It concerns a document, apparently an internal document, 
of the Government of Canada which has come to 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1080 

hand outlining relationships between the Government of Canada and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
And I will quote briefly from it under the heading ‘Issues in Federal-Provincial Relations and Economic 
Development.’ And I quote: 
 

At present the basis for agreement and co-operation under explicit instructions from the Premier 
outweighs any negative aspects of federal-provincial relations. The provincial interest in the free 
market and deregulation has led Saskatchewan to become far more neutral in the Crow debate, 
although local politics may preclude any overt provincial support for the federal initiative. 

 
My question to the minister is this: is this analysis the reason why the government has taken so few steps 
to counteract what is very clearly a vigorous federal campaign in support of the so-called Pepin initiative 
at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan are not going to be judged 
by some federal bureaucrat in Ottawa as to what our strategy is going to be. The Minister of Agriculture 
is today in Ottawa furthering the lobby against the Pepin proposal, and I hope, and we all hope, that he 
will bring back some results either now or in the very near future with regards to that. I don’t think the 
Government of Canada . . .  And if they do in their view, believe that we are happy with the Crow rate, 
have certainly got something else to come for. 
 
We will be mounting a further attack later this week, early part of next week, primarily in the province of 
Quebec, again because we believe in the province of Quebec is where the weakness of the federal move 
on Crow is going to be found. We can spend a lot of time, like the previous government, telling the folks 
in Saskatchewan about what we don’t like about the proposed Crow change. The reality of the federal 
government, if we’re going to bend them and going to move them, we’re going to have to do it with the 
political strength in the province of Quebec and in the province of Ontario. And that’s where we’re 
going to stop the Pepin proposal. We are confident that we are going to do something to in fact change 
or stop that proposal altogether. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The minister will be aware of the propaganda barrage advanced by the federal 
government, and my supplementary to him is this: what steps does your government propose to take to 
provide information - written information - to the citizens of Canada to counteract this federal 
propaganda barrage which has been launched on the nation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, this. I recall a previous government, another 
government that tried that same tactic, and it brought them very little results. I suggest to the members 
opposite, it’s going to bring very little results to the federal government in Ottawa as well. You will see 
later this week or early next week an attack by the Government of Saskatchewan to try to counteract that 
type of what I believe is propaganda, as well as the member opposite. And I believe that we will mount 
just as good and more effective campaign than the national government will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary to the minister. He will be aware that this campaign is already 
under way. Would he advise the House just what your campaign is going to be which will counteract 
this? Or are you asking us to accept your platitudinous statements that something will be done but you 
won’t tell us what? 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1081 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve indicated and advised the House that announcements will be 
made very shortly with regards to campaigns, including advertising campaigns. It will be forthcoming 
very shortly. If the members opposite are not prepared to simply wait and see what that particular 
strategy is as it unfolds, then that’s too bad. That’s what’s in fact going to happen. When we say we’re 
going to do something in this government, we in fact do it, and the record speaks for itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — New question to the Minister of Finance. Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that the 
federal government has attempted to mislead the people of the province, and indeed the total population 
of Canada, and the minister is telling us that they have this great plan to fight for the Crow rate, could 
you explain to us why the transportation agency which used to be the mechanism used to fight for the 
Crow rate was disbanded in your recent budget? And if you’re saying that the money is in Agriculture, 
why is it that $10 million less is being spent in Agriculture this year as opposed to last year? Where is 
this thrust to defend the Crow rate when you’re disbanding the very group who used to defend it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite that you are not going to defend 
the Crow rate by having some small department in a particularly budgetary item within a budget. That’s 
not how you’re going to defend the Crow rate. The way we’re going to deal with the Crow rate, Mr. 
Speaker, and the way we have today . . .  The same thing that the lobby that’s being mounted by the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool . . .  And they recognize, and they recognize that the soft underbelly of the 
federal government is in the province of Quebec, and that’s what you have to get at. That’s where you’re 
going to have to move them, because they too are concerned with these proposed changes that’s going to 
hurt the province of Quebec. And if those farmers in the province of Quebec start getting their backs up, 
Mr. Speaker, then the federal government takes notice, because that’s going to cost them a lot of seats. 
And this is a political battle, Mr. Speaker, and you have to fight that political battle not only in the 
province of Saskatchewan, but also in Ottawa and in the province of Quebec. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the minister. I appreciate your opinion as to 
where the weak spot in the federal government is, but by the leaked document that we have, the weak 
link in the chain, by the federal government’s own admission, is the provincial government in 
Saskatchewan - the fact that they are saying that the Saskatchewan government is weak on the Crow. 
Will you explain to me what you are doing to disprove that theory of the federal government that you, in 
fact, and your government are weak on the Crow, and for that reason they are moving on getting rid of 
the Crow rate now because of your recent lack of initiative in defending the Crow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, this weak link theory that the members opposite talk about, it seems to me 
I’ve heard that story before. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that the Government of Saskatchewan has no 
weak link on the Crow, with regard to the province of Saskatchewan. I believe, even this morning or 
Saturday, the Toronto Globe and Mail indicating that there, in fact, it was the province of Saskatchewan 
that were leading any kind of attack by any government. 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1082 

Our Minister of Agriculture, Mr. Berntson, was the person leading the pack on the attack with regard to 
the Crow change, and I can assure you today that the Minister of Agriculture is in Ottawa trying to lobby 
and deal with those people down there the best way we see possible to in fact stop that Pepin proposal. 
We intend to move as it unfolds, Mr. Speaker, and I believe the efforts of Mr. Berntson is going to prove 
results - prove results for the people of Saskatchewan and for the farm community in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I can say to members opposite, we in fact don’t believe, but we could mount up 
another great road show like the former minister of agriculture where he tracked around the entire 
province, spent hundreds of thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker, through such forms, not as budgetary 
items, but things like the grain car corporation, that type of thing, and it was for nothing else, Mr. 
Speaker, than the political advantage of that particular government and it showed results on April 26th, 
and their political judgement on that was wrong as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — May I address a question to the Minister of Finance? Would he advise the 
House when we might expect to receive a statement of the government’s intentions with respect to the 
policies it proposes to launch in defence of the Crow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I take it that question relates to any advertising that we might look at doing in 
central Canada. Certainly that will be coming very shortly. With regard to exact time, simply stay with 
us and I’m sure you’ll like what you see. 
 

PCS Accounting Policy Changes 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a question to the minister in charge of the potash 
corporation, the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, last week you filed the annual report for the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. I think that it’s evident in that report that the profits of 1981 were $141 
million, and that was reduced to a paltry surplus of $607,000. I want also to indicate to the minister that 
that does not, in my view, reflect a true picture of the profit-and-loss picture of the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan, because during the course of the year, on page 24 of the report, you have a change in the 
accounting policies whereby you have changed the depreciation and have in fact decreased by $13 
million the depreciation that would have been attributed to the corporation had you not changed it. 
 
My question is: will you explain why you changed . . .  why the change in the depreciation policy in the 
last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I just can’t remember offhand the total reasons for the changing of 
accounting. It was brought to our board by the management group of the corporation and our board 
passed it. I just can’t remember the details; I’ll bring it back to you tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In note number two, on page 24, it has this comment: 
 

As a result of the change, depreciation and amortization expense has been decreased by $13 
million. 

 
In other words, what you have done is to decrease the amount of the depreciation. Obviously what you 
have done is therefore cook the books in order to increase the profits. Is that a fact? 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1083 

Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, for the last 11 months I have had no time whatsoever to be 
spending looking at ways to cook books, reduce profits, or anything else, of our crown corporations. 
Number one, we have no intention whatsoever of dismantling, doing away with the Potash Corporation 
of Saskatchewan. I’m hearing it in the press; I’m hearing it from you people across the road. 
 
All you need to do is look at the price per tonne of potash. If we had stayed or maintained the same price 
level of 1981, we would have made a $65 million profit this year. But the prices of the potash, 
world-wide, have gone down. We’re having to compete with the Russians who are hauling it up the 
Mississippi valley and taking whatever price they can get for their potash. We’re having to compete with 
that kind of thing. Until that demand or that supply-demand thing changes around, we’re not going to be 
improving the profit picture. Otherwise, the 607,000 was the best that we could possibly do this year, but 
we’re working on it to bring that back up again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to indicate to the minister that what you have done here is a very material 
change in the accounting policy. Why didn’t you have the previous year’s financial statement rewritten 
to incorporate this change, as is the common practice? Why didn’t you follow that procedure? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, we have followed the recommendations and the suggestions of the 
management people that were in PCS while you people were there also. It’s the same people that were 
there in that financial side of it, and it was recommendations that they made to us. Another reason that 
we had to reduce our profit was because there was $7 million worth of ore piled on the ground which has 
deteriorated to the fact that we’ve had to write off $4 million as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister in charge of the Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. My question is simple. It is this: if you had not changed your accounting 
policy, is it not true that your profit result would have been not a profit of some $600,000 but a lost of 
more than $12 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I understand it was a simple question. I’ll bring a simple answer 
back for him tomorrow. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the minister. Am I to take from the minister’s 
answer that he does not know of the changes made which would have an effect of more than $12 million 
on the profit of this company? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll bring the reasons back tomorrow. I recall the fact that we did 
approve it. I’ll bring you the exact details tomorrow. 
 

Use of Government Symbols in Constituency Newsletter 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier as minister in charge of the 
government’s visual identity program. Mr. Speaker and Mr. Premier, you will be aware that since the 
mid-1970s certain symbols have been used to identify all official government publications and they are 
registered trade marks of the Government of Saskatchewan and they are to be used for official purposes 
only. I have  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1084 

here a constituency newsletter issued by the Conservative MLA for Regina Wascana which contains 
advertisements for the Wascana constituency spring hoe-down and the like of that. Fair enough. But not 
so fair the fact that it has ‘Saskatchewan Education’ with the official symbol and ‘Saskatchewan’ using 
the official print, and the question I ask to the Premier is this: has the member for Wascana received the 
permission from the Government of Saskatchewan to use the official symbols in the course of his 
communications with his constituents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s the first I’m aware of that particular document. I’ll take 
notice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary. Mr. Speaker, the document I refer to, headed ‘Saskatchewan 
Education, Legislative Report,’ is one which advertises the Wascana constituency spring hoe-down on 
April 22nd and accordingly, that will allow the minister to ascertain what document is being referred to 
and no doubt the member for Wascana, the Minister of Education, can assist him in finding the 
appropriate document. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Do the members not have further questions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — My question is this: would the . . .  
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The member rose previously to ask a question, and made 
a statement, and did not ask a question. I’ll take a new question. 
 

Environmental Impact of Nipawin Hydro Project 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to raise my question with the Minister of Environment. 
Some months ago, Mr. Minister, you gave this Assembly your unqualified assurances that the residents 
of communities affected by the environmental impact of the Nipawin hydro project would be 
continuously involved in the monitoring of those environmental impacts. My question to you is this: 
have you met with the residents of those communities, such as Cumberland House and Sturgeon 
Landing? Have you involved those people directly in your environmental impact of that project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, in answer to that, first of all, the environmental impact assessment 
was done through Sask Power Corporation. I’m not aware of how far it’s processed, or where it is at 
right now, and in answer to the balance of the question, no, I have not personally contacted any of those 
communities that was mentioned. 
 
Mr. Yew: — If you are intending . . .  You have given your unqualified assurances that those 
communities would be involved, seeing as how they live downstream from that project. They are going 
to be directly affected from that project, and you gave this Assembly your assurances that they would be 
involved. Now my question to you, in terms of the environmental impact on those communities: will you 
see that those communities will be involved in terms of . . .  You suggested, at one time or another, that 
there would be an environmental advisory committee established in those areas. Will you give your 
unqualified assurances that they will in fact be involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I never once gave my assurance there’d be an advisory 
environmental committee set up at any time because I have not set up any new committees since the 
start, and I have never once promised that, so that is not  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1085 

a fair statement. Second of all, I will take a look to see what can be done, but in regards to promising it 
to be done, no, I won’t. I’ll take a look at it and see what I can do. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. On July 5th, 1982, Mr. Minister, I raised this question, and 
I’ll read the question that I raised in this Assembly with you: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Environment. In view of the fact that 
rivers, lakes and wildlife habitats will be affected by fluctuating waters as a result of the Nipawin 
hydro-electric project, particularly in areas such as Cumberland House and Sturgeon Landing, 
will the Minister of Labour, Minister of SPC and his colleagues (the Minister of Environment) 
give assurance that the environmental effects will be monitored closely with the communities 
affected? Will he give assurance to the Assembly that whatever ongoing environmental safety 
and protection measures are taken they will involve people living downstream, places like 
Cumberland House and Sturgeon Landing? 

 
And your unqualified assurance then was, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, ‘Yes.’ What have you done to 
date, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — First of all, as I said previously, I have not talked to those people at all. I didn’t say 
that I had talked to them. And secondly, I did not, at that time, as the question indicated it, say that I 
would set up an advisory committee. I have never considered that, even. But I will consider (as I said 
previously) to talk to those people if that is necessary. But I have not, to date, done it. I will talk to the 
department to see what should be done and what can be done in regards to that. 
 
I’m not quite aware of what impact that would have down there, in fact, if it may not be a plus impact, 
even. Because if I’m aware of some of that Cumberland delta, in fact, it right now has a shortage of 
water and with the build-up in the whole backwater it may in fact increase the amount of water in there. 
The biggest concern those people have up there is a weir being put in. It’s nothing to do with the 
Nipawin hydro dam. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. This project has gone on for some time, Mr. Minister. 
And no doubt that there will, in any major project such as this kind . . .  A major project such of this 
nature, will definitely have some impact, negative or positive. In this instance it could darned well be 
negative. Based on the wildlife habitat and the way of the people in the community has been, it will be a 
negative impact. 
 
Now you gave this House your unqualified assurance that those people living downstream from that 
project would be involved, would be participants in that project. What is your position today? Are you or 
aren’t you going to involve those communities? They are very little involved in terms of the 
environment, in terms of the employment prospects of that project. Now will you at least give those 
people the assurance that they will be involved in the environmental impact of that project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As I previously said, the environmental impact assessment has been done through 
Sask Power Corporation. I am not aware how much has been involved there. I did say I’d take notice to 
find out about that. I also told you that I would look into seeing how much or what should be done in 
regards to those communities. I’m not aware, particularly aware anyway, of how it would affect them. 
And one thing I would like to mention: that my door has been open, always open. I have a steady stream  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1086 

of people in my office. My door is open and never once have I had anything from those people to me in 
regards to that. And I’m sure if they had any concern they would voice it, and if they voice it, I’ll 
certainly look into it. I will look into it anyway, but if they voiced it, I would have looked into it sooner. 
 
In regards to that advisory committee again, I want to make it very clear I didn’t say that I would set up 
an advisory committee. 
 

Legislative Program of the Government 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Acting House Leader in the absence of the 
House Leader. It deals with the tradition in this legislature as well as in most legislatures where the 
legislative program of the government is brought in within the first 10 or 15 days of the session. My 
question to the minister is this: today, being day 21 of this legislative session, we find that there is no 
bills of any substance on the order paper. I think each and every one deals with name changes with the 
exception of a private member’s bill. My question to you is this: whether or not we can expect this week 
to have tabled in this Assembly a legislative program that would give the opposition an idea, as well as 
the public, of what your legislative program is for this session. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, later this day we will be introducing a bill, for example, the 
Department of Advanced Education and Manpower. Now, if that isn’t important to you folks, it is 
important to us, and it is important to the people of Saskatchewan. And the second one is a bill 
respecting Department of Economic Development and Trade. I know that’s not important to you, but it’s 
important to us. 
 
Now, I think what we will be doing, Mr. Speaker, is introducing the legislative program as we proceed 
and as we go on. That program will be introduced in a normal way. I’ve been in this House four or five 
years now, and very often many of the pieces of legislation, many of the pieces of legislation came near 
the session. We’re going to try to avoid that this year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 
 

Law Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on this occasion to announce to the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan that today, April the 18th, has been designated as Law Day throughout the province and 
across Canada. Sponsored by the Canadian Bar Association and endorsed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the federal government, Law Day is designed to help raise public awareness of our 
laws, and to help provide an opportunity to learn more about how laws affect us. It is also hoped that this 
day of legal education and information will show the value of living under a legal system that protects 
and enhances our individual and collective freedoms. 
 
Modern society is becoming increasingly complex as are our rules and regulations. In order to help keep 
pace with these rapid changes, a day has been set aside to offer assistance and education to the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Law Day has a special significance, because a year ago yesterday marks the first 
anniversary of the adoption of the Constitution Act of 1981. This Charter of  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1087 

Rights and Freedoms contained in the act enshrines our basic democratic, economic, legal, and equality 
rights. 
 
Activities organized by the Canadian Bar Association and the public legal education association include 
interviews and panel discussions on radio shows, publication of reports, booklets, displays, and public 
seminars. 
 
I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the public takes full advantage of this opportunity provided by the 
government and the legal profession. If it proves a success, Law Day will become a permanent event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 17 - An Act respecting the Department of Advanced Education and Manpower 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pleasure and fulfilment, that I move first 
reading of a bill respecting the Department of Advanced Education and Manpower, an extremely good 
bill, and with that Mr. Speaker, I introduce first reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 18 - An Act respecting the Department of Economic Development and Trade 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with further pleasure that I move first reading of a bill 
respecting the Department of Economic Development and Trade, another extremely good department, 
Mr. Speaker, and with that I move first reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 - An Act respecting Residential Care Facilities 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, bill no. 3 and point no. 3, first reading of a bill respecting 
residential care facilities, Mr. Speaker. Another, I think, important innovative move by this government, 
and with that, I move first reading. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 20 - An Act to amend The Department of Rural Affairs Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Finally, Mr. Speaker, for today I would like to move a bill amending The 
Department of Rural Affairs Act. Again, I think, a monumental new act and I think something that will 
be a helpful and a big plus for the people of Saskatchewan, and with that I move first reading of that bill. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

RULING BY MR. SPEAKER 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before orders of the day I would like to bring in a ruling on the request by the Minister 
of Finance. On Friday a point of privilege was raised by the Minister of Finance with regard to remarks 
made by the member for Shaunavon. I have checked the  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1088 

record of last Friday and find that no member who had the floor uttered remarks which were either 
unparliamentary or which constitute a breach of privilege. However, it is true that on that day and on 
nearly every sitting day of the current session members from both sides of the Assembly have been 
making loud remarks from their seats which are uncalled for and which do not contribute to the debate in 
any way. Remarks made by members not in debate have in the past not been judged to be 
unparliamentary and, in fact, are not heard by the Chair. The Chair has repeatedly called the House to 
order and has tried to curb the disruptive remarks made by members from their seats. Therefore, I will 
once again repeat my request for all members to crease such poor behaviour and to resist the temptation 
to enter debate from their seats but instead to enter debate by being recognized by the Chair. 
 

POINT OF PRIVILEGE 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of privilege. I have a copy of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix of 
Saturday, April 16th, wherein referring to the matter raised by the Minister of Finance, it is quoted by the 
Star-Phoenix: 
 

This prompted echoes from Shaunavon NDP MLA Dwain Lingenfelter of ‘A little bit of graft 
going on there.’ 

 
End of quote. Mr. Speaker, I raise that as a matter of privilege of this Assembly, ask Mr. Speaker to take 
a look at that, and perhaps give us a ruling based on the statement by the member. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — My ruling has been made. I really can’t comment on what the press writes. I have no 
control over the press, but rather I must rule on what is discussed and raised by this Assembly in session. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not Debatable) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I will be asking that we make, under motions for returns (not 
debatable), 1 through 21, debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

ENVIRONMENT 
 

Ordinary Expenditure - Vote 9 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my left here, I have Alan Carr, deputy minister of 
environment; on my right here, I have Hugo Maliepaard, director,  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1089 

environmental information and co-ordination and assessment; directly behind me I have Rick Knoll, 
director of administration. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems to me, judging from the budget presented by the 
Conservative government today, that protection of the environment is obviously seen as a non-essential 
government service by the Conservatives. In fact, this is a negative attack on programs for our future, a 
negative attack on policies which are supposed to show some responsible moral leadership. 
 
When I look at the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the Department of Environment, I see that it has 
been out more than $1 million this year. This is about 11 per cent, Deputy Speaker, an 11 per cent 
decrease. And I see that there are about 32 staff positions cut, about 19 per cent of the total staff for the 
department. Perhaps we shouldn’t be too surprised, we shouldn’t be too surprised, with the Conservative 
government’s attitude towards Environment. 
 
Most right-wing governments, such as the Conservatives, admit openly that they see laws to protect the 
environment as a nuisance which ought to be swept aside, which ought to be swept aside in the interest 
of business expansion and increased profitability. The Premier himself made his government’s approach 
to environmental protection quite clear at the Open for Business Conference last October. He told 
potential investors that this Conservative government should, and would, improve private sector access 
to the regulatory process. And he promised that the government would number one, find ways of 
reducing compliance costs. But perhaps nothing sums up this Conservative government’s approach to 
environmental protection, Deputy Speaker, as well as the following quote from the government ad. The 
ad last fall states - just prior to the Open for Business Conference - the ad asked a question: ‘Who should 
attend the Open for Business Conference?’ And this was the answer: ‘Risk-takers who can respond 
quickly to an unfettered government industrial strategy that affords maximum business opportunities 
with minimum intervention in taxation and regulatory matters.’ 
 
The message was clear, Deputy Speaker. This Conservative government planned to do as little as it 
could to get away with in the areas of environmental protection. 
 
The numbers in this budget confirms that. The land protection branch of the Environment, for an 
example, which among others, is responsible for the management of hazardous wastes, loses two staff 
positions in this budget, two staff positions. 
 
As for funding, the land protection branch gets an increase of about 3 per cent, less than half 
Saskatchewan’s inflation rate. 
 
The mines pollution control branch, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is the branch which monitors, inspects 
and licenses all mines and mills in this province, including the uranium and potash mines. But in this 
budget, the mines pollution control branch loses five staff positions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and sees its 
funding cut by more than 150,000. These are just two of the cuts which contribute to the loss of more 
than $1 million and 32 jobs in the Department of Environment. 
 
So you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is an issue here that has to be contended with and questioned 
and argued in this Assembly. I begin my questioning today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to the 
environmental impact on the Nipawin hydro project development. Just a while ago the minister 
responsible for this area, and I, were  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1090 

at odds with respect to an environmental advisory committee for this area. 
 
And I want to start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with my questioning again in that respective area because it is 
an important area. It is an area where people in the Cumberland House/Sturgeon Landing basin, people 
in that basin, in that respective area were involved in the traditional way of life. And not only in the 
traditional way of life, they have accommodated to begin being involved in another area such as tourism. 
They have began to become involved in the modern way of life and in a huge project such as the 
Nipawin hydro project development, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is an important area of concern for people 
living in that particular environment. 
 
And I see myself as an opposition critic for this particular aspect of this legislature. My responsibility 
now lays to the fact that I have to find out some information so that I and the constituents that I represent 
and the people that are directly affected with that project, know what this government’s position is with 
respect to the environmental effects of that particular area. 
 
And to begin my questioning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to know what the minister has, in terms 
of policy for his government, when he gave his unqualified assurances that people in that particular area 
would be involved. I would like to know, for starters, what he has in mind. The project has gone ahead 
and what has he placed in terms of environment protection for that respective area? What has he 
advocated to have people involved in that particular project? Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, while the hon. member was talking I was checking out to see about 
this Nipawin hydro dam. My understanding is that it was done with the previous government. An EIA 
was done in 1979. It was completed in approximately that year. There was a board of inquiry held. Most 
of those northern communities were invited, I understand, if not all. The only one that took part at all 
was Cumberland, and they were very, very reluctant to do so. Red Earth Indian Band may have taken 
some part in it. They weren’t sure. But it was completed in 1979 with public participation in it. There 
was a public inquiry held - a board of inquiry held - in regards to it. 
 
Everybody has had their opportunity to talk and look into it with the previous administration. Now, I 
don’t know, maybe they didn’t do a good job, Mr. Chairman. Maybe we should go back and take another 
look at it, but I would hope - it’s provincial and the people’s money that was spent - that they did do a 
good job, and I would have to think that they did do a pretty fair job of it or they wouldn’t have went 
ahead with it. And each of those communities had that opportunity to take part in it, so I don’t know 
what else that you can answer the member, other than we can monitor it from here on in. 
 
He touched on a few other things, as he went along, and I’d just like to mention them. He was saying, 
earlier in his opening remarks, that the Department of Environment, first of all, had made a lot of cuts 
and that they had cut back a great deal in the amount of money - a million dollars, I think he used, and 32 
positions. And he’s absolutely correct. I mean there’s no doubt about it. That’s exactly what we done. 
 
But let me tell you where we took that million dollars from, and where we took that 32 positions from. 
First of all, there were 25 vacant position - had been vacant for a long time. At the time that we were 
cutting those positions we were very sensitive not to cut the fieldman, the guy that was out to investigate 
a problem or to do an impact or whatever. But we cut the top administration - people that were on the 
top, people  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1091 

that were very high-paid people. We cut those positions out because we don’t need those 17 positions to 
run a very effective department. That isn’t doing anything to hurt the environment. In fact, we even went 
further than that. We brought out other positions in. We’re sending other positions out in the field where 
they can in fact monitor it much better. By doing that, we will save about one million dollars. Now $1 
million can be well spent and so something that is necessary within the province, whether it be 
something to do with water for the city of Regina and Moose Jaw, or whether it’s to do with sewer in 
Saskatoon, or even up into the Cumberland area and the delta. Maybe we have to do something up in 
that area. But money will be wisely spent, and it’s not necessary to say how many people you’ve got 
working for you, it’s how well they work and how well they perform, and how well they do their job. 
And that is a very key to the whole situation. 
 
And just one other thing: you mention that we haven’t done anything in the Department of Environment 
since we became a new government. We brought in potash emission controls. We brought in guide-lines 
for reclamation of all the gravel pits. We brought in guide-lines for mineral exploration which was very 
well received by the mining, because what we done, we set out the basic ground rules so they know what 
they’re working from. 
 
And just one other thing that maybe we were touching on it, where you’re talking about the cost of 
cutting out - I think you talked about five positions or something - and waste in environment, and waste 
in one of the departments here - I forget which one you mentioned here - mines and pollution control. 
This branch was set up originally just to deal with uranium mining, and then it branched out when they 
had the Uranium City problems to the clean-up of it, so there’s more people put into there. That Uranium 
City - the mining there is pretty well cleaned up. The rules and regulations and whatever is necessary to 
clean it up, are pretty well complete. So, therefore, we don’t need those five positions there right now. In 
fact, we’re going to take some of those positions that were done, and we’re moving them around to put 
them out in fields otherwise. Not necessarily them as per se, but the positions will be done in that 
direction. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to thank the minister for trying to explain to me the number 
of environmental safeguards that the present government has taken to ensure against adverse 
environmental effects on our province. But I have to reiterate my line of questioning because I wasn’t 
questioning one specific area in terms of environmental impacts, adverse environmental impacts, and 
that is one area that has to my knowledge created a lot of public awareness at present. The minister will 
know that there are thousands and thousands of people entering our province to gain employment 
opportunity at this particular site. And the minister will know that people living downstream from this 
Nipawin hydro project are direly concerned. They’re direly concerned because people in those respective 
areas have accumulated their livelihood, their income through the traditional way of life, and also they 
are advocating some new modern knowledge into ways that they can make their environment work for 
them. 
 
They’ve got tourism in mind. There are people in this community that are involved in tourism. And in 
terms of tourism, you naturally fall back to the natural way of life because you want to retain that 
environment the way it was so that it attracts people from outside. In that sense, Mr. Minister, there still 
are a vast number of people that are still concerned about the natural habitat of that environment. 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1092 

I’m not trying to downgrade the project that is in place to date. That project serves a purpose, not only in 
terms of energy, but it also serves a purpose in terms of jobs, in terms of training and employment for 
people in this province. And that is, I believe, something that must be. 
 
But at the same time, you have to realize that people that are isolated, people that are out of (probably 
from the old line of thinking) this province, people that are isolated, the communication isn’t quite 
intact. The major industrial corporations have always neglected that portion of this province. They have 
neglected that portion of this province because they felt, ‘Well, people up there don’t really mind. They 
are isolated; they don’t really care.’ 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Minister, those people care. Those people now are beginning to be aware of the way 
this province is being developed. Particularly so, the whole of the northern administration district cares. 
They want to be a part; they want to be full participants of any development that goes on in the northern 
administration district. They want to be involved. They want to be informed. They want to be full 
participants. 
 
They are not less than the people in southern Saskatchewan, although they may be native. I am native, 
and I haven’t got the qualified education that many people in the southern half of the province have. But, 
we still have our feelings. We still have our commitments. We still have our principles with respect to 
the environment, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to know from you, Mr. Minister, how are you going to involve the people of Cumberland House, 
the people of Sturgeon Landing, and the people of the northern administration district with respect to 
future developments in the northern administration district? That is my questioning to you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The hon. member sort of got a little further from environment than just . . .  At 
least, a little ways from what I think environment represents. I know that he feels strongly about 
retaining it as it is, but when you get into development and what we’re going to do in development, it 
really isn’t the role of the Department of Environment. The role of the Department of Environment is to 
see that any development that goes does not in fact hurt the environment. 
 
In relation to tourism - and again, I suppose I’m diverging a little bit from environment - and the 
promotion of tourism in your area: certainly, and certainly we’d like to see the people, especially 
northern people, partake of anything that would be beneficial to them. 
 
I think maybe we could even go back into housing; we’ve done exactly that with the housing, the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. We went into all those communities and said, ‘All right, what 
should we do? How should we do it?’ Right now I’m getting a proposal that was put out by these people 
coming back to me on how we should handle the situation of housing. 
 
I would think that we would handle the Department of Environment the same way when we have 
something to be developed in the area. Right to date I’m not aware of what they would like to have 
developed in there. I have not been the minister responsible for development of that area. My concern 
has been with the housing part, which I think we’ve done a relatively reasonable decent job with it, and 
with the Department of  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1093 

Environment as far as the lakes and the quality of lakes and rivers. It is a tough situation, as we well 
know. 
 
A lot of it relates outside our province. The water comes down from Alberta, comes down from B.C. I 
have meetings set up - I had them set up for today, but I cancelled because of estimates here - in regards 
to the transporting of water between one province another, the quality of the water coming in. I 
recognize and realize that that is a very important part of everything we do, is water, and that certainly 
relates to the native people that live in the Cumberland area, whether they work in the bush or whether 
they trap or whether they fish or whether they promote tourism or have their own livelihood otherwise. 
 
But in regards to what’s going to be developed there, gosh, that’s not for the Department of Environment 
to decide. Our job is to decide how it develops and how it would or could affect the environment itself. 
 
Mr. Yew: — With respect to the people and the communities directly affected, Mr. Minister, do you 
have any possible ways of having them kept informed on a continuous basis? And, that is my first line of 
questioning. And if not, do you then proceed to have them involved in some kind of a monitoring in 
terms of the monitoring system that you may have in place? I don’t know whether you have now at this 
point in time, but if you have such an idea with respect to the monitoring system of that project, would 
you envisage having those people involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I’m not too sure of just . . .  You said ‘information,’ and I wonder about 
what? You could maybe fill in in a second. 
 
In regards to the monitoring system, I really don’t know how we could involve these people in it. Like I 
said earlier in question period, my door has always been open and they have not, in any way that I know 
of anyway, made a representation to the department in regards to wanting me to be involved with the 
Nipawin hydro project itself or how it could affect them. As I said, too, just a few minutes ago, that 
when it was done by the previous government, the environment impact assessment was done, they 
seemed to have little or no interest at the time. Now it’s maybe because they’re unaware of what could or 
may not have been. I’m not sure what the situation was. But my understanding was that they had their 
opportunity, and they didn’t at that time take part in it. I told you in question period I’d take a look at 
what could be done. I will take a look and see what we can do to involve those people. We want them 
involved too. 
 
But in regards to how they can monitor the system, I would be pleased to have them come in and tell me 
what they could do to help monitor the system. I don’t know, and I’m sure the department don’t know, 
or it would have been done a couple or three years ago with the previous administration. My 
understanding also is that the Nipawin project itself will have little or no impact in the Cumberland 
House area because of the Tobin Lake catch basin in between. Now, it could be right if they are wrong, 
but that was the impression that was given when the environment impact assessment was done. Maybe 
you’d like to tell me: you’d like to know information on what? I’d like it so I could answer that one, but 
that’s about the answer to the rest of it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I hate to belabour this point, Mr. Minister, but I have to take exceptions with 
a few comments made by the hon. member in respect to an issue that I want to take a hold of. I noted that 
you stated in your response to me that you don’t know whether they are concerned. I want to take issue 
with that, Mr. Minister. I take Angus  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1094 

Deschambeault, for an example, the president of the Association of Metis and Non-Status Indians of 
Saskatchewan, the northern board of director for that particular area. And I also take the president of that 
local, Joe Fiddler. And I also take other locally elected officials for that particular area, like Harvey 
Young, overseer (in the South we would refer to him as the mayor of that community), and many other 
community leaders in that particular community. They are concerned about that region. They are 
concerned about the adverse affects of that project. And you tell me, in your response to me just a while 
ago, that you’re not sure whether or not they are concerned with that project. Mr. Minister, I just want to 
reassure you that the people in that community are concerned. They are concerned because the number 
on question, and I will place it before you, Mr. Minister: how long do you see that project in existence, 
and how long do you see that project being an impact to that particular region? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — To answer the hon. member’s question - how long will it be there? - I would hope 
that it’d be there for many years. I would think it’s got a long, long life. I can’t say for sure what the 
length of the power project is, but I would assume many years. And the impact, I would assume, will 
continue the length of the project. 
 
Just relating back to that, what I said a few minutes ago, whether I said it correctly or incorrectly, what I 
said was: in 1979, when the environment impact assessment was done, at that time those people in there 
did not seem to have a concern. Now, whether they recognized the full impact of what may happen or 
not, I do not know. But I said: at that time they did not seem to have a concern, because they didn’t take 
part in it, although I understand, through the former government, that they were notified and asked to be 
part of it and everything, which seems to be the proper way to have done it. 
 
In regards to the Cumberland delta area, I know there’s a concern up there now. But the dam is not in 
place. I know there’s been no water there. But that has nothing to do with what’s happening right now. 
The concern I mentioned in question period too, is the concern seems to be up there, not so much as the 
water that’s coming, as to how to retain the water within that. And a weir on the end of the Cumberland 
delta would seem to be one of the deep concerns they have. That in fact would change all the 
environmental situations around there. But I don’t know where the Nipawin power dam would have any 
effect on that. I think the weir itself would probably have a tremendously more impact on that area, and 
probably be well received. 
 
We have done some looking into it. I know it’s still being looked into. And I think that something like 
that may have more impact on those people in that area, both their livelihood and the way they live, than 
the Nipawin power dam would have. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the environmental advisory council, I wonder if the 
minister would state to the Assembly the status of this environmental advisory council; whether or not 
this is still in existence or whether or not this has been dissolved, abolished or whatever. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, that’s quite right. Right at the present time it’s . . .  I think about six or seven 
members’ terms have expired. We have not reappointed anybody. It’s just being held there until we feel, 
or till we’ve had a look at it to see how we could use it to the most benefit. I talked to the chairman of 
the board, and he told me at that time personally, that he thought that if we were going to reappoint an 
advisory council, we should get in a new direction and a whole new perceptive of what we’d like to see 
done with it. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1095 

So taking his advice, and I’m sure he’s a very qualified man, we have just been sitting here taking a look 
at it, seeing what we should do, pulling together all the information we can, in fact, before we even 
thought of appointing another board. So at the present time it’s not reappointed; it’s waiting to see what 
we should do and how we should handle it, when a situation arises. Right now we don’t have any major 
situation. We’d sort of like to see how we could develop it as a whole oversee of the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I think that’s the direction they’re looking for - not a specific idea but a general 
overture of the whole province. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Again, Mr. Minister, I have to take up an issue with you. You state to me that there is no 
major situation in the province. Well, I state to you, Mr. Minister, that you do have some major 
situations happening in the province. There are potential of hazardous and adverse effects in terms of 
acid rain. But in terms of my line of questioning, how I get down to some more basics of major 
developments happening in this area, you have the major Nipawin hydro project development. Certainly, 
I agree with you, the major environment impact of that study was done in ’79. But just recently, and 
more recently, you had five requests to expand uranium development in this province, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now, I couldn’t get my question responded to in point form, with respect to the environmental advisory 
council, Mr. Minister. If in fact you have abolished the environmental advisory council, how do you 
contend to replace the valuable service that this council had contributed towards this Assembly and 
towards the province? How do you perceive the public participation aspect of major environmental 
impacts in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — First of all, Mr. Chairman, I was unaware that there were five had applied. I asked 
both my officials here and they are unaware of it. My understanding is there’s only been one applied, of 
which an environment impact assessment has been done. 
 
And I think I said earlier, or just previously here, that if something comes up such as an expansion to a 
uranium mine, that’s the time we’d look at a council. 
 
In regards to how you would handle a situation, as we go along, I think we’ve done quite well on that. I 
think I’ve talked to just about every group of people that would be . . .  in regards to environment. I think 
I’ve talked to the wildlife federation. I’ve been working with the C&Ds. I’ve had a lot of environment 
groups in, and also from the industry. And industry is the one that’s always the concern to the people 
how you handle it. And what we’ve been doing with industry is setting out some tight ground rules, and 
they’re probably the most stringent in Canada. But they don’t seem to mind as long as the ground rules 
are set out. 
 
We’ve done that with potash; we’ve done it with uranium development in the North. The one expansion 
we allowed, the most stringent rules for uranium mining ever put in place was given to those people, and 
they’re abiding by it. So I think, in regards to that, it’s been done real well and real carefully. In regards 
to any future ones, if they come up, that’s the time we’ll take a good look at it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I wanted to enlighten the minister’s perception of the issue that I raised just a minute ago, 
and I have it in front of me, Mr. Minister. It states, by the Star-Phoenix,  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1096 

dated the 30th of March, that ‘Cluff Lake seeks the approval of five new uranium mines.’ 
 
Certainly I agree with you in some preliminary statements that you made. There have been inquiries at 
the provincial scale and at the local scale with respect to uranium development in Saskatchewan. And 
certainly the government has moved to some extent to protect the concerns that have been raised at the 
local level and at the provincial level. But certainly there is, for this government, for this province, there 
is a lot more expected in terms of environmental protection, the health and safety of workers at the site. 
 
The return for this investment, Mr. Minister, in terms of training and education - in terms of 
employment, we still have a tremendous long ways to go. As you know, this may again contend . . .  You 
may raise issue with me in respect to my line of questioning, but we can’t disregard the high welfare roll 
that people in the northern administration district are subjected to at this point in time, as well as the 
high unemployment rate that is recorded every day with the Canada Employment and Immigration 
Centre. 
 
So, somehow or other, there leaves to us some issue that we must begin to try to address ourselves to. 
And in terms of the line of questioning that I started with, Mr. Minister, there are some major 
applications in front of us, and I ask you, Mr. Minister: how do you contend to handle those areas of 
concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I think we’re getting off on Labour now, not on the Department of 
the Environment. In regards to your quotation out of the Star-Phoenix, that was one mine expansion that 
was an EIA done on it previously. It was five small pits around the one mine. And that was the phase 2 
of that expansion. A complete EIA was done. It’s for public review right now. I don’t know what else a 
person could do, like the controls are so stringent there. They’re probably, like I said, the best in Canada. 
So I really don’t see . . .  And in regards to the employment up there, that would be done through a 
surface lease, and I’m not aware of what the surface lease is about or how it’s handled . . .  You would 
have to ask one of the departments (I don’t know which one it’s handled through), at that time. 
 
In regards to the employment, I think that would be a Labour question. It’s certainly a concern of ours 
and we’d like to see native employment; we’ve urged it in everything possible. Especially, again going 
back to the housing corporation in the North, with all the clean-up that’s been done in the North, I 
understand all but one small group of units has all been done by northern people. In fact, we’re just now 
fixing up a whole bunch of units that were dismantled. I have just talked to the administrator today, and 
again, that’s going out to northern people, so we have a concern out there in regards to jobs. And in 
regards directly to the environment I don’t know how that reflects on it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In terms of the grants to organizations, Mr. Minister . . .  And 
just before I go on, we probably have different views and different objectives in terms of our political 
stripe as to how the people in this province ought to benefit from major economic development 
expansion. I for one see that we have to have full public participation. I wish to add that in a particular 
area, the people directly affected by any major project ought to be fully involved, not only involved in 
the environmental impact of that project, but also involved in the social and economic benefits of that 
major project. 
 
I want to stop there for a moment, Mr. Minister, and ask for your version, whether or not  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1097 

you see those people as being involved, not only in the environmental impact of that project, but also as 
full participants in the social and economic impact of that project. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, certainly, I would have to agree with them. I think it’s being done every 
place. I think we have involved them in everything we could . . .  every project that’s available, and 
every project that’s coming up. Again, going back to the housing and even in southern Saskatchewan 
(and you call it southern and northern) we have involved, I think it’s been about 20 per cent, 25 per cent 
native employment has been contributed towards the construction of a lot of the units. So we have 
involved, and I have been urging all the construction industry to use them in every phase. 
 
What we’d like to see is the native people equal to everybody else; and I think it’s time that they are 
equal to everybody else; and I think they’d like to be equal to everybody else; and I feel they can be 
equal to everybody else; and I think that’s the way it has to be. I’m sure that the hon. member for 
Athabasca will agree with me that we have to do something up there to, in fact, create employment. We 
are working toward that I’m sure, something up there to, in fact, create employment. We are working 
toward that I’m sure, as a government, in many ways. I know a few that we are. But we have to . . .  I 
agree with you that the more employment, the more social responsibilities they have, the better they will 
be and certainly the better all of Saskatchewan and all of Canada will be. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well, certainly, Deputy Speaker, I want to express my appreciation for the fact that the 
hon. member for Environment has expressed the same type of feeling that I have in terms of major 
projects in this province. If in fact that it should involve people at the local level - not only at the 
environmental impact level, but also at the social and economic levels - I hope that the minister, the hon. 
member for Environment, can carry that message on to his government opposite - that this is a necessity, 
that we are not backward citizens in this province, but rather that we are concerned about the major 
projects that are contemplated, that have been contemplated, that are being contemplated, and that will 
be contemplated in the future. We certainly want to be full participants. We certainly want to be 
involved in the type of developments that takes place in this province, and I hope that the minister will 
carry that philosophy and that belief and that commitment to his government, because at times I look at 
the members opposite and I find it somewhat futile to argue a point, particularly so in question period 
when members opposite tend to heckle and jeer you to the point that you’re unheard of. And I want to 
contribute, I want to be a part of this Assembly, I want to contribute my experience in the way that the 
North can be involved, the way that the North should be involved. 
 
I want to go on with my line of questioning, Mr. Minister. Seeing as how at the last estimate review you 
stated that the environmental advisory council was on hold, and seeing as how you pointed out that you 
may come out with an advisory committee of some sort (didn’t state specifically what type of an 
environmental advisory committee you would have), but to my point of questioning: will you or will you 
not have an environmental advisory committee to oversee development in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I indicated earlier in the day that I would look at 
seeing what we needed for an environment advisory committee. I have looked at the other provinces. 
Everybody has a different situation on how it should be handled. We have been going out at a ministerial 
level checking what is out there. I’m not quite sure what I need there yet. Until I’m really sure, until I see 
a direction that I’d like to be able to give those people, I do not think that I will be appointing an 
advisory council on the environment, or any other council at the present time. So I would hate to say yes, 
I’m going to appoint one, but down the road we certainly will need . . .  There’s a  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1098 

need there for something, and we’ll look at it and at that time we’ll bring it in. I do not know now 
exactly what it will be, and I have no idea, so I’d advise the hon. member that I do know, I don’t know. 
 
At the present time it’s on hold, the advisory council, because the chairman suggested that I take a look 
at it before I appoint anything else. I haven’t taken a look at what I could bring in. Right now we’re 
looking at what Alberta’s got, what Manitoba’s got, what Ontario’s got. Until we’re satisfied that we can 
take maybe the best of all, or none, or bring our own in, I’m not going to appoint any advisory council or 
any other committee at the present time. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Well then, Mr. Minister, how do you foresee public participation, public involvement in 
the monitoring of environmental adverse effects on major projects in this province, Mr. Minister? How 
do you see people being involved in this government, in this mainstream of development that you have 
taken in respect to the province being open for business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think maybe we have a little different policy than the 
former administration. We have what we call ‘our door is open’ policy. My door has always been open 
and will continue to be. The department door will always be open. If there is a concern or a need by 
anybody out there, they can contact the department. If they’re not satisfied, they can contact me, and I’ll 
see that it’s looked into. I think that’s the way it should be, and that’s what we call an open door policy. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In terms of the waste research area, vote 9, subvote no. 6, Mr. Minister, and in response to 
your major federal government program that you referred to in our last estimates, could you tell this 
Assembly then, Mr. Minister, what is the status of this major federal-provincial program that you came 
back to me with in our last estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, my understanding is that the federal government has been in fact working on 
a - I couldn’t call it plan but an outline - in regards to how it could be handled. They said they’d have it 
to us within six months. We have met with them, I think twice now over the last four or five months in 
regards to our input into it. They’re to get back to us on it within six months on how it can be handled, 
how the whole waste management itself . . .  they would like to see it handled. At that time we will be 
addressing it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I didn’t quite get your response, Mr. Minister. You mentioned six months. I’m not sure. 
Could you clearly identify to us then when we can expect an announcement of this essential program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, after we’ve had a chance to look at them when they bring them to us. They 
haven’t brought them to us yet. We’re hoping to have them before fall. At that time we’ll take a look at 
them. At that time we can maybe get more information on their entire plans. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, I wonder what your department and your government foresees then for the 
interim period in terms of effects of uranium mine wastes on the environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, first of all, I think it’s very well regulated right now, both by the federal and 
provincial government. It’s going to continue . . .  the monitoring will continue until they bring in a 
suggested program of how they would like to see it. At that  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1099 

time we’ll look at it and we’ll evaluate it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In terms of getting back to grants to organizations, Mr. Minister, you may not have that 
information with you at present, but I wonder if you may pass that information on to me at a later date in 
terms of grants to organizations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We have it but we’ll pass it over to you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In terms of the Qu’Appelle Valley development agreement, Mr. Minister, I have here some 
notes that I’ve prepared in terms of my assessment of the budget. And I would like the minister then, to 
maybe comment whether or not his government has completed items . . .  channelization, items number 
two, the pollution control system for the intensive livestock operations, three and four items, tourism and 
recreational developments and finally the fish hatchery. Seeing as how this agreement will be finalized, 
Mr. Minister, in short time, could you give this Assembly your assessment of that particular agreement 
and could you give this Assembly your version of what can be expected out of that agreement for the 
ensuing months hence? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in regards to the Qu’Appelle agreement, the completion, 
now, I’ll just read a paragraph here I have: 
 

The completion of the conveyance channel which is one of the main thrusts of this program 
could not be possibly achieved during the remaining of the year of this agreement. 

 
And basically that is because we run into some problems where native bands didn’t want us going 
through their area. We’ve been negotiating with those people in regards to it. I understand that one or 
two of the bands now have agreed that it would be okay. But the thing is, the agreement expires in 
March 31st, 1984, and we just . . .  You well know that it couldn’t be done in one year, the conveyance 
through any of the bands. So what we’re doing now, we’ll be going back to the federal government to 
look for a new agreement that would in fact allow us to go through with a new . . .  that can complete the 
conveyance channel through the . . .  hopefully, through all the reservations. 
 
We have to have their approval. They haven’t given it to us yet. One or two have indicated they may. 
We’re hoping that we can work out an agreement with them there so that we can go through there. We 
can’t impose it upon them. That’s the last thing we want to do. We want to work with them. We’d like to 
be . . .  Again, as I said earlier, we want them to be part of and not forced upon. I think they are starting 
to recognize that now. We hope they will. We hope we can work with them. We’re making an all out 
effort to do exactly that. 
 
In regards to some of the funds, and they don’t all apply to the Department of the Environment, but we 
have $50,000 to work on agreement evaluation in regards to what I was saying. Agriculture has 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of $491,000 for channel work and livestock pollution controls. P&RR 
has $1,342,000, and that’s for the fish and wildlife development at Regina Beach and Nicola Flats, plus 
some tourist area. Also, the fish hatchery is being completed. 
 
Urban Affairs - I understand there’s about $682,000 being done in the Moose Jaw effluent for irrigation 
to get that out of the channelling system. There’s a total of about $2,556,000 that’s in the budget for that 
area this year, fully realizing that to complete 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1100 

that channel down there is a necessity. We don’t need to be flooding land. 
 
We know that in the previous years a lot of head-water channelling was done and forgot about the 
bottom water, the receiver of it. We found that out when we were out in the water committee hearings. It 
seemed to be the thing that was done years ago: you started at the headwater, you drained down, and 
forgot about the receiver. I think we recognize that, and we’re going to deal with it accordingly. So, to 
deal with it accordingly, we have to have approval of everybody along the way. 
 
We’ve set $50,000 aside in our budget just to deal with that, to get the approval and to work with the 
people in regards to it, so we can go ahead with a channel that will in fact be beneficial both to irrigation 
where they can make a living out of it farming and use it for irrigation at the same time and not have any 
flooding on their land. So I think it’s a positive step. It’s the right way to be going with it. And hopefully 
that over the next six to eight months we can come up with an agreement, and then come up with a 
federal-provincial agreement to go ahead with it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just a short question, Mr. Minister. In other words then, you haven’t completely completed 
the Qu’Appelle Valley development agreement. It’s still being negotiated; the final completion of those 
talks haven’t been made final. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s partly correct. The agreement runs out on March 31st, 
’84, and we’d have to renew the agreement. But to renew the agreement, we’ve got to have a reason to 
renew it, so we need this channel agreement from all the native bands and everybody else involved. And 
we’d like to do it so it’s beneficial to all. So we’ve set aside some money this year to get out to do an 
evaluation and an assessment to see how we can go about doing it, how we could work with the bands, 
how we can work with the other people to get it done, and then go to the federal government for an 
extension of the agreement or a new agreement. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, before the extension of any new agreement, I wonder: do you expect a full 
comprehensive report with respect to those ventures undertaken by the province and the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I’m not quite sure I understand your question in regards to a comprehensive report. 
If you’re referring to are we going to involve the bands, the people on the way, I think I’ve indicated 
that. Referring to an environment impact assessment being done, that’ll have to be decided as we deal 
with these people to decide what they want. We’re doing an assessment of what we would think would 
be necessary. It’s certainly open to the public for their comments. There’ll certainly be lots of public 
input into it. We’ll do it so everybody’s well aware of it. It won’t be done behind the scenes or anything. 
Everything will be up front. I don’t know what else we could do as a government to make it more 
accessible, so it will certainly be accessible. It’ll be there for public input. Nothing’s agreed yet. And 
that’s what it’s all about. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I suppose what I was trying to get at, Mr. Minister, is an interim report so that the people in 
this province and, particularly, people in the area would have an idea as to what has been achieved 
through the federal-provincial program, or agreement, in respect to the Qu’Appelle Valley development 
agreement. 
 
Certainly, in the minds of the people involved directly at the local level, they would want to know 
whether or not the agreement has achieved some benefit for the province and for the area concerned. My 
question then was: do you expect an interim report? And if  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1101 

not, if you don’t expect an interim report, then how do you see the people obtaining this type of 
information? Do you see them getting the information after the completion of this Qu’Appelle Valley 
development agreement, or prior to the completion of this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that there’s an annual report done every 
year that details all that’s been done down there. So I would say that it’s done yearly now, and it’s been 
done over the last few years. It isn’t something that we brought in. And it will continue as long as we’re 
working with it. So I don’t know what else we could do. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
In terms of regulations and guide-lines for the reclamation of strip mining in areas of Saskatchewan, my 
question to the minister is: last month your department was working on a set of guide-lines at the last 
questioning of estimates - guide-lines and regulations for the reclamation of strip-mining areas in 
Saskatchewan. If those guide-lines and regulations have been completed, Mr. Minister, can you advise 
this Assembly when we can have copies of such? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, my understanding was - I think I’ve mentioned a few minutes ago - 
we brought out guide-lines for mineral exploration. Right now we’re having discussion with the industry 
on the reclamation of these areas down there so they will in fact be presentable and be reclaimed to an 
acceptable level by everybody. We’re working on them right now; we’re discussing with the industry 
right now in regards to that. And we’re doing it similar to what we done with the potash emissions. We 
sat down with both the Saskatchewan potash corporation, and all the other industries. We sat down and 
said, ‘All right, here’s what it is,’ and we discussed it. And I think it was in the process even before we 
took over as government. We completed it. We’re going to do the same thing now with reclamation of 
the areas such as the coal mines. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Can the minister advise if those new guide-lines and regulations, when they can be made 
available to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d have to say that we’re just discussing right now with the 
industry, and we couldn’t make them available till we’ve completed discussion similar as we did with 
the potash emissions. We’ll do the same situation: once we have come to an agreement with the industry 
and met what we felt was safe and acceptable standards as a department at that time, we’ll make it 
available to the public. It’s an ongoing thing and anybody can have their input into it, so it’s basic by the 
industry and the Department of the Environment. We want some very stiff guide-lines. We’re asking for 
them. We’re working with them so that it’s still an acceptable level, you know, so it isn’t a complete 
financial burden, but we certainly expect to have it in a decent and a reasonable state and we’re working 
towards it and we will, in fact, bring in good tight regulations. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In terms of tailings at Lake Athabasca that you and I both discussed at the last estimates, 
Mr. Minister, you stated to me that negotiations between you, the province, and the federal government 
were being carried out for the health and safety and other environmental effects of that Gunnar and 
Laredo mines may have on the region. Can the minister advise this Assembly if their study and their 
negotiations are 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1102 

complete? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, and hon. member, that’s the same one we’re talking about in 
regards to waste pollution, and we’re working with the federal government. We’ve been meeting with 
them a couple of times. They’re drawing up what they think is draft regulation, or draft type of 
regulations. When they get them drafted up, we’ll take a look at them and see what our evaluation of 
them are, and at that time we will be able to at least look at making a decision on how it should be done. 
But no, we’re not aware of . . .  We’ve met twice, I think twice, already with the federal government - 
most at ministerial level. It’s been an ongoing discussion at deputy minister level continuously in regards 
to these draft regulations. Until they had brought back to us what they would like to see there, you know, 
there’s really not much we can do beyond the point of putting our input into it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Minister, at the beginning of my presentation here with respect to estimates with 
regards to your department, the Department of the Environment, I quoted that your government has 
scrapped policy planning and research, public information and education, and also environmental 
assessment. And you have also decreased from the budget that we had, or the former administration had, 
in March of 1982. This portion of the budget for your department decreased by 2 million, and from your 
budget of last year, last fiscal year’s estimates, it is again down by 1 million. Can the minister advise me, 
advise the Assembly and the people of this province, how you foresee replacing those very essential type 
of departments that provided public input, public participation and involvement and information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I think the hon. member has looked at the estimates and he realizes that what 
we have done is co-ordinated them into one unit under the environment information, co-ordination and 
assessment. And what we’ve really done is took a lot of administrative people and brought them all 
under one, with one administration and the job being done underneath. I don’t think that you need to 
pass paper from one desk to the other a dozen times. That don’t make performance. Performance isn’t 
based on how many people you have. Performance is based, first, on how much you do and how you do 
it. And second of all, in regards to the Department of Environment we took over, to get information out 
of there was like trying to pull teeth. 
 
Right now we have taken the Department of the Environment and made information to the public a 
number one recognition within the department, because if you look, information is the first word that’s 
within that department. And we did that with a reason: so that the people of Saskatchewan would know 
where to go for information. And I think that’s very, very important. If you’re going to protect the 
environment, the people of Saskatchewan have to know where they can get the information from to be 
able to do that. 
 
In regards to the difference in the money, I could tell you one thing. Over the last three years previous to 
us, the department, although they had in their estimates a large number, there was $2,260,000 that was 
never spent. So it didn’t matter how much you put in your estimates; it’s how much you spend and how 
you spend it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I took note of your response, Mr. Minister. You stated a couple of times, information to the 
public is important, and I agree with you. Information to the public is very important, direly important, 
but not as important, Mr. Minister, as public participation in terms of the effect any major development 
will have in any particular area, Mr. Minister. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1103 

And I, from experience, go back to the provincial inquiries. These were provincial inquiries held in this 
province with respect to Cluff Lake, Key Lake and Elizabeth Falls, Rabbit Lake, and you can go on and 
on with respect to quite a number of major developments in this province, that were held. Public 
participation was an important aspect of the former administration. I have to say this, because they not 
only involved people at the local level, they also involved people that were involved in one industry or 
another. 
 
With respect to those provincial inquiries, there evolved some major recommendations as to how those 
projects would be implemented and how they would function, in terms of the project itself, and how the 
public would have access to information - not only access to information, but also how the community 
would be involved in involvement of the social and economic spin-offs of such projects. I want to again 
go back to this quote, or statement that you made in terms of information. Certainly, information is 
important, but public participation is also equally important, Mr. Minister. 
 
I understand the member for Moosomin is getting a little irritated with my line of questioning, but the 
important aspect of this is the fact that people have to be involved in this province. Right now the 
Nipawin hydro project development that is in existence, and that seems to be a highlight in this province, 
it seems to me that there is some misdirection. We have apparently quite a number of people involved in 
that project in terms of the employment benefits, in terms of the major contractual benefits, people 
involved from out of this province. 
 
Some time ago I questioned the Minister of Labour, and I wondered just how much involvement the 
people from that particular region would have in terms of the employment benefits - the spin-off of 
employment and the spin-off of business opportunities - and he got back to me and he stated that there 
would be 95 to 98 per cent provincial content in the employment and in the business spin-off for that 
project. I ask the ministers now, you know, with respect to the existing major projects that we have in 
this province, how do you co-ordinate your Department of the Environment with the other major 
concerns that communities have, that this province has, on those major projects in terms of employment, 
in terms of the social benefits of those major initiatives taken by this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I’m not just sure of all the questions there, but just in answer to a portion of it, 
since 1972 there’s only been seven boards of inquiry. The last board of inquiry was in 1979. That was in 
Nipawin hydro project. There hasn’t been any in two years with the previous administration, and there 
was none in 1982. If there is a need for a major, if there’s a major development coming up, an EIA 
would certainly necessary, a board of inquiry would be necessary, and it would be carried out. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I have to say at this point in time, then, Mr. Minister, that the major reorganization policy 
that your government has undertaken is nothing but a smoke-screen, in terms of how people would 
foresee your government’s initiative is, with respect to major development in this province, because 
when it comes right down to it, Mr. Minister, I as a critic for the Department of Northern Saskatchewan 
have to raise a question with the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan with respect to major initiatives in 
this province. 
 
And what will happen ultimately, Mr. Minister, is that when the estimates come up for DNS he is going 
to refer me back to your department with respect to major policy  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1104 

developments in this province with respect to environment, with respect to the social and economic 
offerings by those projects. What ultimately is going to happen? People at the local level will be 
confused. People at the locally elected level will be confused; they won’t know what your department 
. . . In terms of monitoring, in terms of regulations, in terms of guide-lines and regulations, people are 
confused as to what your government’s policy will be, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I have to seriously question that policy, that philosophy that your government has adopted. When it 
comes to major projects in northern Saskatchewan, when it comes to major projects in this province, 
there is somehow or other (there is; there has to be) some way that your administration, that your 
government can provide information with regard to your whole approach to social, cultural and 
economic developments in this province. 
 
Right now, there are problems with the surface lease agreements in Key Lake and Cluff Lake. The line 
of questioning is that the committees that were given the responsibility to oversee those developments - 
to review, evaluate the benefit or the things that are not being adhered to by the mining companies or by 
the government, to oversee, evaluate and recommend on the projects in northern Saskatchewan - those 
committees that were given that responsibility have not met for such a long time. In fact, the Cluff Lake 
committee has not met for one year. And the other committee with respect to Key Lake has only met 
once. 
 
Now in terms of the surface lease agreements, Mr. Minister, I had some discussion with the Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan and he has stated to me that all the regulations and all those policies have been 
adhered to. But I have my qualms; the people at the local level have their qualms and have their 
reservations as to whether or not those regulations and those policies are being adhered to by your 
administration. And at this point in time, Mr. Minister, I wonder - if you are the Minister of 
Environment, and if you are concerned about those projects in northern Saskatchewan, if you are 
concerned about the people at the community level and at the provincial level, and seeing as how that we 
should put priority that 95, 98 per cent of the people in this province ought to benefit from those projects 
- I wonder if the minister would at this time give me his assurance, like he did at the beginning of my 
line of questioning, that the people at the community level will be full participants, not only in terms of 
information, but also in terms of employment, in terms of the social benefits of those projects. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure we’re diversing off far from the Department of 
Environment. The Department of Environment’s responsibility is certainly to monitor and to regulate. In 
regards to giving the opportunity for employment, it is certainly equal. And I would like to think it’s 
equal for everybody in Saskatchewan. We have basically made it available to each and every one 
wherever you are. I would think that the employment isn’t only for native people, that it would not only 
be in the North, but would be in all of Saskatchewan. I think that’s the role we have to play. I think this 
idea of an imaginary line up there, you know, is far-fetched. It’s time now that we all recognized the 
province of Saskatchewan, fully realized that the further north you go the more problems there is, and 
there has been. And that could relate back to some of the things that’s been done before. 
 
So, really and truly, the Department of Environment’s role is to regulate and to make sure that the 
environment is protected. But it certainly isn’t the role to develop. If a development occurs, like I said 
earlier, and it’s a major development, we’ll make sure that a committee’s set up, that there will be a 
board of inquiry, if necessary, and  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1105 

whatever is necessary to protect the environment and to make sure it is protected before it starts. And I 
think that’s an acceptable situation because it was done previously. 
 
I can’t see nothing wrong with that. And at the same time . . .  you know you get unemployment. I’m 
sure the Minister of Labour, or the minister responsible for DNS, or some of those for economic 
development in the North . . .  It’s certainly needed. It’s recognized. I don’t think anybody denies that. 
But the role and how it would be done is not the Department of Environment’s responsibility. And 
certainly we’ll do whatever we can to help make sure that the environment is protected, and if we can do 
something along the way to help create more jobs, that’s great too. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In terms of the fact, Mr. Minister, in terms of the fact that the environmental advisory 
council is now abolished, would then the minister agree that somewhat or other public participation, in 
terms of environmental adverse effects, is somewhat diminished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, I would have to disagree with that, with the hon. member. I don’t think that 
anything is diminished. I think there’s pretty stringent rules and regulations wherever there is. 
 
The environment advisory council has not been abolished. As we’ve said, we are looking to see how it 
could be re-established, or established in a different . . .  with a different perspective to it. I think that’s 
fair. I think that was done on the advice of the chairman that was responsible before. He personally 
advised, before we went any further, that that would be a good role to take. He said, ‘Don’t rush into it; 
take your time and make sure what you do is right.’ I think that he’s a professor, I think he’s a very 
intelligent person, and certainly he had the opportunity to look into it over the last couple of years and to 
make that type of an assessment. I have not, and I cannot make that type of an assessment. I have to go 
by the people, the public, that it feels that way. 
 
Until we feel confident, and until we think or feel confident we can appoint it such a role that it would be 
beneficial to the people and to the environment, we haven’t done so and we don’t intend to do so. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Just a couple of more questions, Deputy Chairman. In terms of the water rights branch, I 
noted that you have an increase of $500,000. Also an increase of about five persons for this particular 
branch. I wonder if the minister would be able to tell me what the staff are being paid to do, in terms of 
the particular branch in question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman and hon. member, in regards to the expansion of both the hydrology 
branch, and especially the water rights branch, with the five additional people, we felt that water is 
certainly, and should be, and is a high priority in this province, and it’s in every province in Canada. We 
also recognized that water, not only water for usage in municipal use, but for irrigation, but also drainage 
- all that fell under water. And it was time that we started looking at water as a very valuable resource. 
So that’s one of the reasons that we increased the number of people within the department. 
 
Just to give you an idea of what the department of water rights branch would be responsible for: they’d 
be responsible for licensing surface water, ground water, and water power developments; permits 
construction operation of drainage developments; controls and regulates water projection operations; 
investigates and resolves water- 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1106 

related complaints and problems; collects and compiles information on water resources; licenses 
water-well drilling machines; provides geo-hydrological assistance to other branches; assists in ensuring 
the province meets inter-judicial water obligations; assists in the collection of industrial water charges 
and water-power revenues. 
 
Mr. Yew: — In our last review of estimates, Mr. Minister, I raised a question with respect to the 
spraying that had been done at the Primrose air-weapons range. And I had commended your department 
at how expediently that you were able to get a firm grip as to the spraying of this very dangerous 
chemical in the area. But at the same time, I also cautioned your department. 
 
I also suggested some positive recommendations in terms of how we can work as a unit in this province 
to ensure that that type of dangerous chemical was not ever sprayed in our soil again. And I referred to 
you the Primrose bombing range agreement and our Department of National Defence range agreement 
that was arrived at back in 1952-53; and that also this agreement had expired; it is a perpetual agreement, 
no doubt. And that is one question that people at the local level didn’t understand, or a clause that was 
not understood at the local level. But certainly it was a perpetual agreement, one that expired back in 
’73. 
 
Since then you have had interim agreements to that effect. and seeing as how you have interim 
agreements, an agreement there that can be reviewed and modified at the provincial and federal level. 
And I, at the time of our review of estimates, suggested to you that that particular issue ought to be 
addressed at those federal-provincial talks. 
 
At this point in time, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can advise the Assembly whether or not you have 
taken the initiative to ensure that that type of spraying of a dangerous chemical will not happen again in 
our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, certainly, Mr. Chairman and hon. member, we’ll certainly advise them of 
our concerns about it. I’ve addressed it previously, as you’re well aware. It’s under the Department of 
National Defence, as you well know. They have the right to supersede whatever we want to do as long 
. . .  They can use any chemical they want, as long as it’s licensed by the federal department of 
agriculture, which it is. Actually the lease agreement falls under the department of DNS, and we’ll 
certainly be advising them of it too, but really we have no control over it if it’s a licensed product, which 
they did use up there in department of Agriculture Canada. We did the best we could to stop it. We’ve 
asked them not to do it without informing us first. We’ve asked them to have us monitored, for us to 
have our input into it. They’ve assured us before it ever happened again they would do that. I have no 
control over whether they will or will not keep that type of assurance. They do, in fact, have last say. 
And when they have last say, you know, there’s not too much as a province that we can do about it. 
 
Mr. Yew: — I’ll certainly take it, Mr. Minister . . .  I would certainly want to keep in touch with you on 
that particular issue. 
 
Getting back to another one. I see my colleagues want to also enter into the estimates here. With respect 
to the Island Falls project on the east side, specifically, Mr. Minister, two miles out of Sandy Bay, we 
have this project, this Hudson Bay Mining and Development Corporation project. I understand that you 
have a specific task ahead of you negotiating on behalf of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. I 
wonder if your department, at this point in time, is involved with those negotiations, Mr. Minister. 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1107 

Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, I understand all we do is issue the permit for the operation of the 
plant. It actually comes under Sask Power now. It’s been taken from the Department of the Environment 
and put under Sask Power, so maybe when you come up in estimates in Sask Power, you could pursue 
that a little further, because I don’t have the answer to particularly what negotiation’s been going on and 
what hasn’t. So I would ask you to take it up with the minister responsible for Sask Power when it comes 
up in the crown corporations. 
 
In regards to the rest, all we do is permit it, and it’s been an ongoing thing for quite a while. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Pardon me, Mr. Minister. I couldn’t get the full response to my question. Did you say, or 
did you not say, that your department is not involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — That’s correct, the hon. member. All we do is permit the operation of it. We have 
nothing to do with the actual operations itself; it’s under Sask Power Corporation. 
 
Mr. Yew: — It’s pretty difficult again, it’s that primary question that is of concern to the people at the 
local level in Sandy Bay. As a member of the cabinet then, Mr. Minister, I will raise a question with you. 
When do you expect the conclusion of those talks or those discussions and negotiations with the 
community that is directly involved? It may be an unfair question, but as a member of the cabinet, you 
ought to be able to respond to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I don’t think it’s my responsibility to respond to it, so I would refer you to 
the minister responsible for Sask Power Corporation. I’m sure, at that time, he’ll answer it for you. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Mr. Co-chairman, I have no further line of questioning at this point in time. I want to thank 
the minister and the officials involved for having responded to questions that I have raised in terms of 
environmental protection for this province. And with that I may want to leave it to my colleagues to raise 
certain concerns that they have. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I would like to direct a few questions to the minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, during the discussion with the member for Cumberland, he has indicated a considerable 
concern that in implementing programs of new directions in your department, that you will, in fact, 
consult with the interested groups. Can we get a guarantee from the minister that indeed, in 
implementing new programs and new directions, that he is, in fact, consulting with interested groups? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, I think the member from Quill Lakes either didn’t 
hear quite clearly or didn’t understand what I said. I didn’t say, ‘implementing new ideas or new 
programs.’ I said, ‘implementing new projects,’ and that’s a little difference. That’s where a project 
comes into the area. Certainly we’ll keep the people in the area, and have their input in it, if it’s a major 
type of project. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, can the minister give me a guarantee that in respect to running his departments, 
and in introducing new programs or new directions within his  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1108 

department, that there will be public consultation, particularly with interested groups which would be 
affected by the implementation of such programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, we do have what we call an open-door policy. I 
mentioned it a couple of times. Second of all, with the running of the department, I would hope that the 
deputy minister and the administrative people are competent enough people that they can run the 
department without my input into it even. The direction that we would only be giving would be 
policy-type direction. But the direction of the administration of the department, I’m sure there’s qualified 
people there to run it. So I would hope that they are qualified enough to run it and nobody would have to 
put any input into the running of it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Obviously, Mr. Minister, you don’t understand the question. The question, what I am 
talking about, is the implementation of new programs which, in fact, involve policy - policy set by you 
and your cabinet. That’s what I’m talking about. I’m not talking about the ordinary day-to-day 
administration of the department. I’m talking about the implementation of new programs and new 
directions which affect people. 
 
What I want to know is: can you give us your guarantee that in fact you will involve the public, that there 
will be a consultative process before the implementation of new programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, just in answer to the hon. member from Quill Lakes, I thought I told the 
member from Cumberland earlier, in regards to the potash emission regulations, we worked with the 
industry, with the people, in regards to what should be brought in for safeguards. In regards to 
guide-lines for reclamation of gravel pits, the RMs, the industry itself was involved in what’s needed for 
there. There were people who were brought in; we listened and we had a lot of hearings over that. In 
regards to guide-lines for coal mining reclamation, we’re in the process right now of doing exactly that. 
In regards to guide-lines for mineral exploration, we’ve done exactly that. I would think that we do have, 
and have listened, and will continue to listen in that regard, in regards to how the policies are formed. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — As a follow-up, Mr. Minister, recently you put into effect new pesticide controls, and I 
read here a statement from the president of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities. He 
says that he’s pleased with the pilot project, but though happy with the thrust of the pilot project, Charlie 
Phelps said Friday, ‘The Saskatchewan government should have worked more closely with SARM. 
We’ve been involved in this since day one,’ said Phelps, who first heard the details of the program on 
television. ‘They should have talked to us before the announcement.’ 
 
How is that consistent with what you’ve just got finished telling me? Obviously you aren’t consulting, 
even with one of the largest organizations in the province. Either your statement of consultation is 
inaccurate or Mr. Phelps’s, and what I would like to do is believe Mr. Phelps. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I’m glad the member decided who to believe there because when I saw that 
in the paper I also was deeply concerned, because we had met very closely with SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities). And in fact just about two days before that, the secretary of SARM 
was over in my office, Lorne Wilkinson, and we discussed it, and he looked it over. And let me tell you 
something else, Mr. Member, Mr. Minister, or hon. member, at the same time, when that come out 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1109 

in the paper, a fellow called Lorne Wilkinson phoned me and he said, ‘I got to apologize for that. That’s 
an incorrect statement.’ And he said, ‘Any calls that come in, I will take them personally because I do 
not agree with that.’ So if you will just contact Mr. Lorne Wilkinson, he will in fact inform you of how 
the situation was handled. And I will tell you something else while I’m up here is that SARM was 
consulted, were consulted at all times, and so was the safety council, and so was SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association). 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I just want to say to the minister that this is the statement of the president of 
SARM, the elected representative, who says you didn’t consult. And I want to say that I believe what he 
says. And going back to an executive officer of SARM hardly satisfies the situation. I think what you 
should have done is to gone back and publicly apologize to the president for not involving them in a 
program which they had much interest for a long time. Obviously, your policy is a closed policy. You’re 
going to implement it and then afterwards tell the details in respect to the programs. And I want to say 
that the people of Saskatchewan are getting fed up with initiatives. This was supposed to be an open 
government. And obviously, the evidence is here. 
 
There is no openness. What is happening is that the bureaucrats in the department design a program and 
then they talk to the bureaucrats of another organization like SARM, rather than to the elected officials, 
and come up with the details of the program and don’t even involve them. I think that’s regrettable. It 
wasn’t happening in the past. And I think that certainly that as the officials of these bodies who are used 
to firsthand consultation will react accordingly . . .  
 
I want to go on to another matter and that is the water drainage control act program. I would like to ask 
you whether or not there is in existence, or do you still have under your jurisdiction water drainage 
control act in respect to the setting up of watersheds and the drainage of farmlands? Is that still under 
your jurisdiction, or did you toss that out in your efficiencies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I’ll answer the last question first. Yes, we do have a water drainage control act. 
And in regard to the statements you just made a couple of minutes ago, in regard to pesticide container 
clean-up: for 10 to 15 to 20 years, there has been absolutely nothing done, nothing done in regards to 
them being scattered all over the province. There had been no consultation with anybody. There had 
been no program. They had been left. In one year we have brought in a program that in fact . . .  It’s a 
pilot type project that will in fact, that will in fact go towards cleaning up these cans. 
 
And second of all, are you insinuating that the staff at SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) was either incompetent - that I shouldn’t be contacting them because I don’t know any 
others - or are you saying that they aren’t telling the truth? Because somewheres along the line one or the 
other is not correct. Are you telling me that the staff that was hired by SARM is incompetent? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — No, really, basically the minister again is somewhat confused. Any allegations of 
incompetence is not directed to the staff of SARM, nor to the elected officials. The incompetence is 
directed to the minister, in the way in which he is running the department. So I want to clarify that for 
the record. 
 
Since the minister still has, under his jurisdiction, the water drainage control act, I would like to ask the 
minister what steps have been taken in respect to the continuation 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1110 

and the establishment of the watersheds throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Chairman, there has been no watersheds committees appointed. Basically, I 
think what we done here just a few months ago, two months ago in fact . . .  Four . . .  three cabinet 
ministers and Mr. Muirhead travelled around the province to identify water concerns, and it was called 
the cabinet committee on water concerns. Before you appoint a lot of people to positions, you better have 
defined what is needed, and we felt that there is a lot needed in this province in regards to water, and it 
should be well defined. And until such time as it’s all completely defined - and you know we’ve had 
many, many briefs; they are all being gone through now - when it’s defined, at that time we’ll take a look 
at it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’d like to ask the minister, then obviously the concept of establishing watersheds . . .  Is 
in fact what the minister is saying that he is not proceeding with the basic concept of the watersheds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I think I made it very clear a minute ago, but I’d like to make 
it very clear again that there’s a very, very broad scope of water in the province. To go piecemeal, one 
little bit at a time, as the former administration did, got them nowhere. They had no water policy. What 
was their water policy? It hasn’t been defined. We are now in the process of defining one - a water 
policy, a water management, for the province of Saskatchewan - which has never been done before. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What is the minister’s present policy on water management? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In regards to that, I think I just said that we are at the present time formulating it. 
It’ll all be announced in due course. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Am I to understand that at the present time the minister operates in a vacuum? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — In answer to the hon. member from Quill Lakes, I’m not sure who was operating in 
a vacuum because they had never once went around the province to identify anything before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — And, in fact, I have not seen since we took over the department any policy there 
whatsoever. So in 11 years you had never once set out any type of water policy. I’m not too sure where 
the vacuum was, but there’s no vacuum here. We’ve already started out to formulate a policy which will 
be in place in very due course. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to remind the minister that indeed we had brought in the water drainage 
control act. We had an extensive consultation with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and the various 
organizations in this province - extensive - unlike the minister who bypasses them. And we did, in fact, 
have in place the establishment of the initial watershed. One watershed was, in fact, set into place and 
was proceeding. And I think that what we have here is a case of a government which was totally 
unprepared to govern. They have absolutely thought out no direction to governing - no water policy 
whatsoever. So they send a little political machine around - no expertise attached to it, as far as I know, 
and very limited - and trot around the province. I want to say that the research on water in this province, 
the established  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1111 

research, was second to none in any other province. 
 
I want to indicate that the farmers of this province certainly are not going to be very patient if, in fact, the 
circumstances put upon them the drainage problem, because this was being addressed by the previous 
government. I think now that we’ve gone into this delay tactics again of trying to establish a policy 
which . . .  Obviously any party should have a policy before they come into office. I think it’s going to be 
a great disappointment to the farmers. I’ve been talking to many farmers and they’re saying, ‘What is 
happening to the development of the water drainage control act which we helped to establish?’ And I 
say, ‘Well, what happened is that there’s been a change of government and they’re doing nothing. They 
are reviewing, reviewing and reviewing, and as a consequence,’ I say to them, ‘there’s very little that I 
can really recommend to you.’ Certainly we had a policy established whereby the development of C&D 
was under Agriculture and the water drainage control act was under the Department of the Environment 
and there was co-ordination in respect to the two. 
 
And the province had all been analysed as to drainage systems. I believe there were some seven 
watersheds, if I’m not mistaken. Accordingly, they were going to develop this and they were going to 
allow the local people, the local people, to develop and implement a policy which would best suit that 
particular watershed. 
 
I’m very, very disappointed that the minister now indicates that he indeed has no policy in respect to 
water management and that the best that we can do is to wait for the future. 
 
I’d like to know from the minister: how long do you think it will take you to review, review, and 
continue to review? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, in answer to the review and review, I would hope that as long as we’re 
government we review everything that comes up. I think that’s what happened previously, that they had 
never reviewed anything. 
 
In regards to the watersheds: you know, it’s a fact, one watershed was established - one. That’s 
piecemeal. What we said is we need an overall water policy for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In regards to C&Ds, there has been none over many, many years, as the C&D and now the drainage 
control are in conflict. They should be under one department. They should be working together for the 
benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. What has happened was that the drainage was always done at the 
headwaters. They forgot about all the receivers at the other end. There was no policy to say what should 
be done. It was done on an ad hoc basis. It is time, in this province, that we done it on a policy-type basis 
that you know what it’s going to reflect on - the receiver as well as the sender at the top. 
 
So, therefore, we need an overall water management policy, and we also need an overall drainage policy, 
together. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I would just like to remind the minister that in respect to the C&D, that it was the 
policy of the government, indeed, to work out an overall drainage policy, and had that presentation to the 
major organizations of this province. But also, in respect to the implementation of C&Ds, that it allowed 
the residents in the particular municipality to decide whether or not they wanted to go forward with the 
C&D. In other words, what we were doing is allow local autonomy. Farmers had to vote on whether  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1112 

there was going to be a C&D. I believe they had to get two-thirds percentage in order to proceed. Now 
you are saying that that type of local autonomy is now going to be removed from your policy, because 
obviously you have criticized the local autonomy that was instituted under the previous government in 
respect to C&D? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I think we’re in the Department of Agriculture’s jurisdiction. But in regards 
to C&D, what I said was that there was no overall policy to direct those individual C&Ds on how the 
water should be drained. And, in fact, if you don’t know who’s going to receive, if a C&D is draining at 
the top, what about the farmers at the bottom? That was never once taken into consideration. 
 
There’s a word: C&D started out . . .  (inaudible interjection) . . .  It means conservation and 
development. Conservation. Conservation of water in our province is, and will always be, a number one 
priority. Conservation relates to irrigation, to the overall policies of farming. 
 
And another thing in regards to . . .  You’re talking about how we handled things, or how we go about it. 
One thing we don’t do, we don’t develop the policy first, and then go to the people second. We go out 
and listen first, and then develop the policy. So it’s sort of a change-over from what it used to be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, in respect to your review of your annual review, and your review of 
coming up with a water policy, I want to know whether or not that will in fact be under your jurisdiction. 
Will the Department of Environment be in fact putting in place the water policies, or will it be the new 
crown corporation that you have established, and will that new crown corporation be attached to 
Environment? What is the, sort of the organizational chart? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well I think there’s only one person who could answer that and that’s the Premier 
of the province, in regards to what department or who’ll look after a crown corporation. I would say that 
the Government of Saskatchewan will formulate the policy in regards to water. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What I want to ask you: you have indicated here a criticism that the water drainage 
control act, or the control of drainage, was under the Environment, and C&D was under Agriculture. 
What I am asking you now: since you said that, you obviously intend to have both the C&D and any 
water management or the drainage control under the same jurisdiction. Is that the intention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Again, that would certainly be for the Premier to decide what that would be. What 
I said was that with C&Ds on one hand draining, and The Drainage Control Act which affects the 
farmers, the end receiver, maybe it’s about time that they were all looked in one concept and all be in a 
type together. And that’s the way maybe it will end up. I don’t know. I’m not to judge that. 
 
You know, it’s hard to say how a government should act in regards to the people, but I think the first 
thing we have to do is recognize that the people that received water on the bottom end has to be 
recognized as well as those that drain on the top. And so I think . . .  I spoke at a C&D meeting not very 
long ago, and I stressed the word ‘conservation’ and the need to control and to be regulated drainage in 
regard to the receiver, and I think it was very well received by the C&D group themselves, because I 
think they  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1113 

recognize it - they’re very intelligent people - and they recognize that although C&Ds at one time was 
just drainage, it is time for the conservation to be brought into it. And I think they also recognize that the 
rights of the people who receive the water should be recognized when the drainage is taking place. And I 
know many places in the province where headwaters were drained, and down below many, many farmers 
were flooded, and I think, and I know, that it’s time that it’s all looked at in an overall concept plan of 
water management. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask the minister . . .  There was the environmental advisory council. I’d like to 
ask the minister whether or not his department has received from this council its report on the 
environmental decision-making in Saskatchewan? Have you received that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, the department has received it, but I haven’t had an opportunity to review it 
yet. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — When did the department receive that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I’m not sure, but towards the end of ’82. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — And are you telling us that a report was received near the end of ’82, several months 
ago, from a body, an environmental advisory body, which is entitled ‘Environmental Decision-Making 
in Saskatchewan,’ and are you indicating to us that you have not even turned your mind to read that 
report from that body? Is that what you’re telling the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — At the present time it’s being reviewed by the department, and they will be making 
a report to me. As you fully realize, it’s a very extensive bunch of work put in . . .  It’s a very extensive 
book, I guess you’d say. It’s a very, very thick book. It has a lot in it, and I just haven’t had the 
opportunity or the time to do it properly, so the department in the meantime is reviewing it and will be 
making recommendations to me on it. I think that’s a normal procedure done on very extensive reports. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — It may be the normal procedure, Mr. Minister, but the normal procedure is that if you 
commission a report which is a very important report, that normally the minister will deal with it with 
some urgency. I’m asking the minister when he intends to have a look at this report. How soon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding is it was commissioned by the council themselves and it hasn’t 
been endorsed by the council, so I’m not too sure of the official part of it. We do have a report of it (or a 
copy of the report); they are breaking it down so that . . .  and making a report back to me on the 
recommendations within it. When I have had an opportunity to go over it with the staff entirely with it, 
at that time I’ll be more prepared to speak on it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Will the minister make the report public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The report is not . . .  Certainly we’ll be making it public. The report was not our 
report; it was done by the previous government. It was under . . .  It’s entered at 1982 or so. I would 
think certainly we’ll make it available to the public when we’ve had an opportunity to look at it. 



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1114 

Mr. Koskie: — There’s one other area that . . .  When the member from Cumberland was discussing the 
massive cuts in your department - over $1 million cut, 32 positions cut . . .  And I want to say to you, Mr. 
Minister, that I am getting sick and tired of that government alleging efficiencies while, at the same time, 
indeed cutting services. And that will be the net result in respect to the massive cuts that you have 
initiated here in respect to the Department of Environment. 
 
And certainly I think, Mr. Minister, it’s coming clearly home that this government, in its open to 
business approach, is certainly going to accommodate, and accommodate to the full extent, any new 
venture in this province without the necessity of protection of the environment. That is our fear. 
 
And I want to ask the minister, in respect to his tenure as Minister of the Environment: has he in fact 
carried out in the department, or initiated any impact studies during the course of the year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, first of all, in answer to the hon. member, the department never does the 
environment impact study. It’s always done by those that’s industries or whatever is related to that. So 
the proponents do the study. There’s some going on right now; I don’t know how many, but there is 
some going on right now. But the department does not do any EIAs. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — But obviously the minister and the department certainly do request that an 
environmental impact study be done and that the results of that impact study be made available to the 
Department of Environment. And what I’m asking you: can you detail to us - give us a list of all the 
impact studies which you have requested and which are being carried out by the private sector in which 
you will be getting a report back? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Certainly we’ll send the list over to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I didn’t hear your answer. What did you say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We’ll get a list together and send it over to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to specifically ask in respect to the heavy oil upgrader whether or not the 
department has to date requested that an environmental impact study be done for any site in 
Saskatchewan. And surely you should know that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, in answer to the hon. member from Quill Lake, I don’t know if it’s a heavy 
oil upgrader and where. Certainly the departments aren’t aware of one in . . .  (inaudible) . . .  so we 
haven’t been requested to date, no. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In respect to the justification of your cut in staff in administration, which you denoted as 
being efficient, I look at the staff, the personal staff of the minister, and I find a Darryl Blinkley, special 
assistant; Fay Brunning, EA; Nancy Martin, EA; plus Gerald Muirhead, MLA, Legislative Secretary. I 
would like the minister to give me the salaries of each of Darryl Blinkley, Fay Brunning, and Nancy 
Martin. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Certainly we’ll get them together for you and send them over to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, it’s a question to the  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1115 

minister with respect to the chemical cans. I am not sure, Mr. Minister, that I understand what your 
program is. I did read the material which came out of your office, and, frankly, I’m not sure I understand 
what your program consists of. Perhaps you could explain it for my benefit today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, I can go into it in complete detail or just the basic. The basic of it is that the 
site’s established by the RMs, if they so wish, and a lot of them have indicated they want to. There’ll be 
voluntary-type sites established. The department will send out somebody to inspect the site to make sure 
it’s safe for the type of a can to be put on. There’ll be a crushing unit come around to crush the can. And 
then the can will either be stored on site or if we can get - and we haven’t got it finalized yet - Ipsco or a 
steel mill to take the steel, it will be sent off to the steel mill to be melted down. But we haven’t got that 
. . .  The steel mills yet haven’t decided or haven’t agreed to accept them to date. We have looked at 
some proponents in crushing them, and we can crush 10 cans down to 5 inches which will give you 
about a 30-pound compressed piece of metal that will be all . . .  (inaudible) . . .  together, which would 
basically leave no residue, or very little if any residue, in them at all. We’ve asked the farmers to rinse 
them three times before they bring them there. Any residue that’s left in the can will be caught, 
contained, and stored and will be shipped out to be either stored or destroyed, probably stored down in 
the southern United States. So, basically that’s the way the program sits. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, is it anticipated, Mr. Minister, that the cans will be permanently stored at 
these sites or is this just, in a sense, a kind of collection depot until you find some other place to store 
them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, we’re sincerely hoping that one or the other of the smelting plants will take 
them. And we feel they will. Like I said, it hasn’t been finalized yet and we’re still dealing with them. 
They will be temporary on site. And if they can’t do it, then we’ll have to haul them and store them, and 
either bury them or store them on a safe site. And as you know, a safe site would have to be selected for 
that. But it hasn’t been selected. We’re going to store them on site for this year; we’ll crush them down, 
they’ll be very little. Once they’re crushed down - 10 cans into five inches takes up very little space - it 
will be a very compressed type of can. 
 
It’s a pilot project. There may be some faults with it. If there is we’ll correct them. We didn’t go out on a 
major scale because we wanted to pilot project it for one year. I think it’s a normal procedure; most 
things are done that way. We felt there was a real need out there, and it was time it was done. We’ve 
addressed the issue for this year on that type of project. Like I said, if there’s some errors or we haven’t 
done everything just right, we’ll change it around. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What’s the nature of your discussions, with Ipsco, I gather? When you say you 
expect them to be melted down, what’s the nature of your discussions? How vigorous and intense is it? 
What precisely do you mean when you say you’re having discussions with Ipsco? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, first of all, to make clear, I didn’t say Ipsco, I said one of the steel mills. I 
know you interpret here, and we would hope that they would take it. We’ve asked them once; we asked 
previously and they had said no. They may still say no, but one of their answers was that they couldn’t 
arc them properly; there was residue in them. They have open-hearth furnaces. We respected that. I don’t 
say that anyone will take it. We’re hoping that one . . .  There’s a couple closed ones, one in Manitoba, a  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1116 

couple in Alberta. It may be necessary to haul them to there. If there is we will have to do it. We would 
prefer not to bury them or to store them. If we can have them taken away and destroyed or smelted down 
is certainly the best answer. We don’t have that exact answer, but for the time being we’re going to store 
them on site, crushed on the local site. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I only have a few questions, Mr. Chairman, I want to direct to the Minister of the 
Environment. Could you indicate to the House whether the responsibilities for the surface leases that 
they have in northern Saskatchewan on the mines have been transferred over to the Department of the 
Environment or do they still remain with Department of Northern Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — They still remain with the DNS. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I would like to ask you a few questions. And I’ll turn to acid rain, Mr. Minister. 
Could you indicate to the House where the monitoring stations for the acid rain are situated in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I couldn’t indicate to you where the stations are. I could indicate that there was a 
report, an ongoing analysis of it. It’s the second year in a row that it’s been carried on in northern 
Saskatchewan - in the Cambrian Shield area - in regard to acid rain. My understanding is that there was 
very little or no acid rain the first year. I haven’t seen the report for this winter; it’s done through 
checking of the snow. I can’t answer you where the stations are because I don’t have it with us here. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — You talk about the tests that are being carried out with the snow, but there is air 
pollution regarding acid rain, and I believe that you are a partner in the activities regarding the acid rain 
and the stations. I wonder if you could give us a report as to the air cleanliness that you are receiving out 
of the station in Cree Lake? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I don’t have the information but we’ll certainly . . .  But we’ll provide it to you. I 
don’t have the information with us, but we’ll provide it to you, in regards to Cree Lake; we don’t have it 
with us today. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But you are a partner with the acid rain tests in northern Saskatchewan. Is this a 
joint venture with the federal Department of the Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes, it’s a join venture with the federal government, the Alberta government and 
the Manitoba government. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Are there any indications that the acid rain fall-out is increasing in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, there isn’t. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I would like, Mr. Chairman, now to turn to another program that you have in the 
province, and that is the northern forest clean-up program. And I believe that program is where you go 
and clean up dumping sites along our highways, roads and canoe routes, and along the river. Could you 
indicate to the House how that program is proceeding and how many sites you have cleaned up in the 
last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understand is that it was not done in ’82, and is not  



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1117 

proposed to do in ’83, because when it was done in ’81 they found very few problems at the sites, and 
they’ve been cleaned up quite well. So it was never carried on in ’82 or in ’83; it will be in ’83. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I see in your report here that . . .  And you indicate to the House that it’s not taken 
place in the last year. For the second year in a row, the department contracted a litter clean-up team in 
northern Saskatchewan. Are you indicating that this did not take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, the last annual report we have is ’81-82, and it does say that in there, but that 
was the ’81-82 year. The ’82-83 year, or the ’83-84 year, it’s not proposed in it. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m a little bit confused. You indicated, and I have the ’81-82 
report which indicates that 2,400 kilometres of roadways and 570 kilometres of canoe routes were 
looked after by a private firm. Are you saying that this did not take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Again in answer, it took part in the ’81-82 estimates which ended on March 31st, 
1982. It did not take place in the ’82-83 estimates or the ’83 now. We’re just starting ’83-84 estimates 
and it will not be in there. What it says in here is correct. That was done on the 1981-82 budget. It 
wouldn’t be the budgets that we’re talking about, or not the ’82-83 budget. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, then you no longer will be carrying on this program of cleaning up 
these sites and checking into them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding was, and it was previously done before we became government, 
that the understanding was that it was, there was really no need for it. The sites were cleaned up quite 
well and the monitoring that was done on them showed that they were being left in a fairly good 
condition. So it was decided even prior to us becoming government that it wasn’t needed. So it wasn’t a 
decision really of mine. It was just a carry on of the department. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There’s one last part here I would like to ask you a few 
questions on and that’s the radiation division, regarding Uranium City clean-up. I wonder, Mr. Minister, 
could you indicate to the House whether or not you are still going ahead with the clean-up of Uranium 
City, regarding the Uranium clean-up with radiation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — There was 69 homes originally in the program and there’s still 36 are still 
occupied. And we’re going to wait to see where Uranium City goes before we make any decision on 
what we’re gong to do with these ones. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Minister, are you not maintaining the equipment, the monitoring equipment that 
is now in Uranium City? Are you not maintaining that equipment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Yes. The equipment in the 36 homes is still operating. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I have a few questions that I would like to ask of the minister. I 
first of all would like to make a comment on the total budget, or the lack of budget, and say that we in 
the opposition are very disappointed in the cut-backs in staff  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1118 

and disappointed with the low profile that Environment will be given over the coming years. And I 
suppose that’s not too surprising when at the Open for Business Conference and the messages that were 
sent out to the private sector from other areas of the world was that this government would cut that sort 
of thing, and that those types of regulations would not be too strictly enforced. But I think that for the 
people of Saskatchewan the result of that kind of a policy are going to be devastating over the coming 
years, and we will soon find that cuts in the areas like land protection and mines and pollution control 
where the staff was cut by almost 50 per cent, that those kinds of cuts will soon come back to haunt us. 
My initial question to you, Mr. Minister, is in the area of the Richardson oil spill. Can you give us an 
update on to your involvement of your department in that oil spill, and what repercussions you see 
coming out of that for the Government of Saskatchewan and the Department of the Environment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, my understanding is that Energy and Mines has been the lead group in 
regards to it. All we are doing is monitoring it and giving advice. Basically, we have nothing to do with 
the clean-up. We’re there for information and to make sure it’s done. But Energy and Mines has been the 
lead group doing it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, I imagine Energy and Mines has an interest. I think, in the not so distant 
future, the Department of the Environment would have had a particularly keen interest in the fact that 
many, many thousands of gallons of oil spilt onto land in Saskatchewan. I’m surprised that you say this 
isn’t important, and that you’re allowing another department to take a lead role. What I would like to 
know from you is whether or not the burning off of the oil . . .  What kind of an area we are talking 
about. Because I’m sure if you’ve been involved in this before, you will know that in burning off oil on 
. . .  The topsoil of that area is not productive for many, many years afterwards. Can you give me an idea 
of the number of acres that were involved in the burn-off in the Richardson area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, in regards to the hon. member’s question, first of all, as he well knows, we 
do care about what goes on. Second of all, is that Marathon Oil would be responsible financially if there 
is a financial responsibility for whatever damage is done on the property. They were the company 
involved. 
 
In regards to the clean-up, our concern was that it didn’t get into the rivers, into the Wascana Creek, that 
we don’t . . .  That was our main concern. We are to monitor, and be sure that it was in place, that it 
didn’t happen. That is the role of the Department of the Environment - to regulate and be sure that the 
controls are there, and that’s exactly what we’ve been doing. The policy that we enforce, it’s the same 
policy that was there before. It hasn’t been changed. There has been no direction to change it whatsoever 
because it was doing a good job. We recognize it. You don’t change every policy when you come in. 
That’s one of the policies that wasn’t changed. So if it wasn’t doing good before, I’d like to know about 
it so I could change what is necessary. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, as the minister will know, it’s not the policy that’s written on paper that 
counts. It’s the enforcement of policy. My question to the minister was: how many acres were involved 
in the burn-off of the oil? The original question was: how many acres will be affected by the company? 
Whether you’re saying it’s Marathon Or Murphy Oil, or whoever it might be, can you give me an 
indicating of how many acres were actually burnt off? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — You were probably right that it was Murphy Oil, first of all, but second of all, in 
regards to, you were saying, about the policy carried out, the same 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1119 

people are working in the same department. It hasn’t been changed, so I would hope that they’re carrying 
out the same type of policy. 
 
In regards to the acreage, we don’t have the number of acres, but we’ll get it for you and we’ll forward it 
to you. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s surprising the minister wouldn’t have that kind of 
information with him when it’s a very current event and one that on a day-to-day basis, I imagine, his 
department is monitoring and I would have thought would have known that in a moment. 
 
The other information I would like on that oil spill . . .  You say that it’s not Marathon Oil but Murphy 
Oil. I would like that clarified, also, how many gallons of oil were spilled and whether or not any of that 
oil is ending up in the water that’s running into the major water basin of the Qu’Appelle. If you’ll give 
me an outline of where that’s at and whether or not you’re expecting a report from Murphy Oil, if that 
will be made available and made public . . .  
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, my understanding is there was an estimated 40,000 to 80,000 gallons. I don’t 
think anybody has a direct figure on that. And it’s my understand also that a little bit got into the 
Wascana Creek, that’s it’s being contained by booms so it doesn’t get away, and they’re sucking it off 
with vacuums to clean it up. I think it’s going along quite well. I think that the company - and I don’t 
know the name of the company. I stand to be correct. I might have made a mistake one way or the other, 
but whatever it is, they’re monitoring it. They’re doing exactly as being directed by the Department of 
Energy and Mines and also from advice from the Department of Environment. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, am I correct in assuming that the reports were accurate which said 
that there would be no charges laid in this incident? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — I’m not sure if there’s any . . .  I’ve had no discussions on whether charges will be 
laid or not. I’m not sure if it was the fault of the company or whether it was the fault of nature. The 
ruption of oil lines could easily be a ruption of frozen ground heaving, and that would be an occurrence 
that nobody could control. If there was negligence there, well, I suppose then that’s the time you would 
consider it. It may not be negligence because we all know water lines break and oil lines break and 
everything else, and I suppose that’s . . .  You know, that’s one of the hazards the company goes through 
and the rest of us. The thing is to clean it up and get it cleaned up properly and to do it right. And they 
have worked very co-operative with us and have done everything that’s been asked to do. I feel that that 
is a responsibility of theirs and they’ve carried it out, and we haven’t asked anything more of them. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, you’ll be well aware that there is a considerable difference between 
water lines bursting and oil lines bursting. I’m sure that that doesn’t take a great deal of explanation to 
realize that when a water line bursts there’s very little environmental damage. But what I would like to 
also remind you is that if an oil company, in creating profits, has a pipeline which is worn out and is no 
longer serving the purpose, they will consider, if there are strict environmental laws, whether they 
replace that line at 20 years or 40 years. The point that I’m making is that if they are allowed to carry out 
oil spills with no repercussions, either from the Department of Environment or Energy and Mines, that 
they will allow those pipelines to stay in long  



 
April 18, 1983 
 

 
1120 

after they should be replaced. And I think it’s your job and your responsibility as a minister to see that 
these regulations are enforced. And oil companies have been known to allow pipelines to get into a state 
of disrepair where you’re having oil pipelines burst on quite a regular basis. What I would like to find 
out from you is whether or not you can tell me how old this pipeline was, and whether or not the 
company has plans to replace that section of the pipeline where the break occurred. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Well, it really falls under Energy and Mines. 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman: — Can we have order so that the minister can answer the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — It hasn’t been used for about three years, my understanding is - that’s only an 
understanding. I’m not sure of the facts there, but we can get you the information and send it to you. In 
regards to all that points, I don’t think there’s anything that we can do other than to make sure it’s 
cleaned up. They’ve had a . . .  I’m sure that there is a need of a pipeline . . .  (inaudible) . . .  The 
expense has been very great; they’ve lost a great number of gallons of oil. The cost has been extremely 
high cleaning it up, and if it continues that, you know, the cost gets very high. So I’m sure as a company, 
if it’s not a good pipe they would look at it. As a province, we certainly will get the information for you 
to find out how old it is, the quality of the pipe, and have it monitored. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to change to a different topic, and that has to do with 
an earlier comment you made about studies and reviews being made on major projects in the province. 
Are you telling us that every major project that goes ahead in the province of Saskatchewan, that you do 
a major environmental review on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — No, I didn’t say every major development gets an impact assessment done. I said, 
if it doesn’t meet the requirements of all or there could be a social or economic or environmental 
problem there, it may be asked to be done. I think that’s been the normal procedure before. So nothing 
has changed that way. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — On the issue of an upgrade, Mr. Minister, can you tell me whether or not any 
studies are under way at the present time, dealing with the location of an oil upgrader in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — We haven’t done any studies that I’m aware of. Our department doesn’t do any 
studies. If there’s some going on, I’m unaware of it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, in regards to people who work in your department and work for you, 
I understand that Mr. Muirhead is a Legislative Secretary to you. Can you tell me what his expenses are 
for the present year, whether or not you have a budget set up within your department for that, and if so, 
what it would be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — As far as I know for ’83-84, no; we have no additional budget set up for ’83-84 at 
all this year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Minister, it is funded out of your department, is it not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — The Legislative Secretary is funded out of the Executive Council. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Including all the expenses that would be associated with that 



 
April 18, 1983 

 

 
1121 

position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding is we pay his vehicle expenses. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, his vehicle expenses would be what? Is he . . .  Does he have a CVA vehicle 
at his disposal or has he got a car that was purchased particularly for him? Or does he use one out of the 
pool? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — My understanding is that he can have a pool car if he’s doing government 
business, we’re sending him out on behalf of myself or to do something. If he used it for other than that, 
and I think it’s normal procedure - everybody’s in the same position - if he uses it for his own personal, 
he has to pay personal expenses on it. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7:00 p.m. 


