






















































Hansard: March 22, 1983


125 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 22, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — I’m pleased to introduce to this Assembly and to yourself, six grade 12 students 
from Marieval Community Education Centre at Marieval, Saskatchewan, together with their teacher, 
Gary Halbert, and their bus driver, Tony Lerat. I wish them an interesting stay in this Assembly. I will 
be meeting with them at 2:35, and I will ask all members to welcome them to this Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YOUNG: — Mr. Speaker, through you and on behalf of my seatmate, the member for Saskatoon 
Westmount, who’s presently resting at home following the birth of her daughter on March 17, I’d like to 
introduce to you and to the House a group of 50 grade 6 to 8 students from Estey Public School in 
Saskatoon, who are presently in the opposition gallery. I’d like to advise the students that I’ll be meeting 
with them after question period for pictures and for drinks downstairs in the cafeteria. I’d like to ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Office of the Ombudsman 
 
Mr. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Premier concerning the annual report 
of the Ombudsman, which was tabled in the House yesterday. The report, Mr. Premier, points out that in 
1982 the number of complaints handled by the Ombudsman increased by nearly 26 per cent. It states 
that there is an urgent need for additional staff. The Ombudsman notes that your government actually 
has staff and budget cuts under consideration for the coming year. The report states, Mr. Premier, that 
staff and budget cuts would have disastrous implications for the office, and would threaten the very 
independence of the Ombudsman. 
 
With that warning in mind, Mr. Premier, would you give this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan 
your assurance and guarantee that next Tuesday’s budget will not contain any cuts in staff and budget 
for the Office of the Ombudsman? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, I am not going to scoop the Minister of Finance in response to 
answering specific questions with respect to the budget. I would say that the observations by the 
gentleman that you’re referring to are speculative in nature, in the sense that the budget isn’t down, and 
when the budget is presented we will know exactly what the financial position is. It will be very clear 
then. To be talking about it  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
126 

prior to the budget . . . I mean, nobody knows but the Minister of Finance what is going to be in the 
budget, so prior to that it’s pure speculation. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. Does the Premier agree with the comments made by the 
Minister of Finance in respect to the comments made by the Ombudsman in his report indicating his 
concern in respect to cuts of staff and budget? The Minister of Finance, in his interview, indicated that 
the comments of the Ombudsman were chintzy and unprofessional. I wonder if the same position is 
being held by the Premier. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I won’t comment on what ministers are saying with respect to speculation on 
a particular portfolio. In this case, it’s the budget. The budget bureau talks with every department and 
every division in government, putting together the best guidelines they can, which will eventually go to 
treasury board for the final decision, and eventually go the minister and the cabinet for the ultimate 
decision with respect to budgets. We will lay those final decisions, or the Minister of Finance will lay 
those final decisions on the table when he presents the budget on Tuesday next. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Premier, the annual report of the Ombudsman makes the point that the budget 
cuts could in fact be a method by the government to reduce the scope of the Ombudsman’s office 
without changing The Ombudsman Act. In the words of the report: 
 

One could not select a more effective method of diminishing the capacity and the effectiveness 
of the investigative agency. 

 
Do you at least admit that any steps taken by your government in cutting the budget or the staff will, in 
fact, impair the operation of the Ombudsman’s office? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, my reaction is simply that any department, or any head of any 
department or branch or crown corporation can speculate all they like with respect to budgets and the 
impact that they could have on their activities, but I would think it’s a little bit premature to start talking 
about what’s in the budget prior to what comes out in the budget. 
 
I would say that there is a great deal of speculation, and in this case speculation as to whether the size of 
the budget will increase, decrease, or go sideways, before the minister has had a chance to table it. 
 
Now, if we are going to have everybody speculating prior to the tabling of the budget . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . That’s exactly the point; it’s precisely the point: can we have all kinds of department 
heads and all kinds of people speculating on what’s in the budget, prior to going out, and then saying, “is 
this a good idea or bad?” That’s the process that goes on internally between budget bureau and treasury 
board and the minister, and ultimately and finally, cabinet. And they will devise this Assembly, and 
indeed the people of Canada, on Tuesday, what’s in the budget, and we’ll go from there. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to get back to the comments of the Minister 
of finance because, frankly, they are very disturbing. They are reminiscent, Mr. Premier, of the 
comments you made about Mr. Van Mulligen when he had made some statements which were less than 
laudatory. You described him as unprofessional. Now you have described the . . . 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
127 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order! This is question period, and we are not allowed speeches at this point in the 
day. If the member has a question will he proceed with the question. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I took your ruling, Mr. Speaker; I did not appreciate that the introduction 
was as long as it was. My question to the Premier is: will you either repudiate or affirm the Minister of 
Finance’s view that that conduct is unprofessional, to have criticized the government in his annual 
report? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I said (and I believe that the member opposite would agree) that it is not 
appropriate for a head of a division, or a corporation, or a department, to be speculating in his report on 
what is in the budget before the budget gets here. The responsibility of the Minister of Finance of the 
province of Saskatchewan is to state what’s in the budget and after that we can all react to it. But prior to 
that it’s pure speculation and, therefore, it makes it that much more cumbersome, or difficult, if people 
are speculating it (particularly in public) prior to the presentation of the budget. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I remind the Premier that you are not dealing 
with an employee of the government. You are dealing with an officer of this legislature who has every 
right and responsibility to report to this legislature and to report candidly. You are not dealing with an 
employee. And I would ask the Premier: how do you pretend to have the right to shackle an officer of 
this legislature who isn’t an employee of yours? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I ask you, Mr. Premier, how you pretend to have the right to shackle an 
employee of the legislature, who is not an employee of yours at all. He has every duty and right to 
respond to this legislature and to report. How do you pretend to muzzle him? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, all I say is the following: prior to a budget, any member of the public, 
or legislative staff, or government staff could speculate, “Well I’m going to get a big raise and 
whoop-de-doo, it’s going to be fine,” or he’ll speculate and say, “I’m going to cut back and I’m going to 
be upset.” What is the point of speculating about that prior to the Minister of Finance, representing the 
crown, representing the budget, whether you’re a legislative staff person, or whether your work for Sask 
Power, or whether you work for Sask Wheat Pool? I mean it’s pure speculation until this gentleman 
decided this is what it will be. Prior to that, it’s nothing more than speculation. So I just ask, what is the 
point in somebody talking about what’s in it, whether it’s up, or down, or sideways, if they don’t know? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I gather then, to bring this matter to a head, you concur in the comments of 
the Minister of Finance. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — All I’ve said is that I don’t believe that it is productive for a member of the 
legislature, whether they are working for all of us or for the government, to be speculating about the 
budget, that is, giving it bouquets, or criticizing it, when they don’t know what’s in it. It’s less than 
productive and it doesn’t mean very much to the public. When we finally know what’s in it, then we can 
respond because we’ve got the evidence before us. Prior to that, it doesn’t mean very much. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. By way of background, let me remind you that 
the Ombudsman has this opportunity to report to the legislature. It is in  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
128 

his annual report that he reports to this legislature. Further, by way of background, he is under and 
obligation to bring to our attention activities of the government which will inhibit the fulfilment of his 
function. Surely you will agree, Mr. Premier, that if he sees something which endanger his ability to 
fulfil his office, he has an obligation to bring it to the attention of this legislature, and that’s all he was 
doing. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, again, the gentleman can comment all he likes, Mr. Speaker, on 
what’s in the budget, but prior to us knowing what’s in the budget, it’s a little difficult for us to take 
seriously people saying, well that there’s this, or I’ve got a raise, or I didn’t get a raise, or I got an 
additional to my department, or this new one is growing, or this one is declining. Well, that is the whole 
point. We’re not saying that the gentleman can’t comment, but what is the value of him forecasting and 
trying to predict what’s in the ‘83-84 budget when it hasn’t been presented? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier. The Premier has indicated 
that in his judgement it is not productive for the Ombudsman to issue the report which he did. Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier will understand that it is not the role of the Ombudsman to say things with which 
the Premier, or any cabinet minister, agrees. You disagree with him that it is productive. My question to 
you is: even thought you thin it is not productive, what he said in his report, do you think it is not 
professional? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, Leader of the Opposition, knows full well 
that it is appropriate for the Ombudsman to comment on the financial situation with respect to the 
budget after it comes down, and to the role that it might have on his office, and he’s done that in the past 
many, many times. I would ask the member opposite if he can recall when this particular gentleman, or 
somebody in his position, has speculated prior to the budget whether it’s going to be good or bad. That’s 
all we’re asking. The individual will make his comments, and he’ free to do so. In fact that’s what he’s 
paid to do. But in this case he’s forecasting what will be in the budget when there’s only one gentleman 
who knows what’s going to be in it. When that is tabled then he can comment all he likes about the 
impact it has on his department, or on the province, or on the world, or on anything else. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. The Premier will know that the 
Ombudsman has, on frequent occasions, speculated on what would or would not be in legislation, and 
has been encouraged to do so, particularly by the member for Kindersley. If it is appropriate for the 
Ombudsman to speculate on what is in legislation before it is table, why is it not appropriate for the 
Ombudsman to speculate on what is in a budget before it is tabled? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I don’t buy the argument that it’s appropriate for people to be speculating 
what is in the budget. In an annual report of any kind that ends in 1982, to be speculating on what might 
be in ‘83-84, particularly in terms of his own department, puts him in a very interesting position of 
saying . . . Well, would send us a big bouquet if he gets a raise in this budget? Is he going to come back 
and say, “Well, wasn’t that just hunky-dory? Wasn’t’ that really nice that I got this great big increase in 
my salary?” Or he’s going to forecast and he said, “Now I’ve got a cut . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I’m not missing the issue. That’s exactly the issue. 
 
If we’re going to get in the business of forecasting . . . If somebody that represents both sides of the 
House is examining and giving a report ending in 1982, then it seems  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
129 

to me that you’d be hard-pressed to justify speculating on the size of the budget for his department or 
others for 1983 and ’84 when there’s only one person who knows what’s in it. It just doesn’t seem to be 
a reasonable exercise or a very productive exercise to be speculating when he doesn’t know what’s in it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If the Premier resolutely refuses to acknowledge the independence of the Ombudsman, will you at least 
acknowledge the nature of his office? The nature of his office is such that he must be able to work with 
government and bring to the attention of government in an amicable fashion problems which he sees. 
Surely, if you won’t admit the inappropriateness of the comment, surely you will at least admit that it 
was inappropriately made in public. The very least the Minister of Finance should have done was to 
have brought it to his attention in a different fashion. Surely you will at least admit that your minister 
inappropriately made the comment publicly. It was inappropriate to make the comment publicly. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this is report for the period the first of 
January, 1982, to December 31, 1982, and I quote on page 5: 
 

It has taken three years of effort to obtain and integrate two new intake positions to cope with the 
increased demand from the public for our services. 

 
So it took the gentleman three years to get any sort of increase out of the previous administration to 
recognize something with respect to the increase in demand for public services, and he talks about that 
in here. Now you’re asking me to comment about him speculating about the next three years when we 
haven’t even had the minister’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly we can talk about the past because it is recorded, and here he says that the members 
opposite didn’t’ do anything for him for three years, and now he’s complaining because he says, he’s not 
sure what’s coming down in the future, when he hasn’t even seen the budget. So it seems to me that it 
would be less than productive to start to speculate about the new financial arrangements until he’s seen 
them. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, surely even the Premier understands that the issue is not 
whether or not the Ombudsman was right or wrong. Surely the Premier understand the issue is whether 
or not your minister made an appropriate comment in the appropriate forum. Now, I would ask you to 
address yourself to that question. Do you believe the comment was made in the appropriate forum? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, what I believe might have been more appropriate is: if we go 
back and look at page 3, and if the individual had said this, and he did say it, it would have been nicer if 
he’d said it in public: 
 

At the time of writing, I am uncertain as to the outcome of the budget review for the fiscal year 
‘83-84 and can only hope that wisdom will prevail. Given  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
130 

the present economic climate the exercise of economic restraint is a reality, and we are quite 
prepared to do more than our share. 

 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, may I direct a question to the Premier? In view of the 
comment just made by the Premier, why does he permit his Minister of Finance to criticize this 
employee of the legislature, and declare him to be unprofessional when he has stated a position which 
the Premier has just agreed with? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I think the member opposite would agree that when the government is about 
to come with a budget, and the individual says that we’re quite prepared to do more than our share to 
cope with this situation, that’s fair ball. But, to speculate about whether his share is going to increase or 
decrease, and then condemn the Minister of Finance before he knows what’s in it, is a completely 
difference situation. I mean, if that isn’t clear to the public . . . I’m sure it is; it’s probably just not clear 
to the members opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It strikes me that the nature of this 
man’s job and function is anything but clear to the Premier. Surely the issue is whether or not your 
minister’s comment was appropriate. You have said you think it is appropriate. Now, will you address 
yourself to the second part of the question: do you think that it was made in the appropriate forum? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, all I will say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The hon. member has asked a question and if he would like to have 
an answer, then he must give the member an opportunity to answer. I might also tell you that it’s not 
permissible in the rules to ask repetitively the same question. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I would remind the Premier that this man’s 
function is that of a mediator. Surely you will admit that the fashion in which your minister made that 
comment has impaired his ability to act as a mediator. Surely you’ll admit that a more appropriate forum 
could have been chosen by your Minister of Finance. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite will recognize, when anybody 
comments in the media (certainly the media would appreciate this), when anybody used the media for a 
comment about this government or about the budget, they enter the world of politics. If you don’t expect 
the Minister of Finance to react to, in public, public comments about the budget when it isn’t even 
tabled, you have another thing coming. 
 
It’s quite appropriate for anybody to say these are difficult economic times and we will co our share and 
here are the comments about the past budget. It’s inappropriate to speculate about the future and 
condemn the budget before you see the budget. If an individual does that, you can expect the Minister of 
Finance to react, because he is responsible for the budget. It’s as clear as that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
131 

Possible SPC Rate Increase 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. Has the Saskatchewan Power Corporation applied to the public 
utilities review commission for a rate increase for the forthcoming period? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we are just in the process of getting our application ready for 
presentation to PURC. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. I gather that the minister is aware of the 
nature of the application being made from the way that answer was phrased. Would the minister confirm 
that, and would he advise whether or not the application is one which respects the government’s 
guidelines of inflation minus one, or is for an amount greater than the government guidelines of inflation 
minus one? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, at the moment we are just getting it put together. We are 
crunching the figures, and we’ll know very, very shortly what percentage, if any, the increase will be. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, may we expect from a minister with 
respect to the increased in power rates the same dilatory lack of action that we have experienced with 
respect to the minimum wage, so that consumers of power may look forward to 24 months of 
unincreased rates. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, we’re fully ware that we must apply to our public utilities 
review commission to request an increase. We have had no increases for over a year. I’m sure there will 
be one coming. We have started the Nipawin dam project. We have started the natural gas program. We 
are going to be needing a few extra dollars. I’m sure there will be a rate increase asked, but that’s up to 
the public utilities review commission to decide on that rate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Address in Reply 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Mr. Dutchak 
and the amendment thereto moved by the Hon. Mr. Blakeney. 
 
MR. DIRKS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is an honour and a pleasure for me to 
participate in this very important debate today, an honour and a pleasure but also a duty, after having 
listened to the Leader of the Opposition for the past few days. Once again the member for Regina 
Elphinstone has confused and confounded the public in this debate, and once again it falls to members 
on this side of the House to set the record straight. And set the record straight we shall. Now the Leader 
of the Opposition has disparaged this fine Speech from the Throne by calling it Much Ado About 
Nothing. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
132 

Well I, too, have an affinity for Shakespeare and I can’t help but remember that one of the great 
speeches delivered by a Shakespearean character was at a funeral. You will recall: Friends, Romans, 
countrymen, lend me your ears. I have come t bury Caesar, not to praise him. 
 
Well, I have no intention whatsoever of praising the Leader of the Opposition, but I have every intention 
of driving a few nails into his political coffin this afternoon. For, my friends, we are here this afternoon 
to continue the burial which commenced on April 26, 1982, with the passing of 35 members of the 
opposite party. It’s been a long service. The burial continued on February 21 of this year with the 
unceremonial laying to rest of one Mr. Jerry Hammersmith. I don’t usually enjoy funeral services. But I 
want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that this extended burial of that slowing decomposing body of 
democratic socialists know as the NDP is a most delightful experience. 
 
Having listened to the flights of fancy in which the Leader of the Opposition has fallen, I can only 
conclude that he has slipped in to the initial stages of political coma from which e is not likely to gain 
consciousness and so I have chosen to label his response to this Speech from the Throne as Allan in 
Slumberland. Now the Leader of the Opposition has criticized the Speech from the Throne for what was 
left out. Yesterday he made an impassioned pitch that our government should declare Saskatchewan a 
nuclear-free zone, and that we should speak out against the testing of cruise missiles, and asked why 
didn’t the throne speech discuss these important matters. Now it seems to me that the nuclear 
disarmament and the cruise controversy have been around for some time, and so I would naturally 
expect that if the Leader of the Opposition believes this matter belongs in our throne speech then I am 
sure that the would agree that his throne speech of 18 months ago should have had this issue as the 
centre-piece of attention. 
 
But when I peruse this Speech from the Throne of 18 months ago, that I have in my hand, I find no 
mention whatsoever of this issue. Has this issue, then, suddenly become a cause celebre for the Leader 
of the Opposition, or do I detect an odious degree of political hypocrisy? I would suggest the latter. 
 
The opposition leader has chastised us because our Speech from the Throne made no mention about 
Canada’s place in the world. It made no mention of Saskatchewan’s distinctiveness. Well, may I remind 
the Leader of the Opposition that the purpose of the Speech from the Throne is to lay out in general 
terms the plan of the government the future, to set those plans in the context of past achievements? The 
Speech from the Throne, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, is not to be an article on the level of the 
National Geographic magazine 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition has chosen to use certain movie titles to characterize the Speech from 
the Throne. He’s termed this document ‘The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly.’ Yesterday the Minister of 
Health chose what I consider to be a more apt title — ‘The Sting’ — for that is what this Speech from 
the Throne really is, a stinging indictment of what the NDP failed to do in their years of power. 
 
They failed to stimulate the housing construction industry, as they could have done, Mr. Speaker, and 
they chose to say the people of Saskatchewan wanted free eyeglasses instead. They failed to shield the 
people of Saskatchewan from high interest rates; instead they chose to say, ‘Let’s buy some equity in the 
CPR.’ They failed to facilitate the transfer of family farms from older to younger, and chose instead to 
spend another $40 million to buy land for a government land bank. They failed, Mr. Speaker, to upgrade  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
133 

technical training opportunities for the people of this province, and they failed to provide adequate 
attention to the development of a high technology industry here in Saskatchewan. They failed to 
stimulate the oil and gas industry here in Saskatchewan and now I head the Leader of the Opposition 
trying to convince the people of the province that the Devine government is holding back the people of 
Saskatchewan from enjoying their full potential. Well, can you believe it? After thousands upon 
thousands of Saskatchewan youth have fled this province because there was no potential for them here, 
after thousands of family farms have disappeared during the last 11 years., the opposition has the gall to 
accuse us of holding this province back, that every shred of credibility that was possessed by the 
opposition leader has now, surely, been called into question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is a damning indictment of all the mistakes, the ineptitude, the 
mismanagement, the omissions, the deception, the bankrupt policies of a former government that was 
totally out of touch with the people of this province. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition knows full well that a far more appropriate title for this speech should be, 
‘How the West was Won.’ Yesterday the member for Arm River read a letter to the Assembly which 
explained why the West was won — a confidential letter. It told about how the Blakeney government 
played politics with Regina’s water. Instead of respecting legitimate needs of the people, they ignored 
those needs. That is precisely why the former government is in opposition today. 
 
Now, I want to read to this Assembly a letter which reveals clearly how the West was won. I would ask 
all hon. members to pay close attention to this letter for surely it explains why it is the Devine 
government’s Speech from the Throne which is being debated today and not some other Speech from 
the Throne. This letter was addressed to Premier Grant Devine, dated February 8, 1983, Humboldt, 
Saskatchewan: 
 

Dear Sir: I wish to thank you most sincerely for introducing the mortgage interest reduction 
plan in your government. (Listen carefully to this next paragraph.) 
 
I am a 52-year-old single mother, supporting my 11-year-old daughter. My income is at 
poverty level and when all my bills are paid each month there is not much left extra for 
anything except the groceries. The mortgage assistance plan has certainly made my life a little 
bit better for myself and my daughter. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DIRKS: — That, Mr. Speaker, is how the West was won: by paying attention to the needs of 
individuals. As I read through this Speech from the Throne and reflect back upon the first 11 months of 
this government, I am convinced more than ever that the Devine government deserves a vote of 
confidence, a unanimous vote of confidence from every member of this Assembly. 
 
When you consider the record of the Progressive Conservative government, a record only briefly 
touched upon in the throne speech, it should be clear to any observer that the new Progressive 
Conservative government indeed has its hand firmly on the pulse of Saskatchewan. It is truly a 
government of the people, a government in touch with the people. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
134 

Mr. Speaker, in a scant 10 months, 10 months, the Devine government has accomplished the following. 
It has completed a full review of the ambulance delivery system, carried out most effectively by the 
member for Moosomin. It has commenced a massive program of regulatory reform. It has conducted a 
thorough review of crown corporations. It's planned for a major government reorganization. 
 
We’ve conducted major hearings concerning water problems throughout the province. We have 
dismantled the Department of Northern Saskatchewan, that bureaucracy run amok. We have revised The 
Urban Municipality Act, the planning act, and will be introducing a new northern municipalities act — 
all in a scant 11 months. 
 
But that is not all. No, we rescued Saskatchewan Government Insurance, that house of horrors, from 
desperate financial conditions. We revitalized the oil and gas industry. We established a public utilities 
review commission. We provided much needed relief from high interest rates. We inaugurated the 
family farm purchase program. We abolished the gas tax. We introduced the job creation program for 
hundreds of people in the midst of a Canada-wide recession. When our socialist neighbour to the east is 
raising taxes and planning for a massive deficit, and all the while losing jobs, the Saskatchewan 
government was the only provincial administration whose policies ere working to create jobs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. DIRKS: — In addition, Mr. Speaker, we commenced a massive natural gas delivery program for 
rural Saskatchewan and we have revitalized the house construction industry, all in a scant 10 months — 
not 10 years, not five years, but 10 months — an enviable record indeed. 
 
I notice that the members opposite have long ago refrained from accusing this government of paralysis 
by analysis. I should certainly hope so: you can only ignore reality for so long. 
 
Now, it is a fact of political life that governments come and go, as our friends opposite know all too 
well. But I strongly suspect that future historians will concluded that the first 10 months of the Devine 
government were characterized by a flurry of achievements and progressive legislation that few 
governments of the future will be able to match in their first 10 months of office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of any throne speech, as I indicated previously, is to set before the people and 
their elected representatives the government’s broad plan of action for the future and to set those plans 
in the context of past programs, commitments and achievements. But to live only in the past, Mr. 
Speaker, is to abdicate our responsibility to the future. 
 
What of the future? Does this Speech from the Throne provide sound reasons why the people of 
Saskatchewan and their elected representatives can have confidence in the present administration? Does 
this document suggest that the Devine government has a sense of vision — is in touch with the common 
man? Does it suggest that we have a broad focus? These are two important questions, for the Speech 
from the Throne is a major opportunity for us to ascertain whether or not the Devine government indeed 
has the ability to set forth a plan of action for the future. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
135 

Now, unfortunately I am sure, the opposition members are not enamoured with the Speech from the 
Throne. For their hon. leader, the member for Elphinstone has chastised the administration for 
presenting a Speech from the Throne which is, ‘Much Ado About Nothing, all tinsel and wrapping, and 
no content. A barren speech, a distasteful document,’ in his words. Well, when the Leader of the 
Opposition writes off this Speech from the Throne as being much ado about nothing, he makes it 
abundantly clear why it is not his Speech from the Throne that we are debating today. 
 
So, I ask all members of this Assembly to consider for a moment the following questions: is an 
expanded and improved cancer program, which is talked about in this Speech from the Throne, and an 
effective ambulance delivery program, much ado about nothing? Well, if that is much ado about 
nothing, you tell that to the sick and the dying, and tell that to the health-car specialists. I’m sure they’ll 
be interested to hear from you that that is much ado about nothing. 
 
I suppose a revitalized housing industry is much ado about nothing. Surely, you’re not going to tell the 
young people of Saskatchewan that the dream to own their own home is much ado about nothing. How 
are you going to tell the farmers, the backbone of Saskatchewan, that an act to restrict non-residents and 
non-agricultural corporations from buying agricultural land in the province is of no concern to them? If 
the ownership of farmland is much ado about nothing, then I’m not surprised the Leader of the 
Opposition would also suggest that the number one growth industry in this province — pardon me, in 
North American — the high technology industry, is of no consequence, and that a major high 
technology development strategy is also much ado about nothing. 
 
Well, so much for health care, so much for housing, so much for farmland, and high technology. 
Unfortunately, the Leader of the Opposition has also suggested that to streamline crown corporations, to 
improve the organization of government, and to stimulate government productivity is also much ado 
about nothing. I challenge any member of this Assembly, and I challenge the members opposite, to try to 
convince one of their constituents that the wise expenditure of their tax dollar is much ado about 
nothing. 
 
Tell the councillors, tell the aldermen, tell the mayors, tell the reeves of this province that revisions to 
The Urban Municipality Act and The Planning and Development Act are much ado about nothing. Tell 
the people of northern Saskatchewan that self-government under the proposed northern municipalities 
act is much ado about nothing. While you’re at it, of course, you’ll want to tell the youth and adults of 
this province that expanded opportunities for technical training are much ado about nothing. Don’t 
forget to tell the injured workers of this province that changes to The Workers’ Compensation Act are 
also much ado about nothing. 
 
Now I thought the opposition benches had some affinity for the co-operative movement, but I see I have 
been proved wrong. For the Leader of the Opposition suggests that the introduction of a new 
co-operatives act is also much ado about nothing. I’m sure he would want to spread that news far and 
wide throughout the co-operative movement in Saskatchewan. 
 
You will naturally want to drop Governor Olson a line, along with his counterparts in the midwestern 
and northern States, and tell them that future common discussions about water and tourism and 
agriculture really aren’t necessary, since they are also much ado about nothing. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
136 

Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne is only much ado about nothing to those who have yet to 
awake from the nightmare of April 26, 1982. It is only much ado about nothing to those few members of 
this Assembly who are desperately holding on to fleeting images of socialist land banks and free 
eyeglasses and government life insurance schemes and equity in the CPR. 
 
Well, I can only say: sleep on. Let the nightmare continue. I hope your sleep will be a long one, and we 
naturally all expect that it will be. For if homes and farms and energy developments and high technology 
strategies and ambulance services and technical training is much ado about nothing, then I am sure the 
people of Saskatchewan would want you to sleep on, from here to eternity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne gives every sound reason for the people of Saskatchewan to 
say, ‘We have chosen a government that is not bankrupt of ideas. We have chosen a government that has 
not lost its vision. We have chosen a government and a Premier who are capable of giving sound but 
imaginative leadership. They have done so in the past; they are doing so in the present; and they will do 
so in the future.’ And I have every confidence that Premier Devine and his ministers will provide that 
government for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Regina Rosemont have asked me to judge on their behalf this government, 
and give an answer on the question of whether or not its policies and programs, both past and future, are 
adequately addressing the needs and aspirations of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne has indicated to me that an expression of confidence in the 
Devine government is fully justified. The proposed initiatives of the government of the day, which are 
outlined in this Speech from the Throne, are worthy of our support. Consequently, the motion before us 
today is a commendable motion. The amendment is not, and for that reason I urge all hon. members to 
reject the amendment and support the motion, as I shall do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. GERICH: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to stand before this House, representing the 
Redberry constituency, and to speak in a positive nature of the throne speech. 
 
Saskatchewan has not yet experienced the effects of the depression, as have other parts of Canada. 
Saskatchewan’s economy is the best in North America. We, at present, have the lowest unemployment 
rate in Canada. I am, however, not naïve. We are experiencing a slow-down in the economic turnovers 
of dollars. We are showing signs of recent recovery in the past months. 
 
The housing industry is strong. Housing starts in Saskatchewan have risen 14 per cent in 1982 over 
1981, while falling 29 per cent nation-wide. The Build-A-Home Saskatchewan program will entitle 
purchasers of newly constructed homes to a grant of $3,000. This program will make housing more 
affordable to those who wish to own their own homes. This program stimulated the housing industry and 
created approximately 1,7000 construction-related jobs during this winter. It was a positive program. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
137 

The positive policies for fighting inflation and protecting the taxpayers are working. Over 37,500 
Saskatchewan residents, some of these Redberry constituency residents, have been protected from the 
high interest rates by the mortgage interest reduction program. By 1986 the average Saskatchewan 
motorist will have saved over $1,000 through the abolishing of the gas tax. The dollars saved by the 
Redberry constituents will be spent in the local stores throughout the constituency, in Hafford and 
Blaine Lake and Mayfair. It is a direct return of money back to the local economy. 
 
Steps have been taken by this Assembly in the past 11 months to lower the total tax burden. My 
government remains committed to the objectives of lowering taxes and will continue to take steps and 
the initiative to reduce taxes whenever possible and wherever reductions are possible. Inflation in 
Saskatchewan has consistently been the lowest in Canada because of these objectives. 
 
Economic development. This is not a new concept by any means. It is a new phrase being used in the 
1980s replacing the old phrase, ‘We are trying to make a decent living.’ Saskatchewan people since 
1905 have been developing, expanding and diversifying their economy. They have met the challenge of 
a depression, and now a recession, with an energy and a pride and a courage known only to 
Saskatchewan people. Their diversity and flexibility to generate economic development will surely 
strengthen and build a stronger Saskatchewan. 
 
This positive, strong attitude of Saskatchewan people will encourage people to invest in our province. 
Their confidence to invest in Saskatchewan, coupled with a strong private sector, will carry us into a 
stronger economic position. 
 
Agriculture — the single most important factor in Saskatchewan’s economic development strategy. It is 
also the most important industry in the Redberry constituency. My government has taken a number of 
significant measures to strengthen the agricultural sector. In particular, the farm purchase program will 
help guarantee the farm industry is composed of family farm units. The farm purchase program now has 
more than 2,000 applications in various stages in processing for more than $250 million in total 
mortgages. More than 350 applicants with mortgages totalling 41 million have already received final 
approval. 
 
The land bank turned only 151 tenants into owners in 10 entire years. We beat that figure in just 10 
weeks. This plan is helping young farmers of the Redberry constituency in purchasing their own land. I 
will repeat the phrase for the members opposite — they are purchasing their own land with this program. 
 
The Crow rate a statutory rate for grain movement established some 86 years ago. The Pepin plan is a 
plan to undermine and take away this statutory rate. The Pepin plan would increase the freight rate from 
twice the Crow rate in a short term, or 25 cents a bushel, to 10 times the Crow rate by 1991 and 1992 — 
over a long term, $1 a bushel or more for increase freight rates. These are large increases at a time when 
wheat has dropped more than $1 per bushel on the world market, and the cost of production has 
increased over 25 per cent. This will strike a fatal blow to the farmers of western Canada, Saskatchewan, 
and my constituency. This Assembly has expressed its unanimous opposition to the current federal plans 
for replacing the Crow rate with a new freight rate structure. Our position has been straightforward, 
simple, and it will continue to be. Any increase granted the railways for moving grain to export position 
should be paid for from the federal treasury. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
138 

Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to a 10-year $340 million program to extend natural gas to 
farms and rural communities, bringing services to approximately 25,000 farms and 10,000 residential 
customers. The program is twice the size of the former NDP program. It will take seven years to 
complete and provide 400 jobs a year. Saskatchewan families will benefit from the provision of a less 
costly heating fuel and business activity will be stimulated b y the working crews in the areas they are 
working. Last year the town of Meota and the Redberry constituency received its natural gas line, adding 
to the services of the village. 
 
In education, this government will offer major initiatives to make the province’s adult education system 
an even greater engine for growth in Saskatchewan. The goal is to substantially increase the range of 
training programs offered, to broaden the range and greatly increase the number of people served and to 
increase access to training programs for the young people and adults throughout Saskatchewan. This is 
of particular interest to the students and people of the Redberry constituency. It will give them the 
avenues to choose and embark on careers that will provide them with a livelihood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government will continue its commitment to improving health services in 
Saskatchewan. I would like to congratulate my colleague, the Minister of Health, and my colleague from 
Moosomin on the new approach they have taken in regards to ambulance services in this province. Their 
steps strengthen the ambulance program, incorporate it within the health care system, and are greatly 
appreciated by ambulance owners in the Redberry constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we, that is the caucus transportation committee consisting of the member for Regina North 
West, the member for Saltcoats, the member for Humboldt, the member for Moose Jaw North, the 
members for Kelvington-Wadena, Saskatoon Nutana, Cut Knife-Lloydminster, and myself, the member 
for Redberry, are working in conjunction with the Minister of Highways, Mr. Garner, on a new vehicle 
act for this session. Excellent input from the members involved gives the ministers a breakdown of 
different concerns relating to the constituencies involved. The transportation committee has a common 
sense approach to the problems and corrections that have been made to the act. This government will do 
its utmost to make Saskatchewan a safer place to travel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome my colleague, the member for Prince-Albert-Duck Lake, Mr. Sid 
Dutchak, a native of Redberry, to the legislature. On the 21st of February, 1983 in the Prince 
Albert-Duck Lake by-election, it was clearly shown that the people of Saskatchewan are in favour of 
this government’s policies and ideas. By a margin of nearly 900 votes, they elected a Progressive 
Conservative candidate over a former NDP cabinet minister. PCs now hold 56 seats in the legislature, 
while the NDP have only eight. Mr. Speaker, the positive attitude, the energy and the courage to tackle 
new problems will be shown over the coming years by this government. I look forward with confidence 
to the opportunities which lie ahead for Saskatchewan and her people I therefore do not support the 
amendment and I support the throne speech. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MEAGHER: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to begin my remarks today by 
congratulating my colleagues, the members for P.A.-Duck Lake and Morse on the excellent job of 
moving and seconding the throne speech. Particularly I would like to welcome my colleague, the new 
member for P.A.-Duck Lake to the legislature. We shall  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
139 

work together to do what we can to benefit the city of Prince Albert and district and I welcome his 
support. 
 
The fact that the people returned a Progressive Conservative member in the recent by-election represents 
the political reality of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It is a clear demonstration of the support that the 
people have for Premier Devine and the Progressive Conservative government and their policies. 
 
I’m proud to respond to this throne speech on behalf of the people of the Prince Albert constituency, the 
people I represent in this legislature. I take the responsibility of being a member of this legislature 
seriously. I believe it is to be my duty to represent all the people of my constituency and examine the 
performance of this government on behalf of the people and taxpayers of my constituency. They’re the 
people who elected me. They’re my first responsibility. They’re paying the bills for government and we 
must never forget that. 
 
I believe it’s important as well to emphasize the fact that I represent all the people of Prince Albert, not 
just those people who support the Progressive Conservative Party. I invite any person in Prince Albert, 
regardless of their political affiliation, who has a problem with government to contact me and I, as their 
MLA, will do all that I can to help them deal with government. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition made reference to the fact that he considered the throne speech barren 
because of what was left out. Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree with one aspect of his comments, that things 
were left out. As a representative of the taxpayers, I am exceedingly grateful that a number of the 
hare-brained socialist ideas we’ve been subjected to in the past number of years have been left out. An 
example that comes to mind readily is the purchase of the CPR. I am grateful the throne speech omitted 
that little investment. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has made reference on a number of occasions to Conservative members of 
the Assembly going off on flights of fantasy. Well, Mr. Speaker, if anyone as a political leader, has 
indulged himself in flights of fantasy, it has to be the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone, in response 
to this throne speech. He and his party’s total lack of contact with the real world, and the reason that 
they’re going to be a thing of the past in Saskatchewan, was clearly demonstrated by his priorities in that 
speech. 
 
His priorities were: number one, foreign aid to Africa and Asia — countries that have been subjected to 
even more socialism than we have. That’s why they need so much aid. The second priority, as was 
pointed out by my colleague, was the testing of the cruise missile. I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, and all 
members of this Assembly, that the people and taxpayers of this province, while recognizing the 
importance of these issues, want the government to go to work on the immediate and important job of 
cleaning up the economic destruction of this rich province, perpetrated by the socialist prelacies of that 
party in the corner. 
 
As well, they want us to lead the rest of Canada out of the socialist quagmire the comrades in Ottawa 
have created. The federal position of the NDP, enunciated by Mr. Broadbent recently, is that he was glad 
he helped put out the Clark government, and replace it with the Trudeau Liberals, and he would do it 
again. Well, Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite that the stance of the federal wing of their 
parity, as the Liberal Party-West makes all their crowing about the Crow so shallow and hypocritical  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
140 

as to make their future as a political party in Saskatchewan bleak and barren. That’s what’s bleak and 
barren. That, Mr. Speaker, is what is barren in this legislature. Not this throne speech, but their future as 
a political party in Saskatchewan. It is my hope that that group over there will begin to make an effort to 
represent their constituencies and get in touch with the real world. The people of Saskatchewan deserve 
a responsible, constructive opposition in this House. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition in his response the other day started right off in fantasy land, and brought 
out the old fear tactics, so reminiscent of the NDP campaigns of the past, without regard for the truth or 
the facts. 
 
He quoted John Diefenbaker in his claims that we should be objecting strongly to the testing of the 
cruise. He made reference to Mr. Diefenbaker’s concern about keeping Canada a nuclear-free zone, and 
his opposition to testing nuclear weapons on our soil — a sentiment, Mr. Speaker, widely supported in 
Saskatchewan and across Canada. 
 
My members opposite are suggesting I should be talking about the throne speech. I should remind them 
that the Leader of the Opposition raised the cruise missile as an issue in his response to the throne 
speech. I think it’s entirely appropriate for us to talk about that subject. It’s a sentiment that he quoted 
from Mr. Diefenbaker, and it’s supported across Canada. What he neglected to point out is that the 
cruise is an unmanned, unarmed aircraft. It is being proposed that it be tested over the Primrose air 
weapons range, established with the permission of the previous government for the purpose of testing 
weapons. The possibility of this unmanned, unarmed aircraft doing any damage to the air weapons range 
is almost zero. 
 
What is becoming increasing evident to the people of Saskatchewan, and across the country — indeed, 
North American continent — is that as soon as the comrades in Moscow push the button, the ‘Pink 
Panthers’ of the phony peace movement hit the streets of Saskatoon and Regina and across the country, 
with their placards waving, supported by socialist leaders like the member for Regina Elphinstone. 
Whenever the United States develops or tests a weapon system that might inhibit the Soviet Union’s 
aggressive plan, and at the same time help to safeguard our freedoms here in Canada, freedom, Mr. 
Speaker, that was earned for us by great sacrifice and bloodshed . . .  
 
To demonstrate how far into fantasy land their argument goes, they tell us that our safeguard is trust in 
the Soviet Union — that workers’ paradise with 65 crop failures in a row; that socialist tyranny that has 
almost a perfect record for breaking every treaty or undertaking it has ever entered into; that government 
whose philosophy dictates that a treaty is simply an undertaking of convenience. When it advances the 
socialist revolution it is kept; when it inhibits the revolution it is broken. Those are the people we are 
asked to trust. 
 
It is my conviction, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure the conviction of the vast majority of my constituents, 
that when given the facts, the least we can do is allow our friends to defend our freedom for us. God 
knows we wouldn’t be able to do it ourselves, thanks to the direction of party chairman Trudeau and his 
supporters in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s flights into fantasyland in foreign affairs and federal issues 
gives rise to a little speculation that perhaps his intentions are to enter the federal political scene. That 
may account, Mr. Speaker, for the dismal performance of the official opposition over there. They’re too 
busy jockeying for leadership positions to pay attention to the affairs of the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
141 

My colleagues who have spoken already in reply to the Speech from the Throne have done such a 
tremendous job and have so eloquently covered the main thrust of our government’s proposals, that I 
feel somewhat like Liz Taylor’s next husband. I know what’s expected of me but I don’t know if I can 
make it interesting anymore. 
 
Contrary to the doom and gloom predictions of the members opposite, the people of Saskatchewan have 
faith in the future, faith in themselves, faith in the new Government of Saskatchewan and an expectation 
of a promise kept. This government will turn Saskatchewan around and lead us out of the economic 
stagnation that has been foisted upon us by socialist economics in Saskatchewan, and Mr. Speaker, 
socialist economics in Ottawa. They want the government to get off their backs, out of their 
pocket-books, and out of the way, and let them go to work. 
 
This throne speech, Mr. Speaker, has gone a long way towards that very objective. 
 
We recognize that many of our problems are related to resource industries, and the fact that many of the 
megaprojects we thought would cushion the downturn fell victim to the socialist national energy 
program, high interest rates, and declining oil prices. But there are signs of recovery. Housing starts are 
up here and in the United States. With the decline of interest rates and the very timely and helpful 
programs introduced by this government, we believe Canada’s economic winter of discontent is over 
and Saskatchewan will lead the way to recovery. 
 
This government recognizes the importance of education and will therefore introduce changes to The 
Education Act. In this session we will bring our technical vocational training up to par, through 
measures such as the completion of the expanded version of the Prince Albert technical institute. I am 
very happy, as the member for Prince Albert, to see that institute under way. It will be a great asset to 
our community and it is needed in that part of Saskatchewan. We will also be introducing new training 
programs at the three other technical institutes. We are also dedicated to the improvement and expansion 
of our ability to train highly skilled manpower for complex fields. 
 
We continue in our commitment to provide the best health care in the world. Our aim is to maintain and 
stabilize our health care system. The cancer program will be continued and be expanded and improved. 
 
This government helped develop the strongest housing industry in Canada and will continue to work to 
maintain it. Housing starts in Saskatchewan rose 14 per cent in 1982 over 1981, while falling 29 per cent 
nation-wide. Programs like the mortgage interest reduction plan, family home purchase program, and 
Build-A-Home Saskatchewan have provided adequate and affordable housing for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Our government has begun to make changes in the priorities and directions of 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. Our objective is to make the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation a 
partner with the private sector rather than a competitor. 
 
On April 1, 1983, we will be transferring the ambulance program to the Department of Health, where it 
belongs. A new funding approach will reduce the inequities regarding cost for rural residents. In the area 
of social programming we will continue our determination to improve the quality of life for all citizens 
in Saskatchewan, better home care being a key example. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
142 

Government initiatives have allowed for a dramatic increase in the oil industry activity in Saskatchewan. 
In an unstable world market we are prepared to act to protect our oil industry, in order to retain our 
traditional positions as owner of that resource. 
 
A 10-year program which will extend natural gas to farms and rural communities will bring services to 
approximately 25,000 farms and 10,000 residential customers. It will create jobs and provide a less 
expensive heating fuel for consumers. 
 
Further amendments will be made to The Workers’ Compensation Act. A new co-operatives act will be 
introduced to provide a strong supportive base for future development in this area. 
 
Other things forthcoming, that I’m happy to see, are a new vehicles act with a focus on the dangers of 
drinking and driving, introduction of legislation to establish a licensing authority for cable service in 
Saskatchewan, and additional steps to decrease tax burdens for Saskatchewan residents. Finally, a 
provision that is particularly helpful for small contractors and businessmen, in particular in northern 
Saskatchewan, the review of the requirements for bonding on small projects. Many times we were 
confronted by the previous administration, with great efforts to involve small contractors and 
Northerners in the projects, only to find that bonding requirements and other matters precluded their 
having any opportunity to do work on those projects. 
 
This government is making positive steps to in fact include small business, Northerners, tradespeople, 
and encourage them to go to work. It is for that reason, and others, that I support the motion and oppose 
the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am proud to be here representing Saskatoon Nutana. It’s a 
beautiful riding and it’s full of beautiful people. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake and the 
member for Morse for their responses to the throne speech. I thought it was eloquently done. 
 
I am very sorry that the Leader of the Opposition is not in the Chamber at this moment, because I 
listened intently to his reply to the throne speech with unprecedented disgust. I say to your leader and to 
you seven little woodsy people, this time you have poisoned your own apple. 
 
The main catalyst, or the entire dramatic oratory, was not what do the people want, but more, what they 
must have. Socialism must rule. It is the theoretical core of the NDP and your party will not survive 
without it. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has indicated that the people of Saskatchewan have lived and have 
survived under the narrow philosophy of the NDP, and that you think the people must never have an 
opportunity to gain personal initiative nor to promote free enterprise. Not only can you not understand it, 
you will not tolerate it. 
 
Any move on the part of the Devine administration to encourage people to improve themselves and their 
environment — any such move, Mr. Speaker — will . . . (inaudible) . . . your party forever, because we 
won’t be dependent on big government  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
143 

any longer. 
 
I realize that each of us is dependent on others from birth until at least the age of 16, but I question the 
prolongment of such dependency. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the prolongment of the previous administration 
was from the nest of the parents under the wing of a big government, and it’s wrong. Quite simply, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a difference of philosophy. 
 
I say to my children, ‘Get a job and save your money and manage it well. You will learn every day to be 
a better person, and you will feel good about yourself.’ 
 
I dare to say that in the households of members opposite the line was, ‘Finish school, and I’ll get you a 
job with the government,’ and I think that’s what they did. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some facts are here to be accepted. These facts can not be changed by any government at 
any level, and we must build programs and plans around these facts. The economy is in a downturn. The 
fact that Saskatchewan sits like fresh cream on the top does not alter the fact. Our oil revenues are in 
jeopardy, in jeopardy as a direct result of a structured artificial market put in place by the OPEC nations. 
Trade, I say, free trade is the oldest profession in the world, contrary to some other opinions. Free trade 
survives, but government-controlled markets, socialist markets, do not, and I doubt that they ever will. 
 
This well-being of any civilization depends on the market, and it has come to pass, Mr. Speaker, that 
second only to our agricultural economy, housing and new housing starts are next. Housing starts are 
ahead in Saskatchewan and, indeed, we lead the nation. That in itself, thanks to this government’s 
policies and the implementation thereof, has been a modifying factor for the province during these 
strained financial times. Governments survive on trust, Mr. Speaker. We said we would, and we did. 
 
It is unpleasant and indeed unsettling to be aware of the course of the Liberal government in Ottawa, 
from their suppression of the West to their mockery of the parliamentary system. They cannot be trusted. 
And those in Saskatchewan who do not know who to thank for the Trudeau administration will surely be 
made aware prior to the oncoming of the next federal election. It has been said time and time again that 
an NDP is an NDP is an NDP. We heard from the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition just how true 
that was. Thus it is necessary for this government to try and get out from under the sheets of Mr. 
Trudeau and establish a platonic relationship for it is not an easy task dealing with a recently rejected 
lover. 
 
We all realize how serious the Pepin plan really is. After hearing the Premier and members of this 
government, many now know how dangerous the whole scheme is to the economic balance of Canada. 
The member for Elphinstone stated so emphatically how soft we were on the Crow. The member for 
Moosomin stated that both parties represented in the legislature today had a partial platform during the 
election regarding the Crow. The electorate, Mr. Speaker, were able to read and were able to analyse. 
The rural electorate, probably more than the urban, made a choice. In this legislature there are eight 
NDP and 56 Devine Conservatives. This has been said before many times and in many ways. The 
philosophy of this government regarding the use of the taxpayers’ morale and the taxpayers’ money, Mr. 
Speaker, is a direct conflict to the doctrine of the late NDP administration. 
 
Many of us are weary from effort, weary from trying to enlighten members opposite. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
144 

There are real families in Saskatchewan. These little groups of people, these real families are more 
precious to our society than the family of crown corporations. I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the heart of 
the throne speech exemplifies the heart of this government. We care about people, and we care a great 
deal about how these people feel about themselves. 
 
Admittedly there are problems we are having trouble dealing with. There are problems no government 
has ever solved, but there are problems that people have solved themselves, and they feel very good 
about it. As problems go, I would say the people of Saskatchewan solved the biggest problem this 
province has ever had on April 26, 1982. Good work, neighbours, I say, good work. A government 
should guide and not dictate. We are elected to expound the views of the grassroots people. This is a 
government that not only listens, but has the common sense to ask, be it ambulances, water, traffic 
legislation and even labour. 
 
Members opposite, I say to you: come up with a decent resolution and we’ll even listen to you. Mr. 
Speaker, may I remark on the members’ opposite comments about our continued suppression of women. 
I am very sorry that ‘Surely’ Shillington is not here today. The women are the sufferers; the women are 
the bearers of burdens; the women are suppressed by the Tory administration, says the babbling mouth 
from Regina Centre. Well, I should like to put on the record that, number one, I am a woman; number 
two, I spent the entire decade of the 70s working under the NDP administration; number three, I can’t 
think of a darn thing the NDP did to help me out — I did it alone; number four, I don’t see any skirts on 
the opposition benches. 
 
You see, members opposite, when people are allowed to grow and they’re allowed to believe in 
themselves as contributors to their own society, the dependency on big government terminates and 
therefore goes your party. This throne speech is the first sign of recovery for an ill province governed by 
diseased minds. Let’s keep the cures coming. 
 
In conclusion, I should like to enter into this little movie throne speech scenario contest we have. We 
have heard the Leader of the Opposition say the throne speech was all ado about nothing. We heard the 
member for Melville call it ‘The Good, The Bad and The Ugly.’ The Minister of Health referred to it as 
‘The Sting.’ The member for Regina Lakeview called it ‘Gone with the Wind.’ The member for Regina 
Rosemont said “How The West Was Won.’ Well, I had trouble making a decision. We could simply call 
you ‘The Reds.’ If there were four more of you, you could be ‘The Dirty Dozen.’ But as I take in the 
P.A.-Duck Lake by-election and the results thereof, I believe the appropriate title for this throne speech 
is ‘Justice for All.’ I will be opposing the amendment and supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise in the Chamber today to deal with the throne 
speech delivered last week by His Honour. In listening to the Leader of the Opposition yesterday, I was 
reminded of travelling around the country near The Battlefords. I have a good friend up there who’s 
somewhat of an evangelist and particularly, in the summer when the ministers to the area are away on 
vacation, he goes around and takes service in their church. On a number of occasions I’ve joined him in 
his little Sunday sojourn. 
 
One day we happened to be out in the small community of Maymont near The  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
145 

Battlefords. We were a little early for church and this friend of mine had a letter to mail. Now there was 
a young fellow in the town throwing a tennis ball against the roof of one of the buildings, catching it — 
playing ball with himself basically, as many of us did when we were children. We drove up to this 
young fellow and my friend said. ‘Pardon me. Can you tell me where the post office is here. I have a 
letter to mail.’ Well, the young fellow looked at him, and he gave us directions and he did it in a very, 
very competent manner. My friend thought that such a young boy not being in church on Sunday was 
somewhat of a travesty. So he passed along to the young fellow and said. ‘You know, see that church 
right down the street there you come there in a half an hour. I’ll show you the road to heaven.’ And the 
little boy looked up at my friend and he said. ‘Mister. I’m not going to be there. You can’t even find the 
post office.’ And that is what I was reminded of, listening to the Leader of the Opposition talk. He wants 
to show us the road to heaven and he doesn’t know where the post office is. 
 
I’d like to deal with three topics, Mr. Speaker, today in my speech. I’d like to deal with the history of 
this government. I’d like to deal with the economy and in particular, the energy sector of the economy. 
And I’d like to deal with the history of this province. You’ll notice that one thing is going to be 
particularly absent from my comments and that is any or very much reference to the former government. 
 
I think it goes without saying that in this province that former government is worth forgetting, Mr. 
Speaker. The people of Saskatchewan threw back the rhetorical pearls that were cast to them by the 
former government. In addition to that, they threw that government out. Recently, in February, the 
Leader of the Opposition called to the people of the province when there was a by-election in P.A.-Duck 
Lake. He said. ‘Send the government a message.’ Well, they did. That message is now sitting on this 
side of the House in the person of Mr. Sid Dutchak. I am very happy to see him here. 
 
When the Rex Reed of the opposition was reviewing his recent movie attendance, he decided that he’s 
equate the Speech from the Throne to the movie ‘Missing.’ For a while I thought he was talking about 
Mr. Hammersmith, but later he revealed that what he’d missed was the whole import of what the Speech 
from the Throne was all about. Obviously, he must have been on vacation for the summer, because if he 
would have looked around he would have realized that we had a number of promises that we were 
obligated to keep to the electorate of this province and we kept them. 
 
We dealt with things like the gasoline tax, Mr. Speaker. Certainly, everyone knows how that was 
handled . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It certainly was. There’s no question. It was a pleasure, and the 
people appreciated it. We dealt with a home ownership program. We kept that one to the letter, and the 
people appreciated it. We have a farm purchase program in place in this province. It’s very well 
accepted. We’ve instituted a public utilities review commission which is currently doing its job 
protecting the people from uncertain and unjustified increases in rates in public utilities. 
 
We brought in new industry to this province. We’ve developed a new technical institute which is much 
needed and will help the people of this province adapt to the changes in technology of the future and 
will arm them with the weapons, I suppose, that they need to attack the economy and to prosper in it. 
We’ve repealed the compulsory crown corporation back-in., which was basically a blank cheque that 
said should the government have the opportunity to enter into a venture which the private sector had 
developed and looked profitable, they could, and they could take half of that venture. We have now said 
that if they want to make any deal on joint-venturing with the private sector, that deal has to be made up 
front. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
146 

We’ve cleaned up the DNS, It’s a good thing that the hon. minister is such a big man because it would 
have worn out a lesser man. We have begun on our rural gasification program — another commitment 
kept. We were the first province in the country to develop the NEED program in conjunction with the 
federal government. When we saw that the federal government wasn’t going far enough, we went on our 
own with a jobs program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the province of Saskatchewan, housing starts have increased by 14 per cent, while for 
the nation they’ve decreased by 29 per cent. Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs over there keep asking 
when will drilling activity in the oil industry reach the levels of 1980? Well, I’d like to deal with a few 
things about drilling activity in 1980. To begin with, 1980 was before the national energy program was 
implemented. In addition to that, the oil industry expected to see radically increased prices. 
Saskatchewan wasn’t the only place that had record drilling in 1980, Mr. Speaker. The province of 
British Columbia, the province of Alberta, the province of Manitoba, the province of Ontario, and 
indeed the Maritimes, all enjoyed record oil drilling activity in 1980. For any government to take credit 
for that is irresponsible, in my view. But contrast that to what happened in 1982. 
 
In the first half of 1982, Mr. Speaker, last year, you had to look around hard to find out if we had an oil 
industry in this province. Everywhere you looked — Swift Current, Estevan, The Battlefords — 
everywhere the people tried to drill oil in this province, and they were shut down, and people were 
unemployed. Well, there was a change in government and there was a change in philosophy, and on 
June 30, the Minister of Energy announced changes in the oil royalty tax structure. We cleaned up the 
freehold oil and gas tax ant, and for the second half of 1982, drilling more than doubled. In the first half 
of 1982 there were 281 wells drilled in this province. In the second half there were 528 wells drilled — a 
direct result of a stimulation program, and a direct result of what can happen when you have a 
government that’s tuned in to the people, that’s tuned in to the needs of the province, and that’s a little 
bit imaginative and innovative and is prepared to be flexible. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, so far to the middle of February this year, there have been approximately 250 wells 
drilled. In six weeks under this government, in a new year, under the same weather conditions, there 
were as many wells drilled as there were in six months last year under the old administration, and I say 
that’s an indication of where this government is going. We are projecting a thousand-plus oil wells to be 
drilled in the province this year, and if this pace continues, it will be well over a thousand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear nothing but doom and gloom emanating from that little corner over there. 
Listening to them reminds me of being away recently and having my fortune read. I put my palm out, 
Mr. Speaker, and the fortune teller looked at it for awhile, and she mused over it, and she said, ‘I can see 
by the lines on your hand that you are going to be poor and unhappy until you are 30.’ Well, I’m almost 
30, in fact I’ve only 11 months to go until I’m 30, so I was quite concerned about what would happen 
after that. The fortune teller replied to me, ‘After you’re 30, you’ll get used to being poor.’ 
 
Well that’s what happened to the opposition, Mr. Speaker. They got used to being poor; they got 
comfortable with the way things were. Well, Mr. Speaker, the people of the province didn’t get used to 
being poor. They pushed them aside and they said, ‘We’re pushing ahead. That’s the best they have 
done in here for about 15 years. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
147 

I’ve dealt with the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to deal briefly with the natural gas industry. We 
don’t have a natural gas industry in this province to speak of really, and largely that’s because we 
weren’t making it worth anyone’s while to develop the natural gas fields that are lying underneath this 
province in the past, and in the recent past we’ve raised the fieldgate price from 54 cents a thousand 
cubic feet to $1 a thousand cubic feet. We’ve increased the royalties that the provincial government gets 
from 2 cents to 10 cents, or five times. More importantly, what we’ve done is increase the return to the 
producer, to encourage them to develop the natural gas fields we have from 14 to 30 cents. 
 
As I’ve said before, we had no industry to speak of in the province in the natural gas sector. What were 
we doing rather than develop our own.? Well, we were buying gas from TransCanada Pipelines through 
Alberta and paying them $2.50 or more than two and one-half times what we’re currently prepared to 
pay our own people to develop the market here and create Saskatchewan jobs. 
 
Again, within the recent past, we’ve announced a potash sale to China — one sale that so far this year 
almost equals the entire sales in 1982. Both of those initiatives are initiatives geared toward marketing 
the product that we produce. This government realizes that you can’t merely sit back and produce 
something and hope that somebody comes to buy it. You have to go out and market that product in order 
to create and maintain jobs in our economy. That’s what we’re doing. 
 
What about the other sectors of our economy, though? Saskatchewan and Canada indeed are exporting 
nations. Our major market is the United States; in fact about 70 per cent of our trade is with the United 
States. In fact, recently we’ve expanded our market into the United States by 16 per cent. So it should be 
very important to us what’s going on there. 
 
What’s going on there is that in January on 1983, the United States economy enjoyed the best month 
that it has had in 30 years — a clear indication that they’re beginning to come out of the recession that 
they’ve been plagued by. For us, our market, which we’re growing in, which we’re expanding in, is 
getting stronger. It’s nothing but good news for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So what does this all mean to us, and how does it reflect back to us here in the province.? Well, to begin 
with, the sales of used cars, for example, are up 21 per cent over a year ago. Department store sales are 
up 13 per cent in the province. What that means, Mr. Speaker, is that the consumer has renewed faith in 
this economy. When things are depressed, when people are worried about a recession, they’re not 
spending their money. They’re saving their money, they’re afraid of unemployment, they’re worried 
about what may happen, and they cut back. Particularly they cut back on the purchase of durable goods, 
like cars and appliances, and those types of items. Now they have faith in the economy; they’re going 
forward; they’re purchasing these items. What is going to happen will be a spin-off, a circulatory effect 
which by the increase in demand will create more jobs which will in turn create greater demand. 
 
In addition, there are a few other statistics that are interesting in relation to the economy. Corporate 
profit has increased for the first time in six quarters. For the first time in 18 months, people don’t need to 
be worried about laying people off. They can start to think about hiring for a change. I know that profit 
is a dirty world with some people but what we want to think about here is that profit really has two 
meanings. In  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
148 

an accounting sense it’s the surplus of revenue over expenses; and in the more biblical sense it foretells 
the future. 
 
Well, either word that you choose to use, Mr. Speaker, foretells the future. Without any profit, there 
aren’t any jobs; without any jobs, we’re talking about hardship in the province. Fortunately, the change 
has been such that profits are increasing, that people are going to work and that in fact we are on the 
road to repair in our economy. We’re leading the nation — we’re leading the world in this regard. 
 
Finally, retail advertising, Mr. Speaker, increased 38 per cent over last year in this province. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, when people are afraid of going broke, they’re not spending money on advertising and telling 
you about it. Largely, the doom and gloom that we hear is in men’s minds (and it’s in a very few minds, 
I might add — small minds). In fact, last year the province of Saskatchewan was the only province in 
the nation to expand its economy. We expanded the economy overall by 1,000 jobs. 
 
In fact, the Statistics Canada people ran a survey published in the Financial Times recently. Where are 
the new jobs? The new jobs are: two out of seven cities in Canada that are on the go — Saskatoon and 
Regina — between them a total of 7,000 new jobs created in the last 12 months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am the fourth generation of my family to live in this province. My ancestors were typical 
of most of the people who came here; they left somewhere where they thought they had no future; they 
left somewhere where they thought there was no hope of them getting better; they didn’t get used to 
being poor, Mr. Speaker, they got tired of being poor. 
 
There are two kinds of people basically in life: those people who are builders, and those people who are 
coasters. Thank goodness that the government of the province of Saskatchewan is finally in the hands of 
builders who are prepared to look forward to the future, rather than look backwards . . .  
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — . . . and coast on the laurels and work of generations gone by. 
 
Finally, those people who came here and built and developed this province were people of courage, and 
people of co-operation,. The co-operation that we have seen in this province is not the type of thing 
where they were trying to pound their neighbour down. They were prepared to co-operate and work with 
people for the betterment of them both. That’s the spirit that we maintain in this government, where 
we’ve co-operated with different levels of government for the betterment of the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of our past in this province, very proud of it. But more than that, I’ve got faith in 
our future. You know, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to be in Alberta recently and I was talking to a 
fellow who works for the Alberta government in the Department of Labour. As we chatted he said, ‘You 
know, I’m from near Yorkton, and I’m interested in your farm purchase program. What do I have to do 
to qualify for it? I said, ‘All you have to do is come home.’ And they’re coming home. Those people 
from Saskatchewan who have left in droves because no opportunity was here for them are  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
149 

coming home. 
 
I met a fellow in The Battlefords not long ago, about a month ago, and we were chatting. I said, ‘What 
do you do?’ He’s a carpenter and we got talking about building and renovating . . .  
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Was he working? 
 
MR. MORIN: — Yes, as a matter of fact, he was working, that’s why he was up in my riding. I said, 
‘Where do you live?’ He said, ‘I’m from Saskatoon now, but I was in Calgary before. I used to live in 
Calgary.’ I said, ‘Why would you want to leave Calgary?’ He said, ‘It’s dead in Calgary. There’s 
nothing going on there. Saskatchewan is the place of the future.’ 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What kind of government have they got in Calgary? 
 
MR. MORIN: — Not as good as we’ve got here in Saskatchewan, obviously. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, these are people that didn’t get used to being poor, they got tired of 
being poor. There are always going to be people who get tired of being poor and who look for 
opportunities. For a change, for the first time in two generations, people like that are looking to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read an excerpt from an editorial in Oilweek, February 28. I’ve had it with 
doom and gloom up to my eyeballs. The headline is ‘Upbeat Optimist . . . a Welcome Change.’ You bet 
it is. After living here for 29 years, I’ve had one of them that had upbeat optimism in it. 
 

It’s refreshing to visit another part of the country and hear some welcome upbeat optimism. 
While in Calgary where there’s an ongoing tendency to wallow in a slough of self-pity, 
accompanied by repetitious recitation of negativism because of the industry’s economic 
downturn, to the east and more specifically in Regina, the mood is decidedly on the upside 
with the future painted in dominant, optimist hues. 

 
Saskatchewan, the forgotten province. Well, nobody has forgotten about it lately. 
 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve finally got a government that’s prepared to be a partner of the people, not to 
oppress them and hold them back. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it says in the Bible in Proverbs, that where there 
is no vision the people perish. Well, finally in this province after 11 years of dearth, we have a 
government with a vision, with a look towards the future. That vision is the prosperity, it’s the job for 
our people, it’s the freedom for our people and it’s leading this nation out of its economic doldrums. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that I will be opposing the amendment to the Speech from the Throne, 
and supporting the Speech from the Throne. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s indeed a pleasure to take part in the throne 
speech debate. I have to say in starting that the throne speech will not take a 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
150 

long time to debate for two reasons. One, we have to go to a meeting in Val Marie to sort out the 
grasslands national park, which the government has been so inactive on over the last number of months. 
But also, because the throne speech contained so very, very little it won’t take long to debate. I think 
there’s an appropriate place for that throne speech. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a number of speakers that I’ve listened to today, some of the comments that 
were made I would just like to correct for the record. I listened to the member for Nipawin talk bout the 
used car sales in the province and how they had gone up. I guess there’s a reason why used car sales 
have gone up, and that’s because new car sales have gone down. People can no longer afford to buy new 
cars. The records show that passenger cars between 1982 and ’83 dropped a good deal. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I say that the reason used car sales have gone up is simply because people on minimum wage 
who work for the government, in the lower echelons at least, can no longer afford to buy new cars in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency which I represent is a rural constituency and is very typical, I think, of 
rural Saskatchewan, with on exception that I think that I would like to comment on. That is that over the 
past years, in fact in the history of the province since there was a constituency there, they have not 
elected a Conservative member. Indeed, that is a record that the people of Shaunavon are very proud of, 
and I’m sure it’s one that they will want to continue. Mr. Speaker, they are congratulating themselves 
day by day, as the record of this new government becomes known, and they did not fall for the folly of 
the promises that were made on April 26, 1982. As the days go by I run into them on the street, and they 
are very quick to admit that they weren’t part of the crew who were deceived by the promises made by 
the then opposition, the then Conservative candidate who played, indeed, the big lie on the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Shaunavon are proud they didn’t vote Conservative because they 
didn’t expect that the bus lines to towns like Frontier and Shaunavon and Eastend and Climax would be 
cut back in the first year of a Conservative government. I think that they were surprised when the 
grasslands park in the area was put on hold, when the highway construction stopped, when projects at 
Cypress Hills were put on hold, and the list goes on and on. 
 
Even the supposedly positive area of oil production which the members like to talk about is not coming 
to fruition. The royalty tax which was cut by the then member of mineral resources, or energy and 
mines, has indeed failed to stimulate drilling in my area of the province. In fact, in watching production 
for March, I find that the production quota is set at 82.5 per cent for the month of March, and what 
they’re predicting for April is that it will drop to 60 per cent or possibly even 50 per cent. So indeed, 
what has happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that this $100 million or $50 million, whatever it might turn 
out to be, has been given away to the oil companies with no return, either in jobs in oil production, or 
wells drilled. 
 
And Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is at a time when other people in the province are being told that the 
money is not there to increase salaries, that the money is not there to build much-needed facilities, 
whether it’s a rural gas distribution pipeline, or nursing homes, or hospitals. What the government 
should have done before it gave this money to the oil companies is looked at whether or not that was the 
right place to put the money. Were the profits, for example, of these oil companies in such dire straits 
that they had to go ahead and pour the money into them? I think the record would show quite a different 
story where oil companies like Husky Oil and oil companies like Imperial and Gulf have 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
151 

been showing significant profits. 
 
Just for the record, I would like to quote what the profit of some of these oil companies, who the 
Conservative government felt they had to pay off after the election, really was. Husky Oil in 1981, and 
this was with an NDP government in Saskatchewan, had profits of $28 million. These were certainly 
laudable people who needed a tax cut when the Conservatives came to power. Hudson’s Bay Oil and 
Gas, under an NDP government in Saskatchewan, had profits of $71 million in 1981. Imperial Oil, in 
1980, had profits of $601 million, and Gulf Oil had profits of $380 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the people of Saskatchewan look at where the tax dollars are going in the 
province, they will wonder whether or not those kinds of profits would indicate that that was a proper 
place to put the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars. We believe that the money would much better have 
been spent in taking care of the needs of our seniors, the day cares, and the other operations that are 
sacrificed as a result of this money going to oil companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to reiterate that my role as MLA for the Shaunavon constituency is one that I 
appreciate carrying out very much. I would like to say, as well, that the message that my constituents 
want me to bring here today is that for the people who are seen to be the losers or the victims of the 
April 26 election, we should be the defenders here in the Assembly because this massive government is 
not doing its job in that area. The victims of April 26 — the list grows and grows, and I would like to go 
through a few of them. I would like to use examples of the native people, and my colleagues both from 
Cumberland and Athabasca will go into that in a great deal more extant at a later date. 
 
But here we have towns where the unemployment rate is running in the area of 85 per cent and 90 per 
cent. These people are not feeling the benefits of the Conservative government which the members get 
up and brag about every day here in the House. The four-year-olds who were sacrificed in the dental 
program are also being called on to bear the burden of the mistakes being made by the Conservative 
government. We can go on to the 60,000 on minimum wage, the 59,000 on welfare, the 41,000 who 
cannot find jobs, and the example of people who are handicapped in the sheltered work-shops of the 
SCCC&A — because of a lack of a grant by the government they have had their salaries cut in half. In 
fact, the story is told that one individual had his salary cut from $100 a month to 50 and his 
transportation fee was 45 which left him with a grand total of $5 per month. These, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
are the victims of April. These, Mr. Speaker, are the people who will see that this government is indeed 
short-lived. 
 
I think the Government of Saskatchewan is a little bit like the cheerleading crew who come out on the 
field in advance of the football game here in Regina. I think that after 11 months of cheerleading, what 
the people of Saskatchewan are wondering is whether or not the cheerleading is over and the game is 
about to begin, because the people of Saskatchewan have a hard time deciding whether the cheerleading 
is over, or whether we’re just losing the game. What they’re telling me is that at the first opportunity 
when the season’s over, they’re going to turf out the coach and get a new management team in. Mr. 
Speaker, I think that we on this side of the House will make sure that that happens, and the quicker the 
better. 
 
In having loser of April 26, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it is fair to say that we also have had a number 
of winners. The winners — the first obvious one would be the good, old CPR — the CPR that very 
obviously had benefited by the removal of the gas tax in the  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
152 

area of a million dollars per year, the CPR that, as well, now have the road clear to get rid of the Crow 
rate because of the inaction of the present government in Saskatchewan. The member will try to say that 
they have this great plan for recovery now, in terms of to get rid of the Pepin plan, but the case has been 
made over and over again that the Minister of Agriculture is not sincere in attempting to defend the 
Crow rate. He’s not sincere, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because if he were, he would not have been silent on 
the issue from June 1982 until February 1983. He would also attend meetings of the Crow organizations 
in Saskatoon and Regina when invited and not send his Legislative Secretary. I don’t have anything 
against the member for Weyburn. I think he’s a fine fellow, a good friend. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, sending the member for Weyburn to a Crow meeting 
when he has no power to do anything is a little bit useless. I don’t say that in any disrespect for the 
member for Weyburn. I think that he will some day make a great replacement for the Minister of 
Agriculture, who is presently not doing his job. 
 
I think in looking at what is happening with the Crow rate, the CPR is very glad that there’s a 
Conservative government in Saskatchewan. They are indeed winners as a result of the April 26 election. 
I think that in looking at the political donations of the CPR, it’s no wonder that we have the kind of 
action that we recently have here in the province of Saskatchewan. Over the last number of years, 
literally thousands of dollars have gone from the CPR to the Conservative Party of Canada, who then 
filter money back to the Conservative Party in Saskatchewan to fight elections. I think the day of 
collection has arrived here in the province. Therefore, we see great silence of the Crow rate until it is 
absolutely certain that Liberals are going to be able to ram it through in the House. Then we find that the 
government comes out and takes a stand. 
 
Even today, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is the Minister of Agriculture doing to defend the Crow in a very 
crucial week in this whole debate? Where is the Minister of Agriculture. Well, our information is that he 
is selling bulls in Bulgaria. I hope he has a better time selling bull there than he does here in the province 
of Saskatchewan, because the farmers aren’t buying it. 
 
We, on this side of the house, are extremely disappointed that the minister has not been here in this 
Assembly to fight and work for the Crow rate, but instead has gone to Bulgaria and attempted to sell 
cattle. It’s not that cattle aren’t important to sell, but I think that the minister has a much more important 
role at this time to be in Saskatchewan fighting for the Crow. And if I were choosing who would go 
away, I would send the Legislative Secretary to Bulgaria to sell bull because I think he’d do a better job 
of it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to say that the people who also benefited from the Tory election were 
indeed the oil companies in the province of Saskatchewan. Another group to do very well under the 
Conservative government will be the insurance companies, who will benefit day by day as SGI is done 
and got rid of, where the premiums are shifted from the package policies from SGI to Royal Trust and to 
other large line companies. And here again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, large amounts of money will roll out 
of this province to line the coffers of the multinationals, insurance companies as well as the CPR . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
The members say that it is pure speculation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but the people who  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
153 

set up SGI in the ’40s and ’30s will well know why that corporation was set up to start with. It was for 
that very reason. Now we see the hatchet crew in who are attempting to deal the death blow to SGI and 
other crown corporations. The members opposite will say that the reason they’re doing that is because 
they’re going to allow the free enterprisers to come in and develop the resources of the province, but I’ll 
tell you the reason that SGI and the other crowns were set up is that the free enterprisers were not 
willing to come to Saskatchewan because the profit margin was not great enough. And what they’re 
going to have to do to entice them to come is to sell off the heritage and the resources of our province. 
And I think that our job on this side of the Assembly is going to be to make that know to the people of 
the province before the next election. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, members opposite laugh about the destruction of crown corporations and talk 
about the need for profit. What we’re saying is that profit may be fine, but before the needs of the people 
of the province are taken care of profits are immoral. What we want for the people of the province, 
whether it’s senior citizens in nursing homes or children in day care, is that before the profits of Imperial 
Oil are taken care of the needs of our citizens come first. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another group who lost, and I believe the ones who were taken to the cleaners the 
worst, because of their faith in government built over the last number of years, were the farmers of 
Saskatchewan. Now don’t say that the people made a terrible error on April 26. They were conned by a 
Conservative government, the likes of which hadn’t been seen in the province for many years. I think 
the people of the province had built up a trust between 1934, the last Conservative government, and 
1982. And somehow they had gotten around to the point where they believed what a government or an 
opposition or a person seeking election was saying on the campaign trail. When you said you were going 
to set up a crown corporation to work with potash during the election campaign, sometime during the 
next four years you did it. And when you talked about working with nursing homes or setting up home 
care during the campaign, that would come about. 
 
But Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that many farmers, especially those who believed that there would be 
40 cents off a gallon of fuel on the farm were misled by the Conservatives during the campaign, and 
misled badly. At no time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, did the Conservatives, while they were campaigning, 
attempt to correct the myth about a 40 cent reduction on the farm fuel. What they said is that they would 
lower the cost of fuel for farmers, but the story which has happened since then is quite different. 
 
I went to check the record whether or not farm fuel has gone down 40 cents a gallon since the election in 
April. When checking, I find that it has gone from $1.33 to $1.66 in Shaunavon since the election in 
April, and that’s an increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of some 23 per cent. I took the opportunity to phone 
Malta, Montana to see whether or not this was a trend which existed across the place, whether the 
farmers in Montana were being called on to compete in the same way we are in the cost-price squeeze. I 
find quite a different story, for on April 26 last year the cost of fuel in Malta was $1.16 as compared to 
our $1.33. The price has gone down to $1 a gallon today. 
 
So our farmers are being asked to compete with American farmers who are having their fuel costs go 
down from $1.16 to $1, while ours is going from $1.33 to $1.66. What that means in terms of an average 
farm would use 4,000 or 5,000 gallons of fuel a year, and I don’t think that’s unusual, is an increase of 
about $1,500 per year. 
 
You members say there’s no tax on farm fuel and I agree, there is no tax on farm fuel, but  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
154 

what we’re talking about is bringing in a program such as exists in Alberta, or has existed in 
Saskatchewan in the past when there was a cost-price squeeze, where the provincial government takes 
some of their revenue and turns it back to the farmers to show some confidence, the way they did with 
the oil companies. 
 
Grant Devine, the Premier, the other day talked about why we gave $100 million to the oil companies. 
He said it was to improve their morale. Well, that’s a weird way of using $100 million in the province of 
Saskatchewan when you’re going to have a deficit and there’s no money for farmers. To improve the 
morale of the oil companies such as Imperial Oil, and Gulf, and Hudson’s Bay Oil and Gas, as well as 
Husky Oil, who have millions and millions of dollars in profits. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that when 
the next election rolls around the farmers of Saskatchewan will not be conned twice. 
 
The members opposite will talk about their great farm purchase program — the program which has 
given loans to 400 farmers. I believe, out of 67,000 farmers — less than 1 per cent. I believe it’s in the 
area of a quarter of 1 per cent that has used this wondrous program. Five thousand farmers have applied 
for it; 400 have received it. That means one out of 10 of those who applied for the program are eligible, 
and I don’t know whether the people in the government don’t have their ear to the ground, but it’s not a 
very popular program in the areas that I circulate in Shaunavon, because every farmer I talked to who 
has applied has not been eligible. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think, here again, we have a program which has 
helped 400 people and the other 67,000 are wondering what the government has done for them today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that in looking at the litany of the record of this government one doesn’t 
have to look very far to realize that the first 10 months of the Conservative government tell a very sad 
story. 
 
On the Crow rate I think that the story is a very sad one. The minister has not taken advantage of the 
opportunities he has had to fight for the maintenance of the Crow rate. Instead, he has talked about 
whether Pepin’s plan needs a little changing or whether it needs a little adjusting here or there, but at no 
time has he come out and said that the Crow rate has to be maintained and no more money should be 
paid by farmers. I don’t think that’s a story that any of the members will dare stand in this House and 
say, because if they say that, they should read what their minister is saying when, on March 16,’83 in 
Melville, talking to the chamber of commerce (and maybe it depends on where he’s talking), he says, in 
quotation: 
 

We’ve met with Pepin and told him we will pay a little more. 
 
That’s a strange way for the Minister of Agriculture to be behaving if he is on record as being a defender 
of the Crow, and I don’t think that at any time the members will be able to ever hear that coming out of 
the mouths of our members on this side. Everyone knows where we stand on the Crow, and the farmers 
will remember that at the next election. 
 
I think the only reason the minister was able to finally come off the fence was because his pollster from 
Toronto said that if you don’t make a bit of a stand on this you’re going to have to pay the 
consequences, and therefore we saw a great turn around in February, late February, and the 
Conservatives then had a policy on the Crow. But it’s not backed up by members in Manitoba like Jack 
Murta from Lisgar, or by the legislature in Alberta. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that it’s a phoney case 
being made; otherwise the minister would not be in Bulgaria but would be in the House fighting for the 
Crow rate and the  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
155 

Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
. . .(inaudible interjections) . . . Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members talk about 55 other members. I 
was in Estevan last night. The chamber of commerce had a farmer appreciation night there last week. 
They invited the Premier and the Minister of Agriculture. They wouldn’t show up. They said. ‘Well, 
send us anyone.’ No one showed up. They were thinking about asking Ned Shillington to go out and 
argue on the farmers’ behalf, because there was no one in the Tory caucus who would show up in 
Estevan to address a farmer appreciation night in Estevan, in the Premier’s home riding. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the arrogance that is shown by this government in 10 short months 
takes most governments 10 or 20 years to develop, and I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because of the lack 
of content in the throne speech, and because of the lack of confidence that we have in the government, I 
will be voting in favour of the amendment, and against the main motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMITH: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is a great pleasure and honour for me to stand before this 
Assembly today to speak in regard to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I would first like to thank all the residents and electors of Moose Jaw South for making it so that I may 
be sitting in the legislature today. I would just like to, first of all, talk on a few things, as to why I’m in 
this legislature today. 
 
Number one, because electors of Moose Jaw were tired with nothing from the previous government 
excepting promises. Number two, their trust in the member at that time was no more. Number three, 
they wanted a member who would recognize the citizens of all the area. Number four, they wished for 
an MLA who would speak for all the people on their concerns of the day. Number five, Mr. Speaker, 
someone who had worked with the government, for the government, and worked with the labour force, 
which I think in Moose Jaw South is why we had a change in government. 
 
I do not like to criticize. I always like to be positive and constructive, but I would just like to make a few 
remarks. The previous government knew they were fading in all their aspects. They felt that they needed 
an exciting announcement prior to the election of 1982, so they announced there would be a heavy oil 
upgrader in the Moose Jaw or Lloydminster area, and as their political strength was failing in Moose 
Jaw, they put their main emphasis on Moose Jaw. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I said from the time of the 
announcement, it was just another wild news story which we can always expect from the socialist 
government. 
 
What happened in the election of April 26? The previous MLA for Moose Jaw South was defeated. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you may wonder where he is now. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he is down by the 
railroad tracks. Mr. Speaker, my I just say, the opposition leader was in Moose Jaw a couple of weeks 
ago speaking to an NDP forum, and one of his quotes was, and I quote: ‘The present Moose Jaw MLAs 
from Moose Jaw are apologists for the present government.’ Might I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
challenge the opposition leader to ask the constituents in Moose Jaw South what they feel about my 
record. He will get a very positive answer. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why am I a member of the legislature? Because the electors of Moose Jaw South 
were tired with nothing; they wanted action at all times. Yes, Mr. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
156 

Deputy Speaker, may I just point out to the opposition leader that we in Moose Jaw will always give 
service to the constituents who put us in here. Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I would like to mention a 
few things about the throne speech debate, and I will go into them very briefly as I know that they have 
all been covered very well before and we’ve had some very diligent speakers on this event. Allow me to 
comment just on a few of them. 
 
I think it is evident to most residents of Saskatchewan that the whole of Canada’s economy has suffered 
a downturn in the past two years or more. Saskatchewan has shared in that suffering but surely not to the 
extent of other areas of the country. We have been fortunate because of our strong agricultural base and 
the economic foundation of our province, which we should all take pride in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is with this in mind that our government seeks to stimulate all sectors of the 
economy. Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government believes in fairness and balance in labour-management 
relations. Productive relations are imperative for the creating and security of employment in the 
province. We have already taken steps to improve the workers’ compensation, and I look forward to 
further amendments to The Workers’ Compensation Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, regarding employment, I am very pleased the maximum minimum wage will be 
frozen for the balance of the year. This move is necessary to ensure that more jobs will be provided 
throughout the province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, with regard to small business, I am pleased to see our 
government has decided to take steps to help small businesses in regard to performance bonds. The new 
government policy will supply bidding procedures for small Saskatchewan contractors. Up to this point, 
small business had not been given the attention they deserved by any government in this province, and I 
feel we must do more for small business in the future. This involves small businesses, and small 
businesses did not get the attention given to others, such as the farmers, home-owners, and oil industries. 
 
Co-operative aspects in the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, will provide an effective response to the 
challenges of our economic environment in regard to agriculture. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I mentioned 
earlier, Saskatchewan has a strong agriculture base, probably the best in Canada, and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, our government has strengthened that base from the very first day we came to form the 
Government of the province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we established the farm purchase program, we 
gave the farmers their land. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we disbanded the land bank program and replaced it 
with the farm purchase program so farmers would be owners of their land and not tenants of the 
government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a provision in this throne speech to introduce a new horse-racing 
commission to regulate and conduct horse-racing. I hope to see that the smaller cities like Moose Jaw, 
Swift Current, and others will be allowed their fair share of input into such a commission, and that they 
will benefit from it in many ways financially, also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has taken a firm stand on the Crow rate. We adamantly oppose the current 
federal plan for replacing the Crow rate with a new freight structure. I’m sure we all realize changes 
must be made to such things as the Crow. However, the changes must be made in such a way that one 
sector of the Canadian economy does not have to bear the entire burden of those changes. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
157 

Energy and natural resources. Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has been a great increase in oil industry 
activity in Saskatchewan since our government has taken office, but we must realize that recently world 
oil prices have fallen, and this could greatly affect our provincial revenues. Our government is 
monitoring the situation extremely carefully, and is prepared to protect our oil industry. We are also 
committed to extending natural gas to the many farms and rural communities throughout the province, 
which is long overdue. 
 
In social services and health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government is introducing a new approach 
to ambulance services. We will be taking steps to incorporate the new program within the health care 
system. Mr. Deputy Speaker, a new funding system for ambulance services will be implemented early 
next year. 
 
I think it is extremely significant that our government is deeply committed to improving independent 
living opportunities for the disable and disadvantaged. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we started to meet the challenges placed on us and society by the growing numbers 
of seniors. We realize the importance of improving the quality of life for all people. 
 
With regard to housing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there have been many improvements regarding the 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation in the past year. I’m sure that housing in the province is no longer 
the problem it was before we became the government. 
 
With regard to highways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to see a new vehicle act which will be 
presented during this session. I’m equally pleased that more attention will be focused on the dangers of 
drinking and driving. Mr. Deputy Speaker, let us hope that changes to The Highways Act will promote 
safer highway travel. 
 
I believe that municipalities have been pretty well covered . . . (inaudible) . . . I would just like to say 
I’m sure our municipal governments are looking forward to new legislation that will strengthen their 
local autonomy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government has established a cabinet committee on water concerns, and plans 
to introduce measures to bring all water-related legislation and services under one body. And I’m also 
looking forward to improved water facilities in the cities of Regina and Moose Jaw, which I feel will be 
coming in a very near time. This approach will bring forward many of the water problems and projects 
which have been neglected and discouraged for many years under the previous government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, speaking for the city of Moose Jaw and Moose Jaw South, I must say the 
re-evaluation was not one done properly. I hope that under our government, the other cities and 
communities in the province will be dealt with in a much better way. Moose Jaw’s business sector is 
suffering greatly from the previous government’s way of handling things in regard to reassessment. It is 
my understanding we were assessed under the new assessment formula in Moose Jaw, and some others 
under the old formula. I feel that this was very unjust, and we certainly had a bad time by this 
reassessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m quite sure that most everything is being covered in the throne speech from time to 
time. I am quite sure we are all getting rather tired of hearing everything  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
158 

over and over again. So I just want to say that I’ll be supporting the motion, but I will not be supporting 
the amendment. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to rise in this Assembly and 
speak on the throne speech, the first throne speech of the Devine government. I must say, Mr. Speaker, 
that I am very impressed with the calibre of the speeches that have come forward in the throne speech 
debate. When I look at the calibre of the speeches from some of the new members in this House, I can 
tell you that the people of Saskatchewan, on April 26, spoke soundly, spoke wisely, and I can say, 
elected some of the best members that this legislature has seen in some time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — And I want to publicly congratulate you new members to the Assembly, 
because you are a bright bunch of young people — young people committed to the development of the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’m sure you’re going to be here for a long time. I think some of you, and 
most of you — I would say, all of you — are going to have a very fruitful and enjoyable political 
careers. 
 
I think I speak for all of us in this House — I speak for every member in this House, whether they e a 
veteran, or whether they be a neophyte in the political arena — that we are all very pleased and very 
proud to sit in this Camber as members of the government led by the fine Premier of this province, Grant 
Devine. I’ve had opportunity, ladies and gentlemen, to travel this country in the last while, and I can tell 
you, from sea to sea in Canada, that Premier Grant Devine is one of the most admire and respected 
politicians on the political scene today. I’m proud to be a cabinet minister in his government — a 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which has confidence in the judgements and in the abilities of the 
people of Saskatchewan; a government that is not here to tell people what’s good for them — not a 
government that wants to run everything by itself, but a government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that wants to 
work with the people of Saskatchewan to help them realize their goals, their aspirations, for their 
families and their futures. That’s the type of government that sits on this side of the House today in the 
province of Saskatchewan — a government that we’re all proud to be part of. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, last April the people of Saskatchewan gave this government a resounding mandate. 
They re-enforced that mandate two months ago in Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
I want to congratulate our newest member, Mr. Dutchak, from that constituency. I think he gave a fine 
maiden speech in the House last week, and I look forward to a great contribution to our caucus from the 
new member for Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan people have entrusted us with the responsibility to carry out 
their wishes and help them achieve their personal goals, and we will not betray that trust, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Our record during the first year in office speaks for itself. The removal of the provincial 
gasoline tax, the mortgage interest reduction program and the family farm purchase program have all be 
implemented and are benefiting people throughout this province. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
159 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have accomplished much in the 11 months, but this is only the beginning. The 
programs set out in the throne speech will chart a course for a better life for all Saskatchewan residents, 
a stronger economy, expanded training programs for the people of Saskatchewan to take part in the 
expanded new development that will take place in this province in the coming years. I am proud to say 
that there will be improved health and social programs and more opportunities for families and 
individuals to establish a career and a home right here in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Those are the objectives. Those are the objectives and the deals of the Devine government. Those are the 
things that the fellows in the front benches and the back benches of this government, and the ladies — 
and I want to say the ladies because that’s rather a new thing to the Saskatchewan legislature, the ladies, 
and the ladies are all on our side of the House — will work together on, along with the Saskatchewan 
people, to achieve. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the road ahead is not going to be an easy one, and we will not achieve these goals 
overnight, but we are laying the foundations for steady and logical progress towards these goals. 
 
I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that we are laying those foundations in consultation and co-operation 
with the public. It would take me too long to list every example from the throne speech, but I want to 
mention just a few to illustrate how the members of this side of the House believe that the government 
should serve the people, and not the other way around. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a new co-operatives act has been developed on the basis of discussion with the 
co-operative leaders in the province. A new labour relations branch in the Department of Labour will 
work towards better relations between labour, government and employers. Bonding requirements on 
small projects will be reviewed to assist small Saskatchewan contractors. The taxation system for 
mineral resources will be simplified, and steps are being taken to improve the organization of the public 
service, so it can better meet the needs of the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, during this recession in the economy of Canada and other nations, it is natural that 
the rejuvenation of our own provincial economy should be our principal concern, but as the Minister of 
Health, I am pleased to see that the fields of health and social service will continue to be assigned an 
important role in our government’s program, and I am particularly pleased by the approaches being 
taken for the development of our health system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the health system of Saskatchewan is faced with many demands, many legitimate 
demands from all sectors of society. We have concerns for the young, for our senior citizens, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Thank goodness, we have a health system in this province where people are able to 
enjoy good health for a greater number of years, and our government will face that situation and we will 
do whatever we possibly can to provide adequate health services for the senior citizens of this province, 
because, ladies and gentlemen, it was the senior citizens of this province who built many of the things 
that I, and people of my generation and younger generations enjoy in Saskatchewan today. 
 
In the field of health, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think one of the areas that the throne speech alluded to was 
the provision of cancer facilities. Cancer, for some unknown reasons as  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
160 

of yet is a very great threat to the people of Saskatchewan and other people in western nations. Cancer 
and cancer treatment is the priority of the people of Saskatchewan. I’m proud to say (and more will be 
brought forward when my colleague and seatmate, the Minister of Finance, brings forth the budget) that 
this government is using the resources of the province of Saskatchewan to address this serious situation 
of cancer. I’m very proud, as Minister of Health, to be able to say that we’re going to do that. I think it is 
something that the people of Saskatchewan are wanting. We hear these things as we, the ministers and 
the members of the caucus of the Government of Saskatchewan, go throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan, speaking to the people. 
 
Now many of my colleagues have mentioned the ambulance service, and I want to say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that upon taking over the portfolio of health on May 10, I found an ambulance system that was 
somewhat in disarray, an ambulance system that was grossly underfunded. We took immediate steps at 
the Government of Saskatchewan. In July of this year we put in $500,000, my colleague the Minister of 
Urban Affairs put forth $500,000 into the ambulance service. We also promised them that we would 
undertake a thorough investigation of ambulance services, with a view towards improving them in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
My colleague and seatmate, the member for Moosomin, Mr. Birkbeck, undertook such a study. This 
week we were able to unveil that study, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am very proud of the work that Mr. 
Birkbeck and his committee have come up with. I thin it you listen to the media, if you listen to the 
people in the ambulance service in Saskatchewan, you will see that by listening to the various groups . . . 
I think there were 69 various groups who made presentations to Mr. Birkbeck’s committee. He travelled 
through the western states and provinces to visit other ambulance systems. I would think the reaction 
from the people on ambulance boards and the ambulance operators has been most favourable to the 
ambulance report brought forward by Mr. Birkbeck and his committee. I want to congratulate him for a 
job very well done. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I want to lay out some important aspects of that study. Two of the things 
which I think are very important . . . Number one, as many have said, the ambulance will come directly 
under the administration of the Department of Health. We have an ambulance unit in the Department of 
Health. But more important than that, as an advisory committee to the ambulance unit, there will be on 
ongoing advisory committee which will help the people in my department evolve an ambulance 
program, an emergency health program that will in the future years develop and grow to meet the needs 
of the Saskatchewan people. That representation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will include people from the 
Saskatchewan Road Ambulance Association; people from the Saskatchewan EMT Association; people 
from the medical association, the SMA; people from the ambulance district boards; people from the 
Saskatchewan Health-care Association, and people from the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is in keeping with the philosophy of the Devine government: that we listen to 
the people of Saskatchewan; that we work as partners with the people of Saskatchewan, people who are 
involved in the delivery of these services; that we all work together; that the government is not the 
vehicle to just say that this is it, take it or leave it, but the government, along with the people providing 
the service, work together in consultation and co-operation to provide a better service. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m sure there are other speakers who are wanting to speak in this  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
161 

debate so I will not go on too long. I wanted to point out some more of the aspects in health that I am 
very proud of, seeing that is the portfolio that I have been charged with by the Premier of this province. I 
just want to indicate that over the last 10 months since taking office in the province of Saskatchewan, we 
have infused into the health department budget $26 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, more than was put 
forth in that fudge budget of the government that we defeated. 
 
We have also brought in an improved construction formula for the building of hospitals that takes some 
of the burden off local communities to construct their new hospitals. Substantial grants totally over $2 
million have been made available to the City and St. Paul’s hospitals in Saskatoon to meet pressing 
capital needs. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again in this Assembly. I visited St. 
Paul’s Hospital. I saw diagnostic equipment that was obsolete; that’s what the professionals told me. I 
believe their judgements. I came to the cabinet of this government and said that there was a need in St. 
Paul’s Hospital for new diagnostic equipment at that meeting — not three years hence, at that meeting. 
And I say that’s reacting to the needs of Saskatchewan, and that’s putting people’s money right in to the 
services, the health services of this province. 
 
We’ve also had funding which has been approved for major hospital construction projects in 
Lloydminster, in Nipawin, in Melfort, in Yorkton and in Cut Knife. These projects have a total estimated 
cost of $43 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s putting people’s dollars into providing health services, 
health facilities, to meet the needs in those communities throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Just recently, and many of you have seen this on the television, I was proud to be part of that great 
annual event in this province, the Kinsmen Telemiracle, where the volunteers of this province — the 
people belonging to the Kinsmen association — come together. They work all night, all night long. They 
get some of the best entertainers in Canada who work tremendously hard. I was there at this 
Telemiracle; it was my first time. I can tell you that the effort put forth by all involved was great. 
 
The culminating announcement, and I was proud to be part of that, was that a new children’s rehab 
centre in the city of Saskatoon will be put together and built with the volunteers of Saskatchewan, and 
the Government of Saskatchewan, and I was proud to announce $2.7 million from this government for a 
children’s rehab centre in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve said, I know there are others who are wanting to address this throne speech. 
I notice that the Leader of the Opposition has come in and I would like to remind him that we had a little 
discussion at the last session about prophesying. I think he said that he had prophesied that there would 
be a great depression, or a recession, maybe a recession is a little kinder. But there was something he 
said: “I predict that it’s going to get worse.” I remember that the other night, it was getting rather late, 
but I remember that. I said tat that time, “You know, I don’t pretend to predict, but when I see the 
Leader of the Opposition predicting, from some of his past predictions, that indicates to me that it might 
go the other way around.” 
 
Now, I don’t profess to have any powers of prophesy, but I remember back to my . . . I thin kit was 
maiden speech. No, it wouldn’t be, it was the second year I was in this House. We had a member who 
was then the member for Saskatoon Nutana, and he had a couple p of claims to fame. Number one, he 
was a bit of a boxer, and number two, he was kind of the poet laureate of the NDP government of the 
day. He’s writing letters at  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
162 

this time; he switched from poetry to letter writing. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had taught English, and I 
don’t profess to be a real good poet, but I did write a little poem because I remember on March 14 that 
the then member for Saskatoon Nutana wrote a poem about one of our members. So I thought, well, if 
he can write a poem, I can write a poem also. I just happened to come across this the other day, and I 
thought, it is a little bit prophetic. I’d like to share it with some of our new members, because I’m sure 
they have never heard it before. 
 
It happened the day after one Mr. Peter Lougheed had rather an astounding victory in Alberta. I’m sure 
you will remember it, March 15, 1979. These are the words I said that day: 
 
 The NDP looks sad today 
 Alberta people have said, “No way.” 
 The socialist philosophy they see to the east 
 Is not the kind they want in the least. 
 One lame duck sits over there. 
 His political views Albertans don’t share. 
 Lougheed will bring them milk and honey 
 And fill their pockets with lots of money. 
 And so I say to you, my friends, 
 Take heed, in four short years your term will end. 
 And over there, sitting all alone, 
 Will be wee Allan Blakeney, a lonely drone. 
 
As I say, I don’t have any prophetic vision. Maybe it was just a little bit of insight. You never know how 
the world is going to unfold. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think with those few remarks, I would have to say 
that I will not be supporting the amendment, I will be supporting the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MS. ZAZELENCHUK: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time if I may, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you to this Assembly, a group of approximately 30 people from Saskatoon, seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
These people represent the Pensioners’ and Pioneers’ Activity Pavilion in Saskatoon, and among our 
guests are included their president, Mrs. June Clark. This organization is also celebrating its 50th 
anniversary this year, and I look forward to joining them in the celebration of this event next month. 
 
I would like all members to join with me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

Address in Reply (continued) 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
163 

MR. GLAUSER: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think it’s only fitting that I begin by thanking 
the Minister of Health for his commendation of the newest members to this House, me being one of 
them. While I perhaps cannot be considered with the young ones that he has identified, I still intend to 
be around here a long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to begin, first of all, by congratulating the mover of the throne speech, the newest 
member to join this government, representing Prince Albert-Duck Lake, and at the same time 
compliment him on his maiden speech; and the seconder, the member for Morse, who spoke, and when 
he spoke was not only speaking for the farmers of his constituency, but was peaking for indeed, the 
member for Morse, who spoke, and when he spoke was not only speaking for the farmers of his 
constituency, but was speaking for indeed all farmers in this province. 
 
While I represent the urban constituency of Saskatoon Mayfair, it does encompass numerous farm 
holdings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to comment a little bit more on my constituency. I feel I represent a group of 
the finest people. For the confidence they have a placed in me, I intend to serve them to the best of my 
ability, and regardless of their problem, large or small, I have no hesitation to give them good service. 
 
It is indeed a pleasure for me to enter this debate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a debate on a throne speech that 
has more scope than most I have perused over the past number of years. 
 
I found it somewhat difficult to equate what I had heard with the qualitative and quantitative analysis of 
it by the Leader of the Opposition, the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone. First of all, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he had difficult naming it — “The good, the Bad, and the Ugly,” “Jaws II,” — but what he 
finally settled on was “barren.” Well, ms, he must have been thinking about a baron of beef, because had 
the speech not contained so much meat, I would doubt that the hon. member could have provide the 
Dukes of Hansard (as they have been referred to by one member of the media) with some 20 pages of 
verbatim that sounded like Kahlil Gibran’s masterpiece, The Prophet. 
 
So we go on, and he gets on job creation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition wants to see 
a massive program of $200 million with borrowed money. That was printed in the Star-Phoenix, 
Saskatoon. What do we hear from his counterpart, the federal leader of the NDP? He wants the 
government, in its next budget, to allot $10 billion for job creation. What would those moves do to 
inflation? It is being gradually wrestled to the ground, and was caused by governments at all levels 
excessively stimulating the economy through the 1970s. It resulted in the widespread unemployment we 
have come to know as attempts were made to curb prices and wages. 
 
The governor of the Bank of Canada, Mr. Bouey, has also issued a stern warning against any major 
government stimulating the economy, saying such a step would only boost inflation and create jobs only 
temporarily, if at all. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, a noted free-lance writer, an economist, Dian Cohen, 
recently stated, and I quote: 
 

If we want to increase our productivity grown, we will have to change our mix of how we use 
our machines and manpower. It means having flexible policies which will provide long-term 
restraining for the people displace by progress. It means understanding that still other policies 
will be needed to deal with people rendered permanently unemployable. And it means having 
governments which have the good sense to know they cannot do it all  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
164 

themselves. They can’t know which industries, which methods. The best they can do is provide 
a nurturing environment for the creative private sector. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the course we embarked on with our commitment, working with business, 
labour and education. Mr. Deputy Speaker, how do you provide a nurturing environment for the creative 
private sector after 30 or more years of socialism, or stateism? I suppose, Mr. Speaker, it’s not so much 
a case of how, but rather, what time span will it take to reverse that philosophical approach. We cannot 
indefinitely stress social equity at the expense of investment. We can no longer afford to be consistent in 
the way we regulate ourselves. We have to let people know that our role would be limited to one of 
broad control, to make an economic strategy work without becoming bogged down in petty 
interventionism, and that there is along-term commitment to keeping it that way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that the people within and from outside this province trust us when we 
make that commitment. We, as a government, under the leadership of Premier Devine, are convinced 
that we can be economic winners as a result of becoming aggressive, global, market-oriented, rather than 
reactionary nationalists. For the information of the member for Shaunavon — the missing member for 
Shaunavon, I should say — that is why the Minister of Agriculture is in Bavaria and that is why the 
industry minister is in the United States. 
 
What has happened to France as a result of the economic steps that they have taken? What about the 
devaluation of the franc that has happened just this week? Over-government expenditures, that’s what 
has caused their problem. The industrial climate that I have referred to earlier here is conducive to 
attracting enterprises that create permanent positions, as compared to make-work, short-term jobs. 
 
I posed the question earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker: how long will it take to reverse the socialist 
philosophical approach that was entrenched in this province? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and for my 
colleagues over there, the process is well under way. As a matter of fact, the reversal started on April 26 
when we took office. 
 
I just want to make a little mention here of a little item that I picked up the other day in the House and 
it’s on bank profits. Mr. Speaker, the hon. member for Regina Elphinstone seemed to be critical the 
other day in the House when referring to Royal Bank profits showing an increase of 40 per cent during 
the past year. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many sides to the equation when talking about profits. And besides, 
I do not know what he meant by the past year. For instance, Mr. Speaker, the hon. member did not say 
that the 40 per cent increase was for the first quarter of 1983, following upon the year of 1982 when net 
profits decreased by 25 per cent over the year 1981. So let’s just keep everything in context here. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, he did say that 40 per cent of that 40 per cent increase, almost half, was 
attributed to the international side of the bank’s revenue — significant figure, and it is usually higher 
than half in most years I am neither here to defend or condemn bank profits. I would just like the record 
straight as to what took place. 
 
There are opportunities on the international scene as proven by the banks and other business, and this 
prompts me to raise another point, Mr. Speaker. During the past year, the Premier has appointed two 
people to be responsible for the development of markets in the Latin Americas and Asia. The Premier is 
to be commended for the  



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
165 

initiative he has taken to recognize these areas as not only potential markets for our products, but also 
that we as a province would welcome other countries’ expertise in new technologies, manufacturing, etc. 
To locate here, either independently or in concord with existing enterprises, without fear of 
nationalization when they become successful. Momentum is picking up. Time is on our side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since taking over the government nearly one year ago, when all of Canada was well into a 
severe depression, we implemented the election promises that rescued anxiety. Example: the 
home-owner interest reduction plan. We kept the utility costs at pre-election levels for one year. 
Transportation costs were reduced. Implementation of the promises, Mr. Speaker, had a most positive 
effect on the population. The people living in new homes in my constituency with mortgage renewals 
coming up are no longer faced with the litigation that would have been involved under the NDP’s 
home-owner security act. Any relief that may have been achieved under that act was short-term gain and 
long-term pain. Arrears had to eventually be paid or foreclosure measures could be taken. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, in late 1981, the last occasion for an NDP throne speech, the then premier, 
now Leader of the Opposition, admitted that the throne speech broke little new ground except for the 
above-mentioned act. That was quite an accomplishment. 
 
Our program allowed young people with families protection from spiralling interest rates. It was an 
imaginative program that made the NDP’s scheme obsolete, a scheme that when tested in the courts, at 
least on one occasion I know of, did rule not in favour of the appellant. 
 
The pensioner, Mr. Speaker, on a fixed income — income that had been eroded drastically with 
prolonged double-digit inflation — got a holiday for one year from further increase in utility bills. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, with the introduction of the farm purchase program virtually all segments of 
our society shared in the revenue that many hard-working people of this province have contributed over 
time to the provincial treasury. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made election promises that were transferred into reality, and the reality is that they 
were accepted, as evidence by the election in Prince Albert-Duck Lake and my colleague who is sitting 
over there on the other side of the House. 
 
During the period of implementation of our programs, Mr. Speaker, what were the opposition saying? 
Well, the Leader of the Opposition was saying, “Cut, cut, cut.” I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the most 
significant cut we institute was as a result of the renegotiation of the Nipawin Dam contract that saved 
the taxpayers of this province $10 million That was not the only project, Mr. Speaker, real or imaginary, 
that was in the planning stages or promised by the NDP during the election campaign that went under 
close scrutiny when we took over government. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, what was the Leader of the Opposition saying that the media picked up on? He said 
that it was paralysis by analysis. What they did not understand, Mr. Speaker, or perhaps believe is that 
the province was asset-rich and cash-poor. To understand any business is to know that on e cannot 
finance daily operations or capital expenditures with assets. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
166 

Well, priorities were established, Mr. Speaker. A new budget was brought in. In the words of the finance 
minister, a mid-course correction. Well, I would go even further, Mr. Speaker, and term it a correct with 
direction. Yes, there was a 200 million deficit. But let any member stand in this House and say that his 
or her constituents are concerned. Sure, they don’t like it. But what were the alternatives under the 
circumstances? Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Finance is to be commended for the manner in which he 
has risen to the task of dealing with the provincial finances, and the co-operation he has received from 
all ministries in reducing their department administrative expenses has undoubtedly aided him in his 
endeavours. 
 
By comparison, it is perhaps fitting that we should examine the situation — a number of my colleagues 
did this, but I think I would just like to remind you again of this — immediately to the east of us under 
and NDP administration which in their first year have brought in a $495 million deficit. And it’s 
growing higher. They are now projecting for an approximate $700 million or $800 million spring budget 
deficit in which case it will require in excess of 9 per cent of the revenue they take in to pay the carrying 
charges on the debt. It is not a happy occasion, I would say, for the people of Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, 
what about the unemployment in that province at 10.1 per cent seasonally adjusted, as compared to 
Saskatchewan’s of 8.7 actual? 
 
Throughout 1982, Mr. Speaker, we heard nothing but doom and gloom, not only from the opposition but 
also the media. The member for Regina said, “Mr. Premier, I want you to promise that you will never 
hold another Open for business conference . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that comment received 
media attention, too. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that a case has to be made for diversifying industries in this province. We 
have to broaden our agricultural base to include processing and packaging of farm products. Over the 
years we have seen the demise of the packing industry in this province, meat packing plants that went. 
This industry alone was very labour intensive and accounted for numerous jobs. This is just one 
example, Mr. Speaker, of industries that either closed down or did not come into the province as result 
of less than favourable political climate . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He will. We as a government 
must get our message across, by whatever means at our disposal, that this is a province with much to 
offer. I challenge the opposition and the media to spend as much item and energy was we as a 
government have and are prepared to do, on promoting and merchandising our attributes. Mr. Speaker, 
we had better understand until a sale is made, there will not be any jobs crated nor will there be any 
money in the till. Mr. Speaker, it is better that we tried and failed than never to have tried at all, but that 
we have failed is yet to be proven. 
 
So what does the future hold for the people of Saskatchewan? The media have our next deficit pegged at 
something approaching 400 million. Be that as it may, do your constituents or mine want the gas tax 
reimposed? Let me just share something with you. This is a letter to the editor. There was a little space 
made available in the Star-Phoenix for an Alan Propp and he entitles his article, ‘Chicken in Every Pot.’ 
And it goes on. In his letter, he refers to the letter of W.A. Robbins, Star-Phoenix, March 10, who 
suggested the Conservative government members should eat crow and reinstate the gasoline road tax. 
Well here’s what he has to say about that. This is what Alan Propp says: 
 

He doesn’t realize, thanks to the abolition of the road tax, many families no longer eat crow. 
With the $30 a month we save on gasoline, we now eat chicken, turkey, and the occasional 
beef steak. 



 
March 22, 1983 

 

 
167 

So, the gas tax — they don’t want that reimposed. Do they want their subsidies on mortgages taken 
away? Do they want any deterioration in health services, the drug plan? The list goes on and on. I 
suggest to this House, Mr. Speaker, no one cares to see any of those things come to fruition. They are 
quite prepared to live with the deficit, whatever the size, as they are confident, confident in themselves, 
Mr. Speaker, and in the future of this province. It is in good hands. 
 
With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, the time is going on. I would like to tell this House that I will not 
support the amendment. I am supporting the motion. Since it is after 5 o’clock, I beg leave to have the 
debate adjourned. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5:06 p.m. 
 


