






















































Hansard: March 03, 1983


2335 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 3, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Canada Winter Games 
 
MR. FOLK: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I would ask that all 
members join me in congratulating the team from Saskatchewan for their performance in the recently 
completed Canada Winter Games. Their hard work and dedication indeed paid off as they were awarded 
the Centennial Cup, emblematic of the most improved provincial team. To all the athletes, coaches and 
officials; we’re proud of you and once again, congratulations. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

SGI Rates 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Industry and Commerce, 
the chairman of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance Office. The past week, Mr. Minister, you 
made an announcement and you indicated to the House, I believe, that SGI had, on behalf of AAIA, 
submitted an application to PURC, the public utilities review commission, for a 6.7 per cent increase. I 
would like to ask the minister whether he could advise us whether the application that was submitted did 
in fact take into consideration that the basic coverage provided to the people of Saskatchewan at the 
present time was the basis on which that announcement was premised. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, last week when I was asked the question about the 6.7 per 
cent submission for our increase and the submission to the public utilities review commission, I was 
under the impression at the time that the submission had been made. However, I have subsequently been 
told that, although it is prepared, it hasn’t in fact been given to the public utilities review commission 
and will be done any day. To answer the hon. member’s question, the public utilities review commission 
submission will include the $500 deductible, as the member has asked. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, in announcing the application, you indicated it would be a 6.7 per cent 
increase which, in appearance, looked like a modest increase. I’m asking you specifically then: in 
respect to that application, the deductibility will be in fact increased from 350 to the 500 level. Is that 
correct? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, it was announced yesterday. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, in respect to the consideration of the increase in the deductibility, on a 
previous occasion you indicated that in fact you did not believe that the increase in the deductibility 
would be included in the submission to PURC. Have 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2336 

you since changed your opinion on that? You are reported to have said that you would not include any 
change in deductibility for consideration by PURC in setting the percentages. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I have already replied to the question. I don’t know what the 
member is driving at. The application that we are submitting to public utilities review commission will 
in fact include the $500 deductible. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister in charge of SGI. He has 
advised the House, as I understand it, that the application to PURC will involve: (1) a request for an 
increase in rates, and (2) a request for an increase in deductible. Will he give the House an assurance 
that there will be no increase in rates or decrease in coverage without the consent of the public utilities 
review commission? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No. Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is a little confused. I did 
not say that we were submitting a request for increase in deductible. What I said was that we are 
submitting a request for an increase in the rate. The request for the increase in the rate will be based on 
the application that we are submitting, the package that we are putting forth. In other words, the 
insurance package that we are asking for the increase of 6.7 per cent increase will include a $500 
deductible. We are not asking for permission to increase the deductible. We have done that. It’s the same 
thing as we would not ask public utilities review commission to increase liability. We would do that 
without that permission. We don’t need that permission. The permission we need from the public 
utilities review commission is for a rate increase. That’s the application we are making. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The initial rates which you have filed with 
the public utilities review commission, SGI, involve a particular rate for a particular coverage. Is it your 
position that SGI can decrease the coverage without the consent of PURC? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, not only can we decrease it, we can increase it. The 
coverage, as he puts it, is one thing: the package that we are presenting is a package. On that package we 
are asking for a rate increase. It seems to me that the opposition is saying to us that they would rather 
have us apply for 13 or 14 per cent increase in the rates which would apply to everybody in the 
province. That’s what they are asking us to do: to charge everybody in the province instead of the few 
people, the small percentage, less than 15 per cent of the motoring public, who in fact should pay more 
money for the accidents that they cause and the charges made against the insurance that they cost. This 
is the direction we are taking. This is what we prefer to do. We are submitting an application for a rate 
increase based on the package that we’ve submitted. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker and Mr. Minister, I want to direct a question to the minister 
in charge of SGI because this is absolutely key to the question of what the public utilities review 
commission is all about. 
 
If the rates can be changed without the consent of the public utilities review commission, it amounts to 
nothing. He says that’s not true. If what is offered to the customers can be changed without the public 
utilities review commission approval, then the whole review procedure amounts to nothing, and I am 
asking the minister again: is it his position that SGI can change the coverage provided by the plate 
insurance, without any reference to the public utilities review commission, at its sole 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2337 

discretion? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, that is correct, Mr. Speaker. The SGI, on behalf of The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act, can in fact submit to the public utilities review commission a package — no 
different, Mr. Speaker, than that SGI on the general side of the picture can change the package as they 
have at any time they so desired, if they so desired. 
 
The package that we are selling — we’re not hiding anything; we’re not covering anything over. We are 
saying that the basic insurance will include $500 deductible and will include $100,000 in liability; based 
on those facts, based on that package, we’re asking the public utilities review commission to grant us a 
6.7 per cent increase in the rate as it applied before. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a supplementary to the minister. 
 
Does he not agree that he has already filed a package? The SGI have already filed a package with the 
public utilities review commission, and that was your initial rate schedule including the rate and the 
coverage, and neither can be changed without the approval of the public utilities review commission. Do 
you not agree with that? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, I don’t. Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact, and obviously the Leader of 
the Opposition wasn’t listening to my reply to the first question, when I said I had been under the 
impression that a package or a submission had been made to the public utilities review commission. I 
knew it had been completed, and I thought it had gone, and I apologize to the Assembly for the 
misinformation that I provided last week. But I was under the impression at the time that it had been 
done. We are submitting a package which will be the first package that the public utilities review 
commission have received. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Just one last supplementary. Is the minister saying that SGI on behalf of 
AAIA has not filed anything with the public utilities review commission up to now, either an initial 
package or a request for change? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I’m informed, Mr. Speaker, that all rates for all corporations have 
been filed, basically, in January or within three months. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Minister, I ask a new question. You are now telling 
us that a rate schedule has been filed, a rate schedule which included reference to the deductible. Are 
you now telling us that that rate schedule, including the reference to the deductible, can be changed by 
SGI with respect to the deductible without the approval of PURC? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I don’t know what was filed in January or whenever. I don’t know 
whether it was a package as an outline, what it included, or just a rate as it applied to vehicles at the 
time. So I can’t answer the hon. member’s question on that particular point. 
 
But to answer the second part of this question, I will say this: as I understand it, the rules of the public 
utilities review commission with the guidelines or whatever you want to call them, SGI can, in fact, 
change the package, the benefits, applied to the policy without permission from the public utilities 
review commission. For example, if we decided at some time in the future to increase the liability 
amounts, we can do that without referring it to the public utilities review commission, the same as we 
can change 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2338 

the deductible. The decision or the deliberations of the public utilities review commission is the rate, the 
rate based on what we are presenting. So one has nothing to do with the other, and I don’t know why the 
Leader of the Opposition would have so much difficulty understanding that because we are telling the 
public utilities review commission what, in fact, we have and we are asking for a rate based on what we 
have. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Clearly the minister is giving us a 
description of PURC which is very different from what we understood. He is saying that PURC is 
dealing with the application made by the SGI to establish a rate. I say PURC is dealing with the 
application to change a rate. 
 
Now are you saying that you can change the coverage under the initial plan which you have already filed 
regardless of what changes you make? You can make it a $5,000 deductible, without any reference to 
the public utilities review commission? Have I got that clearly in my mind? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I believe he has finally got it clear in his mind. It’s 
taken him a little while to get it there, but I think he’s starting to understand the position that we can, in 
fact, do as he’s saying. 
 

Sask Tel Rates 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a short question to the minister in charge of Sask 
Tel. With respect to Sask Tel, is it the view of the minister that if Sask Tel has filed a rate of, let us say, 
$2 for a three-minute call to Saskatoon, the Sask Tel can change that into $3 for a two-minute call to 
Saskatoon, without any application to PURC? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Yes, the long-distance rates are often established by the CRTC and may have 
some influence on the change. Consequently, there may have to be a change. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. I specifically picked an in-province call 
which CRTC has nothing to do with, as the minister well knows. I’ll ask it again. Are you saying (a 
similar question again) that if Sask Tel charges and I’ll use $4 for a call for three minutes from Regina to 
Saskatoon, they can say, “Our rate is now $4 for a two-minute call to Saskatoon” without reference to 
PURC? 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — No, I would have to get an opinion. It certainly wouldn’t be our intention to do 
that. 
 

SGI Rates 
 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I ask a new question of the minister in charge of SGI. We 
are attempting to decide whether we are attempting to regulate — whether PURC can be made a 
mockery of by simply changing what you offer. It is not dissimilar to someone saying, “I sell eggs at $1 
a dozen, and I’m not raising the price. All I’m saying is that next week a dozen eggs will have 10 and 
not 12.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — My question is . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! It’s getting to the point where it’s impossible to hear what the 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2339 

member is asking and I’m sure that the minister will not be able to answer because he doesn’t know 
what the question is. I can’t hear it and you can’t. So I would ask for order. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I ask a question to the minister in charge of SGI. From the press 
statements, I have understood him to say that the increase in deductible will apply only to drivers at 
fault. Will he confirm that? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, I certainly won’t confirm that. I don’t think I have seen any press 
reports that say it will only apply to drivers at fault. I think what it says is that only the drivers at fault 
will pay. There’s a difference. The $500 deductible will apply to anyone who buys a licence. But no one 
will pay a dollar if they don’t have an accident. There’s no charge at all. It’s zero. If you don’t have an 
accident, it’s zero. 
 
Now if you have an accident, and there are probably 80,000 to 100,000 — I don’t know the exact figure 
but I can work out some details for you on that — then you will pay. Those are the ones who will pay. 
Everyone will be offered the same package. Everyone will pay the same price on the basic insurance, 
based on the vehicle and so on and so forth. So, yes, put the question the other way and certainly only 
those at fault will pay the $500 deductible. Those not at fault don’t pay anything. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister would then confirm this (and I think 
I heard him). If my car is stolen, will you give me a firm assurance that my deductible is still $350 and 
not $500, if my car is stolen? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I will put it the other way, that if . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I’m pretty careful about where 1980 Oldsmobiles move about. My question 
to the minister is this: if my wife’s care, then, is stolen, will you give me an assurance that neither she 
nor I will have to pay any more than $350, the present deductible? Or are you telling me the deductible 
is increased for that class of people, too? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I would assure the hon. member that if his wife’s car is 
stolen before March 15, it will only cost him $350. And after March 15, starting March 16, it will cost 
him $500, providing — and I’m not sure of this — that the theft includes a deductible. And I’d have to 
check that, but assuming you’re correct in your analogy that perhaps . . . I’m not too sure whether it 
includes that or not. It may not have any deductible at all. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — This is the whole point. I also want to ask him what happens if my wife’s 
car burns. If my wife’s car burns, is that a $500 deductible? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to pull the file on the hon. member’s wife’s car, 
because I know one minister who did that once before, and I don’t want to be doing that again. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — You’re asking me, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, some technical 
questions with respect to what is covered — and hypothetical, as well — but I’m not the technician 
involved over at SGI; I am the chairman of the board. Admittedly, if you want to ask me what 
deductible is on a vehicle with a GVW of 66,000 pounds, I can’t tell you that. There’s a book full of 
those figures, and rules and regulations. Now, you’re picking. If you want to start picking particular 
cases, unfortunately I can’t give you the answers to that because I don’t have the book here with me. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2340 

If there is a deductible involved in a burn — as I remember from my days in the automobile business, I 
don’t think there is a deductible involved in that, but there may be — then the deductible will apply. The 
deductible as it exists on March 16 will apply, whatever it is. It may be zero. For example, on a 
hit-and-run, which is zero . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . On certain, depending on the amount. Again 
I’m getting into an area that perhaps I shouldn’t be getting into because we’re talking about a technical 
part of the insurance, and there are some exclusions, and I don’t know what they are at this point. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask the minister to confirm that any statement to the 
effect that only those at fault will pay is false, because people may well be called upon to pay who suffer 
fire loss, theft loss, collision loss with a farm tractor, collision loss with Alberta cards, and a whole list. 
Is that true or are you now giving an assurance that only people who are found to be at fault will pay the 
additional deductible? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — All right. Now I know where the man is coming from, Mr. Speaker. The 
at fault include all of those who are in an accident, in collision, with or without other vehicles, but are at 
fault in that particular accident. That’s what at fault means. Now on the exclusions of that, or on the 
other instances that the member is referring to, again I’m not going to get involved into the technical 
areas of what is covered and what is not covered. 
 
I don’t consider myself qualified, to being with, to tell you what and what is not, and what should be and 
what should not be included in a policy. I can answer those questions all day long for you if you ask me 
the same questions in crown corporations where I have my officials sitting there answering the 
questions. Meanwhile I’m telling you that those at fault in a collision are those who will pay, and that 
involves the majority of the claims that are paid for by SGI. 
 
If you want to get picky about some exclusions, well then, we’ll wait. I’ll take notice of the questions. 
I’ll wait till we get into the crown corporations where I can give you some of those answers. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, one short supplementary. Will the minister assure us that 
nobody other than those at fault will pay the extra deductible? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, this is not to do with the coverage. This is to do with the policy that the minister is announcing. 
I she announcing a policy which says that only those who are at fault will pay the extra deductible, and 
those not found at fault will not pay the extra deductible? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Premier, I will announce now that there are no changes in the policies 
that were in existence at the time that they were the government, the policies remain the same. 
 

Public Utilities Review Commission 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. I would remind the Premier that 
the credibility of the public utilities review commission is at stake. By way of background I’d ask you to 
think of any other rate setting structures such as the CRTC, all of whom control rates and level of 
service. My question to the Premier is: what on earth is the point in having a public utilities review 
commission, if a utility dissatisfied with the result can then decrease the level of service and recoup the 
same financial result as if it had got the request? What’s the point in having the commission? 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2341 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of advantages to the public utilities review 
commission . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Let me finish. One, that the public is involved, and we’ve 
debated that and talked about it, and I think that is a popular part of it. Number two, when we’re making 
applications to the public utilities review commission, it doesn’t say that we can’t modify the policy of 
the crown corporation that’s in existence. 
 
For example, we may change a number of employees, we may change the marketing division, the 
advertising division. Do you want the public utilities review commission to decide that? No. Clearly you 
don’t. We can have modifications to the way we operate, on an annual basis, the public utilities that we 
are responsible for. Now, every year when you take that new program to the public utilities review 
commission, they sit and justify that whole new operation plus the application for the rates, and say, “Is 
it reasonable?” Now, we could walk in, in this case, with a 14 per cent increase — apply for a 14 per 
cent increase. But the minister says, “No. I think we can run it better and make it fairer with this new 
package. So would you please consider the 7 per cent increase with this new operation?” 
 
When we propose, year after year, to have rates adjudicated by the public utilities review commission, 
they ask, “How do you run your operation?” The minister who is responsible is going to say, “This is 
how we run our operation. We’re making changes to be more efficient, more effective and fairer.” Now, 
if they look at it as being more efficient, effective and fair, they’ll say, “Great, I think I’ll justify that.” If 
not they’ll come in with a lower rate. They can always do that. 
 
So the public utilities review commission has those two attributes. Number one, it can have the public 
involved in justifying it. Number two, it reviews the management package in every crown corporation 
and says “You’re doing a good job; if not you won’t get the rate increases.” 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on Monday, March 7, 1983, move first 
reading of a bill to amend The Family Farm Improvement Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall, on Monday, March 7, 1983, move first reading of a bill to amend The 
Department of Agriculture Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall, on Monday, March 7, 1983, move first reading of a bill to amend The Public 
Works Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall, on Monday, March 7, 1983, move first reading of a bill to amend The 
Department of Continuing Education Act. 
 
I give notice that I shall, on Monday, March 7, 1983, move first reading of a bill to amend The 
Education Act. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2342 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

HEALTH 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — We will continue with the items on health, page 47. The minister has already 
introduced his officials so we can go right into it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I think we have gone through the process of introducing the 
staff. We probably will just go right into questioning. Hopefully today we’ll move right along here and 
not spend a great deal of time, because we will be back in health estimates, as the minister knows, in a 
very short time. I hope it’s before the end of March that we’re dealing with the next budget because I 
know there are many third-party grants, and the hospitals will want to know what kind of moneys 
they’re going to be getting for the new year. 
 
I think he will be the first one who will admit that running a budget as we have in this past year where 
we are working on estimates long after the money has been spent leads to a great deal of difficulty not 
only for his department, but for the people who work in it, as well as the hospitals out in the country. It 
is just a bad practice to get in where we have a budget introduced late in the year and don’t have the 
estimates passed until the fiscal year is over. 
 
I wonder if the minister could tell me if he has a personal affairs person on staff, someone who’s 
responsible for communications in his department solely for press agents or something like that? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, I do have a public communications department within my department. 
It is comprised of one person, and that person’s responsibilities mainly would be dealing with the media 
on health education types of issues, preparing the pamphlets that you see in doctors’ offices and in 
schools and the general distribution of the health information that our department puts out. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I wonder if the minister would consider giving me the name and the salary 
of that individual? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I don’t have the salary just handy, but I’ll send it across to you. The name is 
Rick Jorgensen. He’s the director of public communications in the administration services branch. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, can you as well send across, when you send that information, 
the qualifications of that individual for that job. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, no problem. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, I want to ask a couple of questions about the progress of the 
hospital regeneration projects in Regina. There is a perception in Regina that the Pasqua Hospital project 
is not proceeding as rapidly as was earlier 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2343 

supposed. Can the minister advise what was spent approximately on the Pasqua Hospital regeneration 
project in the last 12 months, or in some other recent period? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I’ll tell the hon. member that we would want to give you the exact dollar 
figure. It will take a minute or two, but we will supply it to you. In general, the package 2 is progressing 
as on schedule. You know there was a slowdown in construction throughout the province because of the 
strike over the summer which certainly affected the Pasqua. I did speed up the package 3 to have it 
enclosed. I think that’s in keeping with the winter works program. That is where the situation is at the 
Pasqua at this time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What is the estimated date of completion of, I won’t say the entire 
regeneration project because I don’t know what’s involved but, packages 2 and 3? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I can’t give you an exact date, and I think that’s reasonable. Package 2 will 
be completed in entirety by the summer. Package 3 will be enclosed by this summer. Then we would 
have to go to tender on the interior of that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, when is it anticipated that what I call 
the front block, the old front block closest to Dewdney Avenue, will be demolished? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Again, until we go to tender, it’s impossible to give an exact date. But we’re 
looking roughly around 1986, ‘86-87. That’s the ball-park date that we’re kind of looking at. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, when the Pasqua regeneration is 
complete, and the Regina General is complete (and I’ll ask a question in a moment about the Regina 
General and whether it’s nearing completion), and assuming no additions to the Plains in the immediate 
future, what would be the bed complement in Regina when those three hospitals are on stream? Either 
including or excluding Wascana, but tell me what you’re doing? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — This would be excluding Wascana: 1,191 beds. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, coming back to the question which I 
asked concerning the Regina General, can you tell me at what stage that project is? How near 
completion is it? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — On package 3 of the General, we’re looking at the design. In that process at 
this time, we’re not right ready to go to tender yet. That’s where we’re still progressing with design, and 
architects are working on design specifications, and so on. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, to refresh my memory, is phase 3 
something to be built substantially on the site of the old 1908 block, as I call it — that centre block — or 
somewhere else? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — It’ll be constructed to the east of what is commonly known as the old block, 
if you realize where that is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, fine. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2344 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, is it still intended to demolish the old 
block and what I call the DVA wing? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — The original intention has not changed. But I’ll be honest, things can change 
too, you know, depending on situations, so at this point in time there has been no change from the 
original intention. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, a different kind of question now with 
respect to the rehabilitation centre and a site therefor. Would the minister advise the committee of what 
is the favourite site for the rehabilitation centre at this time? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — We are going to go ahead with the rehabilitation centre, but the definite site 
at this point in time has not been selected. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I suspected that. I wonder which one 
was on the top of the list in the minister’s consideration, or has he not ranked them to that extent as yet, 
and if not, tell me what are the two or three sites which he is particularly addressing? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — These sites, and they are not ranked, but beside the Plains Hospital is one 
possibility. Beside the General Hospital is another possibility. Somewhere else as a free-standing 
building in Regina is another possibility. But I will give you my assurance that it won’t be in Wolseley. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I noted that he did not say adjacent to the Pasqua Hospital in the 
constituency of Regina-Elphinstone. I noted that. You are basically then considering a site adjacent to 
the Plains and probably one on Halifax Street or somewhere close to the Regina General, is that fair? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No, or somewhere else, I haven’t ranked them. I’d tell you if I knew. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’d ask the minister to let us know when 
he makes up his mind. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I sure will. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, I have here a report from the college of dental surgeons, 
dated November 1982, that you will be aware of. A report from the college of dental surgeons, the ad 
hoc committee on the future of dentistry in Saskatchewan, November of 1982. And it talks about 
encouragement of the adolescent dental plan to be delivered totally by the private sector dentist. I’m 
wondering if you could inform the House whether consideration has been given to this request, and if so, 
what reply have you given to this report on that issue? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Regarding the report, I have replied to the college of dental surgeons, and the 
gist of my reply was that I was supportive of their request. There has been some transfer of adolescents 
to the private sector and we will continue with that in the coming year. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I wonder if the minister can inform the Assembly why he would be doing 
that, encouraging individuals, young people in particular in the adolescent program, to go to the private 
sector rather than to use the dental nurses and therapists 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2345 

in the schools. What could possibly be the reasoning behind that? Is it cheaper for the department or is it 
just your right-wing philosophy that everything has to be done through the private sector? Can you 
elaborate a bit on that, why you’re doing that? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Basically I think there are two or three things here I’d like to draw to your 
attention. Number one, the cost factor is not that different between the service being provided by a 
private dentist or the dental plan. Number two, and I suppose the most important, is that the philosophy 
behind the dental plan was that children would develop good dental hygiene and that as they grew into 
adulthood, they would then select a dentist who would be their dentist and they would continue on with 
good dental hygiene practices, which of course you realize do have an effect upon one’s personal health. 
Thirdly, to look at keeping viable private dentist practices in rural Saskatchewan, I think that this will 
certainly help. I remember you indicating to me yesterday, Mr. Member, your deep-felt concern for 
viable private dental practices in rural Saskatchewan. So I would think, in line with what you said 
yesterday and in line with what I’m just telling you, the two mesh together and I sure hope you would 
get out and support that for me. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, I find it a little difficult to follow the logic of the minister where on 
the one hand he cuts out the $25,000 grant to the rural program to establish young, starting dentists, and 
at the same time he’s proclaiming that he is transferring or attempting to transfer the adolescent program 
to the private sector. If there are no dentists out in the country, as a result of your lack of initiative in 
granting $25,000 to start them up, how are they then going to go to the dentists in the small community 
when there won’t be any? They will drive to the city in order to get their dental care and with it, the 
business will flow to the city as well. 
 
What I’d like to know is why, when the studies that have been done on the dental program in 
Saskatchewan would indicate that for many reasons, the dental program is superior. I would like to 
quote to you some of the numbers that came out of the 1976 study done by three independent dentists 
from out of province, which said that of the 2,107 amalgam restorations and 1,503 fillings that were 
replaced by dental nurses and 604 dentists, the restoration rates were as follows: unacceptable — 
dentists 21 per cent, dental nurses 3.7; adequate — dentists 62, dental nurses 48; and superior — dentists 
16 and dental nurses 47. 
 
Now the Minister of Health gets up and says that he is attempting to move business to the private sector 
simply because he feels that that is his philosophy, rather than using the actual numbers of what’s better 
for the health of the individual children. Can you square with the school children in Saskatchewan why 
you’re moving in that direction when you know what the facts are concerning dental nurses and 
therapists in the school? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I’d just like to indicate that I think you’ve quoted a 1976 study, and I 
understand that we do have an ongoing evaluation, and that they find that the difference in service today, 
and that’s what I am operating in today — there’s very little difference. So this is being monitored. 
 
I would just like to point out, of interest to you, so that you don’t think that my supposedly right-wing 
philosophy is causing such a great problem to the service of children in the schools that, if you check 
your records, you will find that prior to April 26, there was a move by the government that used to be 
here to move the adolescents into the private practice. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2346 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — The minister says that he has ongoing studies of the dental program. Can 
you give me a bit of background as to who is doing this study on which you’re basing your decision. Is it 
an in-house operation, or do you have professional people from outside the province assessing the dental 
program, and can you give us some statistics to back up your statements? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — It’s an ongoing quality control committee. The representatives are from the 
University of Saskatchewan dental school, the college of dental surgeons, and members of the 
Saskatchewan Dental Plan. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can you tell me whether or not the Saskatchewan Dental Therapists 
Association is involved in this assessment, and if so, who would be their representatives in this group? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I’ll have to check that out for you, but we will, and supply you with the 
answer. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, I would just like to say that if they are not included in the assessment 
of the program. I would encourage you to see that representation from that group is included, because I 
think they see first hand the type of work that is being done. They talk to the children as well as the 
parents, and, I believe, would be able to have some input, very much needed input, from that very 
grassroots level. 
 
I have a letter here, a copy of a letter to you, Mr. Minister, from the Saskatchewan Dental Therapists 
Association, which in part lists out some of the outstanding features of the dental program in 
Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Health Dental Plan, I wonder, do you have that letter handy, and can 
you make comment on some of the points that they make in it about the worthiness as of the dental plan 
and their request that their opinions be taken into consideration for future development of the plan. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I don’t have the letter with me. If you would give me the date of the letter we 
would retrace it, but I didn’t bring all my correspondence in. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, maybe what would be easier if I would just read in part, and you 
could reply to the sections of the letter that I read to you. It starts out by talking about the dental 
program, but makes five basic points. And it says: 
 

Access to a school-based dental program. This allows for a high rate of dental care utilization. In 1982, 
90.07 per cent of enrolled children in all treatment needs had all their treatment needs met. Children 
are treated in familiar surroundings, accepting dental treatment as a routine experience. 
 
Quality dental service. Dental therapists play a significant role in providing the bulk of dental care for 
children in Saskatchewan. Dental therapists, of which there are presently 215 licensed members, 
comprise a large percentage of the dental health care professionals in the province. Within the SHDP 
the quality of dental service provided by the dental therapist is maintained by continual recall, review, 
and evaluation performed by supervising dentists and other dental therapists. 
 
And the third point is public support. As indicated by an attitude survey of families enrolled in the 
Saskatchewan Health Dental Plan, there is an 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2347 

overwhelming support for the plan, its organization, and the dental therapy services. Parents were very 
much satisfied. 
 
The fourth point — dental therapists play an active role in health education in schools. In addition to 
providing individual patient and classroom instruction, the dental therapist may act as a resource 
person in the subject of oral health while maintaining a contact with the teacher. 
 
And five — influence of the dental health teams in the school environment. The presence of the dental 
health team and the dental clinic within the school facilitates continuous motivation to establish 
positive dental attitudes. 
 
It says in conclusion that it is the opinion of the Saskatchewan Dental Therapists Association that the 
dramatic change toward improved dental health and attitudes of the people of Saskatchewan is due in 
part to the performance of the dental therapist acting through the SHDP and the adolescent dental plan, 
and the co-operation of all health and dental professionals, which is fundamental to continuing 
improvement in the dental care in Saskatchewan. 
 

I think what they are saying in the strongest of terms, is that the attempt to move away from a dental 
plan (i.e., the cancellation of the Wadena project, the cancellation of four-year-olds within the plan, and 
now the active encouragement to move 15- and 16-year-olds out of the plan) . . . I think they’re 
expressing their concern at what they see to be the undermining of what has to be one of the major social 
health programs established in Saskatchewan and in Canada, and in fact in North America, over the last 
10 years. 
 
And I think that the minister should give his commitment, both to this health group, this group of 
professionals, and the people of Saskatchewan, that this undermining of the dental plan will come to an 
end, and that his next budget will reflect not only the maintenance of what is already there, but the 
expansion of the dental plan, both to include four-year-olds and pilot projects which would outline and 
decide whether or not a full-fledged dental plan could be put in place in the province of Saskatchewan in 
the very near future. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Either you read a different English than I do, but I didn’t see anything in that 
letter . . . I don’t know who signed it; I’m not even sure it was addressed to me. I don’t recall it, but I get 
an awful lot of correspondence, as you will well know, and it may well be that that letter did come to 
me. I’d like to know the name of who signed it. But what I started to say originally was that I listened 
carefully to you. I never heard a statement about undermining any dental plan. In fact, I listened, and I 
didn’t hear very much condemnation. I heard a letter saying what dental therapists do, and I support 
what dental therapists do. But for you to get up here and try and read into this that there’s an 
undermining and an attempt to wreck the dental plan, when I told you only two or three minutes ago that 
the very move to move some of the adolescents into the private sector was begun by the government in 
which you sat on one of the cabinet benches. Now it doesn’t surprise me that you didn’t know what was 
going on, but you 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2348 

get up here and try to cast aspersions that this government is intent on wrecking dental treatment to 
children in this province. I think you should apologize. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Minister, I have absolutely no intention of apologizing for 
statements that I made in concern about your attitude toward the dental plan in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Our record stands firm; we are the people who introduced the dental plan for children in 
the province of Saskatchewan which was in place when you took over office. We also had a pilot project 
in Wadena which would have attempted to set in motion the wheels that would have allowed for a 
universal dental plan. 
 
Now you may get up and say that you are the great saviour of the dental plan, but the facts don’t bear 
that out. The fact is that you are the minister who didn’t expand the dental plan, but on the other hand 
cut back for four-year-olds within the dental plan, who is encouraging 15- and 16-year-olds to go to the 
private sector, and who is very much working against, I believe, the whole concept of a universal dental 
plan. It’s a little difficult for the people of the province to believe you, and I don’t think they will, 
simply because your actions speak louder than the words that you give out here in the House. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I would just like to read something into the record, just to show the type of 
cheap shots that you think you’re going to be taking at the dental plan. I have this copy of this letter, 
dated February 28, 1983. That was only two or three days ago. You were a minister in this government, 
and you know very well the amount of mail that a minister gets. I think you realize that it would be 
reasonable that I hadn’t had a chance to see this letter at this time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m just 
pointing out. You know, you’re always trying to cast aspersions — “undermining”. I never heard the 
word “undermine.” I don’t know where you dream these things up. I don’t know what part of rural 
Saskatchewan you come from. I told you yesterday that in the constituency that I represent, I haven’t 
had any letters asking for more rural practices. 
 
So, you know, I’m quite willing to discuss and debate the estimates and the expenditures of this 
government — and you know that I’ll do it in a right, upfront, forward manner with you — but I would 
expect the same kind of just treatment. Let’s face the facts that are facing the people of Saskatchewan 
and not play small politics by bringing in loaded words like “undermining,” and so on. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I at no time criticized the minister for not having the letter 
with him. In fact, I brought mine along because I was quite sure he wouldn’t have it. I don’t expect the 
minister to carry all the letters that he gets in the department. This letter was addressed to the minister. 
Copies were sent to the Progressive Conservative caucus and the New Democratic Party caucus, but at 
no time did I say that he should have read the letter and answered it. What I said was that there were five 
main points in the letter that expressed support for the plan that exists in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s my opinion that you are undermining the dental plan in the province, based on three main items: (1) 
the cutback of four-year-olds in the dental plan; (2) the cancellation of the Wadena project; and (3) the 
very act of encouragement to get 15- and 16-year-old people out of the dental plan. That’s my opinion: 
that you’re undermining the dental plan. I will be attempting to convince as many people in the province 
that that is what you are doing. I’ll leave it at that. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2349 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, that’s fine. That doesn’t seem to be too great a threat. But I just wanted 
to point out to you that the dental therapists are not on the committee. You asked me that previously. I 
want to indicate also that the committee structure remains unchanged from that designed prior to April 
’82. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes, the minister will say that there were no representatives on the 
committee. I suppose while the plan was expanding they never saw the need for it. But I think now that 
they see cutbacks they will be requesting that they have input into it to attempt to protect what they see 
as a very adequate job being done by their members. That’s why we as well are requesting that they 
have input into the dental plan, because of the cutbacks and the restraint that is being shown in that area. 
I would encourage you to allow them to have a say and input into your ongoing analysis of the program 
that you say you’re doing in the department. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Just in respect to the letter that was referred to by my colleague, to the minister, Mr. 
Chairman, from the Saskatchewan Dental Therapists Association. I want, first of all, to indicate that this 
letter addresses the report by the College of Dental Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the ad hoc committee, 
regarding the future of dentistry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Two major concerns are echoed in respect to that report. One, dental therapists should not perform 
examinations. That’s apparently what they take out of the report of the dental surgeons. Okay? They’re 
concerned in respect to that item. The second item that they’re concerned with is: dental therapists do 
not feel comfortable treating adolescents because of greater behavioural demands and increased 
difficulty of treatment. 
 
Those are the two basic concerns with the report that the therapists indicate in this letter. I want to make 
clear that these are their concerns. I want to ask the minister whether I can get the assurance from him 
that those basic concerns which they have presented to you . . . Will you in fact be in contact, have 
discussions to hear out the position of the therapists before making any moves in respect to the ad hoc 
report of the dental surgeons? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I can assure the member that, as I said to the member for Shaunavon, I 
haven’t seen the letter till just now. It’s raised. As is the practice of my ministry, I will reply to their 
concerns in writing and if necessary, I suspect, have an actual meeting with them if it is so requested — 
open government. 
 
I think if you want to take the time after the House is over, I’ll take you down to my office. I’ll show 
you my log of the groups that I’ve met with. In Saskatchewan, since I came into this office on May 10, I 
can tell you many of them told me it was a welcome relief and a change in policy. And there is no doubt 
that I will meet with the dental therapists whenever we can get a mutual date. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just have two or three specific areas of interest. I know as a fact the Watson Union 
Hospital Board have met with me, and they have, of course, met with the Minister of Health. I would 
like an indication about whether the minister can give any assurance whether he has made a decision to 
proceed wit the hospital under the new NDP government funding formula. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I think estimates are to discuss the current state of affairs and not to go back 
into past history, but I have met with Watson, as you know, and all I can say at 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2350 

this point in time is that we are considering Watson along with the many other requests that we get. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’ll ask this question. I don’t know if the minister can be more specific. Do you have 
any time frame within which the consideration is likely to be completed? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No, I can’t give you a date. It’s an ongoing process. I have a note on my desk 
to go up to Hudson Bay next week, so the requests come in and communities are given good hearings. 
Their concerns are understood and addressed; it’s an ongoing process, and there will be hospitals built in 
this province, but where and when at this point in time I can’t indicate. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’m a little disappointed. I wanted to go back this weekend to make the 
announcement. Seriously, Mr. Minister, I think you will understand that the hospital in Watson has been 
there for a considerable length of time, that the board was in fact making discussions with the previous 
government and myself. I just hope that you will take into consideration that the need for the hospital in 
Watson certainly is there, and that you can give me your assurance, and the board at Watson, that every 
dispatch will be taken by your ministry in bringing a realization to a project which I can assure you the 
previous government would have made possible. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — They had 10 years to do it. They had a member that was at the cabinet table 
and I didn’t see it come up, so I wonder if that statement is correct. However, you wanted to know, and I 
tell you when the decision is made, if and when that decision is made, I’d be only too glad to tell you 
that it’s going to go ahead. So you can run out there and try and tell them and justify why it happened 
now, or will happen in the future, and didn’t happen over the past 10 years when you were a member on 
the executive benches, and I think you might have a little bit of trouble explaining that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Just one other area where I’d like to ask the minister whether the department has had 
any further involvement. I know the previous minister did. It was the particular hospital in the 
community of Spalding, and there has been a problem there in respect to the board, I believe, moving to 
remove hospital privileges of a doctor. I know at the time the former minister had set up a committee to 
review under the appropriate act, and I just want to ask whether or not the department, his officials, have 
any continuing discussion or dialogue in respect to that particular community. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I understand that the hospital is closed, but the director of hospital services 
has been in consultation with them, and they are attempting to recruit a position. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One other area of concern and of interest is in respect to 
the community clinic that was re-established in the community of Wynyard. The community banded 
together and were able, under the previous administration, to establish a community clinic in Wynyard. 
They have there, as you know, the clinic owned by the residents of the community. They have been, as I 
say, successful in recruiting two doctors to that community. Funding was made about a year ago in the 
previous budget to your budget, Mr. Minister. 
 
I want to say that in my understanding of it it has been working out very well and providing medical 
services to the community. A good rapport between the private medical clinic and the community clinic 
I understand exists. I just want to know whether the minister can give the assurance that where the 
people of a given area have shown 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2351 

the amount of co-operation and determination in the establishing of a community clinic to serve their 
needs, he will continue to support that concept which has been established in Wynyard. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I understand that it is functioning quite well. If that’s the way they want to 
have their medical services. I don’t see any problem with that. I understand it is functioning along quite 
well, as you’ve reported. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. That’s what I wanted to hear you say, that you 
would continue to co-operate with the community in their determination and self-determination of how 
best they can supply it, providing it is within the framework of the policy of the government. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I just want to reply to that that this government honours what local people 
want to do. If that’s what they want to do, and that’s the way they want to have their medical services, 
fine and dandy. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Just as a supplementary to that then. In your reply, I take it if another community in 
the province had an occasion and wished to establish a community clinic, and if it was the wish of a 
group, a considerable number of individuals in that community, as was demonstrated in the example I 
gave you of Wynyard, you would see nothing wrong with the Department of Health lending their 
support in the formation and financing of such an arrangement. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I think we’d just do the same as happened before — base it on the merits of 
the case. If it was going to serve the community needs and they justified that to us, fine. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask of the minister if he can tell me what the 
funding arrangement is for hospital construction in the province at the present time for the three different 
levels of hospital construction? Has that changed? Can you give me that information? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I indicated yesterday that it was the same program, and if you would like me 
to give you the exact percentages for the various sizes of hospitals, we’ll just slip that across to you. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
On the same issue of low-level radiation, can you explain to me why that program, the $400,000 
program to study effects of low-level radiation, was cut out of your department’s budget? Just give me a 
little background on how that took place, and why. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — There’s $400,000 there that hasn’t been spent and they can use that for 
research. I think there’s a competition presently going on for people to come up with projects to use that 
$400,000, but there was money there that hadn’t been spent, and they can use that. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, when you say they could use it, who exactly are you referring to? 
Who is not spending the money? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — It’s the health research board that administers this, and how 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2352 

would they spend the money? It would be a worthy experiment, a project that would be brought forward, 
and they come through competition. All these projects are brought in. they are put out to peers across 
Canada to judge the worthiness of them, and those that are felt to be worthy of funding for research 
would be funded. There’s $400,000 there. It’s a considerable amount of money that can be used. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, in the area of the drug plan, leaked budget documents earlier 
this year in February indicated that there was a possibility of a $75 deductible being placed in the drug 
plan, a change of the program as it presently exists. 
 
Can you confirm or deny this report that was in the press and is causing some concern to a number of 
seniors in the province? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, many programs within the Department of Health are continually being 
evaluated and assessed, and I think that’s only right if you’re delivering a service, and the drug plan is 
one of them. But, at this point in time there’s no change anticipated. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — When you say there is no change anticipated, that rules out then any 
opportunity in the near future to fulfil the election promise of having free drugs for senior citizens, 
which many candidates promised during the election campaign. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I indicated yesterday to you that there had been more drugs brought into the 
formulary and, as I say, we’re looking at it. That doesn’t rule that out. I think, implied or implicit, in 
reviewing and looking at and evaluating programs, that a number of changes could take place. They 
could stay in status quo. They could change, and the type of change that we want to bring about would 
be for improvement. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, that’s very nice to say, but I think there’s a large group of people out 
there who voted for you based on the fact that they may be able to get free drugs. They believed you 
when you said that you were going to do it. And I guess what I’m asking you is, now that you are the 
minister sitting at the cabinet bench, whether or not you’ll use your influence to deliver to these people a 
promise that you made prior to April 26. And I think that it wasn’t a promise that you would do it some 
time over the next two or three years. I think, when you made the statements you made them in a tone of 
voice and in an expression that would lead them to believe that you would do it when you got elected. 
What I’m asking you is: do you expect that in the very near future you’ll have an announcement that 
seniors will get the promise that they expected after April 26? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — You know, I don’t know if you ever took any history when you went to 
school or not. But I’m just sitting here, listening to you, and I’m remembering back to an election not 
too long ago when I saw a piece of paper, and I think the name of it was “Fulfilling the Promise,” or 
“Keeping the Promise,” or something like that. It came just before the election in ’78, and it was the last 
four years’ record. And I think that was the time that you were nominated. So, you know, when you say, 
“You have to come on day one and do this, and this,” I want to tell you that I think you learn slowly. 
 
It was yesterday I told you that the people in Prince Albert have endorsed the things that this 
government has done. We promised gasoline tax, and in three minutes it was off. We promised a 
mortgage program, and it was developed — the best in Canada. We promised a farm purchase plan, and 
it’s here and the farmers are happy with it. And I tell 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2353 

you, we promised to be number one in health in Canada, and we will get to that too. And we make 
decisions that are well thought out. We talk to people in Saskatchewan to see what they want 
implemented, as a government. It isn’t this government that stands like the mandarins of old to tell the 
people of the province what they deserve. So I hope, for once and for all, I’ve answered your question, 
my friend. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I though things were rolling along pretty good, but I see 
that the minister is bent on making political speeches when we’re trying to get a few simple answers. 
We want to talk about the promises that were made and the lack of fulfilment of them. There was also a 
promise to eliminate the sales tax, which hasn’t been done. There was a promise to cut income tax by 10 
per cent; that hasn’t been done. There was a promise of free drugs for the seniors when they were 
prescribed by the doctors. There was a promise of free telephones for the seniors. There was promise of 
four-laning the Trans-Canada Highway. The list goes on and on. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I would like to remind both members that we’re getting way off-track. We’re 
not going on health anymore. We’re going on to election promises. Can we get things back to health? 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, the list goes on and on about promises that were made in the 
area of health, as well as many other promises that haven’t been fulfilled by this government and all I’m 
asking is: when do you suppose the promise to give the promised free drugs, prescribed drugs, to seniors 
that were promised during the April 26 election? One more time. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — One more time I’ll tell you that every health service in this province is being 
looked at with the goal of improving. They’re being looked at in consultation with the consumers, with 
the professionals — and that’s a big change — that provide them, and we will come up with policies and 
programs in the field of health — as has been the record of this government in other fields — that we 
will satisfy the needs and we will improve the health care to the citizens of Saskatchewan, and we will 
be justly rewarded the next time there should be a general election. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, I can agree with the minister on one thing, that they will be justly 
rewarded at the time of the next election. I thoroughly agree with him, and they will be out. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would be able to give me a number of vacancies in the area of public 
health nurses in the province at the present time? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — There are 19 vacancies — the same as there were a year ago. We have seven 
temporary replacements in those an we’re actively recruiting to fill the other vacancies. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I wonder if the minister would send to me a list of where the vacancies are 
in the province? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I sure will. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — . . . (inaudible) . . . of the hearing aid plan, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you 
could tell me what the average cost of a hearing aid would be in the province at the present time, and 
what kind of units are being used by the hearing aid plan. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2354 

HON. MR. TAYLOR: — We are going to have to supply that to you, but I would be interested in 
knowing where you got that question. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, another question. If you’ll guarantee that you will send that 
information to me, I will accept that on the same basis of what we had agreed to yesterday, where you’ll 
get me the information within two weeks. 
 
I would like to know now the cost of the study on road ambulances that was done, I believe, by your Leg 
Secretary. Can you tell me how much that study cost, and whether or not that report is in to you? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I haven’t received the official report yet so I couldn’t give you a figure on 
what the costs were. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I guess we’ll be back here very shortly so I’ll be able to find that out later. 
I wonder if you can tell me the total amount of funds that were transferred out of DNS into the health 
department, as well as the positions that were transferred, and the location of those positions. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — $1,673,760 — that was the total dollars. $1,673,760 — 77.3 person-years. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister tell me whether or not those 77 person-years have been 
transferred — any of them — out of the northern area into the so-called southern area of the province, or 
are they just merely transferred from one department to another? That’s what I would like to know: in 
giving me the descriptions if you’ll tell me whether or not those positions still exist in the same place or 
not. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — All of those positions are still where they are in the North. In other words, 
they’ve just been transferred to the department. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — On the question of the Saskatchewan Hospital at North Battleford, can the 
minister tell me how much money was spent there this year in renovation and expansion of that facility? 
Do you have a number that you can give me on that? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — That bill is paid by the Department of Government Services. I’d request that 
you ask for the information there, to know exactly. Secondly, I’m informed that those types of questions 
really would be better looked at in public accounts. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I think that we will be back onto government services. I will ask that 
question at that time. 
 
In the area of MCIC, the commission, can you give me a list of the people who were on that commission 
as of April 26, and the present commission? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Yes, I’ll send that over to you, if that’s acceptable. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 36 inclusive agreed to. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2355 

Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (No. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

HEALTH 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

HEALTH 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 32 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

HEALTH 
 

Provincial Development Expenditure — Vote 32 
 
Items 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Chairman, I’d just like at this time to thank my officials and the 
members of our department for the back-up resource that they’ve so amply provided for me. And I’d 
like to thank the critic from the other side, the member for Shaunavon, and the other members that took 
part in the estimates. We took a shot at each other once and again, but I think they went by in a 
gentlemanly fashion. And I thank you for the sincere questions and look forward to doing the next set in 
the not too distant future. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

AGRICULTURE 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Item 1 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2356 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Mr. Minister, would you please introduce your staff. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. By way of introduction, on my right is Jack 
Drew, deputy minister of agriculture. On my left is Stu Kramer, assistant deputy minister of agriculture. 
Immediately behind me is Wes Mazer and several other officials along the back; all fine working folks 
from the Department of Agriculture. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, there are several things I’d like to talk about before we 
get into the detailed estimates point by point. Basically I think the most serious question facing farmers 
today is the possibility of a large slice being taken out of the amount of money they’re getting for their 
grain . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I knew that we were going to be talking about your estimates 
today and I felt that we didn’t want to waste precious question period time there when we can get down 
to the nitty gritty of the matter, and my concern, Mr. Minister, is the inability of your party to put 
forward an action plan or a proposal that will come up with some results. 
 
I was distressed to hear on the radio this morning that Pepin’s office made an announcement that he’s 
going to go with the legislation exactly like he promised in April. After you people have exhausted your 
action, after we discussed in the House here a strategy plan you refused to support and put into 
resolution, an action plan that would spell out some action. 
 
I feel that you’ve really failed on your commitment to fight the crow rate. And I think there are only two 
options, Mr. Minister. There’s an option that we can go down and meet with Mr. Pepin and meet with 
the officials, meet with the Quebec Minister of Agriculture like you did, as I read in the news reports, 
and we can talk about tinkering with the Pepin plan. And you will talk to the Minister of Agriculture in 
Quebec, and because he sees the Pepin plan differently than you do, you come back at loggerheads and 
the action is zilch. 
 
I think there’s a second option open to us, rather than tinkering with the Pepin plan or negotiating with 
Pepin himself on changing his plan. I think there is a second option, and that’s an option we can all 
agree with. 
 
We had a motion here in the legislature, a dandy motion. In fact, through a little persuasion and some 
discussion, our colleagues in Manitoba had introduced an identical resolution, word for word — a 
made-in-Saskatchewan resolution. But the outcome of that kind of a plan is that we are standing together 
as provinces. Here we’d have two, if you can get your colleagues or your political blood brothers in 
Manitoba to agree to that resolution, if you could get Sterling Lyon and his camp of defeated boys to do 
like we do over here, and agree with your resolution. 
 
Earlier on in the session, way back in June, we had an emergency debate that we initiated over here, and 
you watered down the entire debate. You watered down that resolution just to a short little item. And my 
concern is, Mr. Minister, that you really don’t have an action plan to stop Pepin, and I think I’ll stop 
there before I go into some of my other questions that I have. 
 
We’ll just take one point at a time. Rather than me giving you the whole load and waiting for you to 
respond, we’ll take one point at a time. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The member opposite has indicated that he has 
some concern that our action plan, or lack thereof, has been 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2357 

exhausted. In fact, the only thing to date that has been exhausted is your Minister of Agriculture who has 
been running around the country, lobbying, as was pointed out by the Premier the other day under the 
rule 17 debate that we were going to do. I don’t know if you would have us go down there with a 
cannon. I don’t know what you would do. We have in fact talked with, at least informally and in most 
cases formally, almost every minister in Canada. We have lobbied industries in central Canada. We have 
advanced their arguments far and wide, both the Premier and myself. And you and some misguided 
media type have indicated that the minister from Quebec, Jean Garon, and myself came out of that 
meeting at loggerheads. 
 
In fact the very opposite was true. We both opposed the Gilson proposal. We naturally opposed it for 
different reasons. We advanced our arguments on the nine points in our resolution, and they were well 
received. And when we left — we came back today at noon — it was left at the officials’ level. They 
were going to analyze our arguments and our data, etc., etc. And they would have no problem with our 
resolution, and supporting our resolution, if I understand them correctly, providing he could be satisfied 
that it wouldn’t do terrible violence to his beef industry. I can understand that he would be concerned 
about that. And we advanced the argument as to why it wouldn’t. I thought it was a very positive 
meeting. We have an understanding for one another’s positions. The fact is he does oppose the Pepin 
proposal, and so do we. 
 
What was the other point you made? I think that was it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — The position, and the point I was making, Mr. Minister, is that I don’t think in this 
debate with Pepin and lobbying the ministers that we can come up with an alternative consensus opinion 
that we would support, Manitoba would support, Alberta would support, Quebec would support and so 
on, to tell Pepin, here’s an alternative proposal. The point I was trying to make is: what is the 
government’s official position? Are you taking the stance that you can tinker with the Pepin plan and 
come up with some amendments, and some resolve to it? Or is the position now that we have to oppose 
the Pepin plan at all costs, to make sure it doesn’t pass in legislation before the end of June? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Our preference would be to have some modified Pepin proposal, as set 
out in the nine points of the resolution. Our Premier has already said that if we are going to pay a bigger 
bill for the status quo, we would sooner stay with the crow. Something to that effect. So what we’re 
saying is that the Pepin proposal, as set out, would do a terrible violence to the economy of 
Saskatchewan, number one, and even more importantly to the economy of all of Canada. But on the 
other side of the coin, if we don’t upgrade the rail system to provide for the capacity that we’re going to 
need in the years ahead, we’re going to be equally behind the eight ball. 
 
So what we would prefer is a modified Pepin proposal as set out in our resolution that you so willingly 
supported, and we thank you very much. But if we can’t get modifications necessary, our Premier has 
already said we would stay with the crow. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — One quick, short question. Have you got a commitment from your colleagues in 
Manitoba to support that identical resolution? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — No, and I didn’t seek a commitment, because I haven’t been running 
around with the cannon saying. “Lookit you do this or else.” What I have been doing is advancing our 
argument in a very positive way. They have been very well received. I would expect that they will 
support the resolution based on my discussions 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2358 

with the various members. I would expect our counterparts in Ottawa would do likewise, and on and on 
it goes. I anticipate a great deal of support from our counterparts across the country. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — That’s fairly weak coming from a tough guy — a minister. I think the minister is 
really almost to the point where he’s trying to mislead the House by saying that he didn’t ask for a 
commitment or check and see. You know that if there is a unified voice coming out of western Canada 
that will make an awful lot of differences as to whether Pepin’s plan is going to go. So, number one, 
we’ve agreed to compromise our position to the point where we support your resolution. It’s not as tight 
as I’d like it to be. That resolution isn’t as tight as I’d like it to be. 
 
I went to a meeting that your government and your members were invited to. They attended for a couple 
of hours. They didn’t come to the last half of it. It was here in the Hotel Saskatchewan. That included 
farm groups that represented a good portion of Saskatchewan people. The transportation minister from 
Manitoba was there. Our party leader from Alberta was there. 
 
We talked about how we go about to stop Pepin’s plan. One of them was that so far in Saskatchewan we 
have a resolution that was unanimously agreed to here in this province. We received an assurance. They 
gave me a copy of the introduction of the resolution and said, “We didn’t force it on them because we 
knew we couldn’t get support from the Conservatives over there on that resolution.” It states right on the 
introductory page: a resolution passed by the Saskatchewan legislation, and there are the words of it. 
 
That resolution will be voted on in the very, very near future. I’m sure that some influence from you and 
some suggestions from them saying, “These are the economic benefits for Manitoba, and this is the kind 
of position we’re in in Saskatchewan, and this is where the money is going to go if we don’t get this 
through” . . . Surely you could have gotten a commitment from your colleagues in Manitoba like we did 
from the Government of Manitoba saying that they’re going to go with it. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I’m sure you’re right. I expect that we have, but it’s not in blood. That’s 
the nature of us as opposed to the attitude on that side. We build on our strengths rather than get into 
confrontation type arguments, and it seems to be working fairly well for us. 
 
You talked about a unified voice coming out of western Canada. It’s building. We would prefer a 
unified voice from across Canada, and it’s building. I don’t anticipate 100 per cent success, but I 
certainly expect that we will get very, very significant support for our resolution relative to the Pepin 
proposal. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Just one further issue on this very same topic and on the resolution that was passed 
here. The Alberta session is being recalled very shortly. I don’t remember right from the top of my head 
whether it’s next week or the following week, but it’s that soon. What kind of a commitment or a 
promise have you from your colleague, the Minister of Agriculture in Alberta, as far as introducing that 
kind of resolution from the Alberta legislature? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, I will tell you only out of the goodness and kindness of my heart, 
but not because I am obliged to in any way, as to the conversations that go on 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2359 

between me and my colleague in Alberta. But I have talked with him informally only. We haven’t had a 
formal discussion relative to this. Their problems again are a little unique as to our situation. In the 
informal discussions, they have no problems with the points raised in our resolution. If and when you let 
me out of the House, I expect to set up a formal meeting with the Alberta minister, and see where that 
takes us. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — When you’re going to your meeting with the minister in Alberta, I can tell you you 
can take with you the assurance that he will get support from the NDP opposition on that resolution. 
They will support that kind of a resolution. Mr. Notley suggested that if they don’t introduce it, he will. 
But he would prefer the government bringing forth that kind of resolution, because it adds a tremendous 
amount of strength coming from there. 
 
I think the key in this whole debate is that we’re not going to help another segment of agriculture by 
breaking the legs of an opposing section. Cutting the grain farmer off at the knees isn’t going to help the 
cattlemen at all. Not at all . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, maybe I am. From the inactivity of that 
minister, I think I’m not really doing that. I suppose I could ask you a question and embarrass you but it 
wouldn’t help the crow debate. 
 
If I’d ask you a question today to tell me how much money your department has spent from May 8 until 
the end of that year, 1982, on battling the crow, I think that would be an embarrassing question, because 
a couple of telegrams don’t cost that much money. I think that you should pull up your socks, Mr. 
Minister, because you’ve got out of the gate with a horse that fell asleep when the gun was fired. In fact, 
I think the rider might have been sleeping, because the original gun wasn’t fired on February 1, when 
you finally woke up that Pepin meant business. That wasn’t when the battle started. 
 
I have a memorandum to cabinet here before me from the Hon. Jean-Luc Pepin . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It’s spelled Jean — J-e-a-n. I have this memorandum to cabinet here, that’s dated more 
than a year ago, January 12, 1982. This document was so widely circulated that I’m sure your 
Department of Agriculture had copies of this document. If you look at it, and if you see some of the 
pints that were raised in this document . . . If you care to take time, I could go through them with you. 
 
Here is Pepin’s proposal: the amounts of money that they were going to spend; how they were going to 
motivate and make it appear as though it was a made-in-Saskatchewan plan. We were sucked into this 
plan and this Pepin proposal. February 1983 wasn’t the opening date of that little war. January 12, 1982 
— one year earlier. I think I should get this document . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s a confidential 
document for a cabinet meeting of January 12, 1982; a memorandum to cabinet, a western rail 
transportation proposal for implementation of a comprehensive solution. The Legislative Secretary says 
that he has this copy, so I don’t have to make that available to him. 
 
Let me just read from page 2: 
 

Because of the historic importance of the Crow’s Nest rate in western Canada and the political 
sensitivity of the subject, the implementation of cabinet’s decisions will need to be handled with great 
care. The government’s primary objective should be to break the rigidness of the present system by 
starting a process of change. While very substantial expenditures by the government will be required 
during the first years of the 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2360 

new regime, the payments in this burden should be eased over time as increased producer payments 
take over. There should be a desire for a made-in-western-Canada solution (that proposal). This 
militates against an excessively firm and detailed stance by the federal government at the outset of the 
negotiations. 

 
They’re talking here about who their friends are. 
 

As other costs increase faced annually by producers, there is a substantial measure of agreement that 
the acceptability of any intention by the government to increase grain transportation costs will be 
improved if the government showed a willingness to link transportation costs to the price of grain, i.e., 
for the producers’ ability to pay. 

 
So they’re talking about that, and that’s . . . (inaudible) . . . proposal, but it details pretty well exactly 
what they told Gilson to do in his study. I think we knew that was happening. And just a short quick 
answer: what did your government do since taking office, and how much money did they spend fighting 
the crow rate during the year 1982? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I don’t know how much money we spent fighting the crow in 1982, but I 
would suggest a great deal of my salary could be chalked up against that, number one. Number two, you 
read the date off that. It was January 2, 1981 . . . I don’t remember. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — January 12, 1982. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Okay. I just ask you who was government then, and what did you do aside 
from making some political statement about . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We called the election on the strength of this . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — And what did they tell you? What did they tell you? What they told you 
when you called the election is, “Let’s put the Tories in power, so they will in fact get the necessary 
changes, or the demise of the Pepin proposal, or whatever,” because they have confidence in us to do 
that. Obviously, they didn’t have confidence in you to do that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I should have been taking notes, because I really don’t know if you asked 
me a question on that one or not, but I just responded to it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — The question was what did you spend, and you said your time. I believe that is exactly 
right, because I’m sure that if that’s what a Minister of Agriculture took eight months to do — to send 
two telegrams — I think that’s pretty serious, because I haven’t seen any effect or any fruits of any 
effort from some great expenditure. 
 
You said they put the Tories in power, and part of your commitment, as given in your little commitment, 
in your little commitment plan . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Sure, it’s a long time ago, but when the 
voters were lined up, “A Progressive Conservative government will be committed to the preservation of 
the crowrate, realizing a farm community cannot afford further cost increases.” That’s a commitment 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2361 

you had, and there should be more than just an expenditure of some of your salary. There should have 
been some programs in place, some funding for groups that want to go to Ottawa in delegations. 
 
We had a good four- or five- or six-point proposal that we added onto the resolution in this House, and 
you voted them down because you don’t have an honest commitment to fight the plan. You really don’t 
care if it passes or not. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I don’t suppose it would do any good to say yes, I do, you know, because 
you’re not going to believe it anyway. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I’ll believe it if you tell me how much money you spent. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, I suppose we could make the calculation. I don’t know how many 
people in the department have been working on all the data that we’ve compiled to advance our 
arguments across the country. I don’t know what percentage of the cost of the Saskatoon conference, 
which was a great success, could be chalked against the crow battle. I don’t know what percentage of 
time of other departments, say intergovernmental affairs or whatever, can be chalked against the crow 
battle. But if we do make the calculation, and it will take some time, it probably wouldn’t approach the 
$100,000 that the previous government budgeted to fight the crow in Saskatchewan, preaching to the 
choir when you should have been down in Ottawa and in other jurisdictions saving the crow. Everybody 
in Saskatchewan wanted it saved, everybody here. So, what did we do? We set up these happy little 
committees and trucked them all over the province. We knew what the people in Saskatchewan wanted. 
So you pumped your $100,000 down a well, and here we are in this situation today. We’re giving it our 
very best shot. We’re confident that something will come out of it, whether it is the demise of the Pepin 
proposal or the modification of the Pepin proposal. If one or the other of those two things don’t happen, 
we will have failed. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I am sure the farm community will be very happy to hear that you think the $100,000 
was spent on organizing those happy little committees, as you’ve called them, and will appreciate that 
effort. I want to ask the minister if he thinks that the support he is getting from rural Saskatchewan today 
. . . The amount of farmers who are showing up at some of the meetings that the Pool is organizing and 
different groups are calling, the amount of people who were at the various meetings over in the 
Chairman’s home town of Shellbrook or wherever, those people came out to that meeting because they 
know where it’s at. They know where it’s at because they were informed well in advance of what was 
happening. The previous government did its job in making its point know. The people in Saskatchewan 
are used to believing governments, believing governments. 
 
And when you come out with a little paper saying commitment, and put on there’s a progressive 
government will be committed to the preservation of the crow rate. When you are all 56 present — or 55 
because you were in Quebec — in Regina, two couldn’t be spared, or one, to stay with the meeting, and 
just make a little one-hour appearance and run at 11 and not bothering coming back. That’s a pretty 
serious commitment to fighting the crow when there are people there from Alberta, people there from 
Saskatchewan and representative groups from across Saskatchewan. An official invitation went to you, 
Mr. Minister, to attend that meeting. The two people who showed up, for your information, were the 
members for Last Mountain constituency and Kelvington-Wadena. They made an appearance and stayed 
for a little while. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2362 

Yes, just a little one-hour shot, and they didn’t have to bother staying for the day. So that doesn’t really 
spell commitment. The assurance I’m looking for today is that the minister has endeavoured to preserve 
that heritage we’ve got as far as the crow issue is concerned. I want a commitment from you that you 
won’t tinker with Pepin’s plan, because there’s nothing there to fix, there’s nothing there to fix. It’s a 
guillotine that’s going to chop the heads off of the Saskatchewan small farmers. Tinkering with it and 
putting a different kind of blade on there, and using a saw instead of a knife isn’t going to help the 
situation, isn’t going to make it less painful. In Art Thibault’s words, just cutting off the farmer at his 
ankles a little bit at a time isn’t going to help, you know. We have to stop the Pepin plan, and I want to 
make sure that we have that kind of a commitment that you’re not just about to tinker with it. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — The commitment that I will give is the same commitment that I gave 
earlier and that is: our preference is a modification as set out in the resolution that we enjoyed your 
support of. Failing that, our fall-back position is to keep the crow as it is. And that has been our position 
and it’s been by the Premier articulated fairly well in this House, on the streets, in the East and in 
Estevan, and I think it’s a far more serious commitment. 
 
I was not quite accurate earlier when I said $100,000. In fact, it was a $187,000 that the previous 
government spent on a nice shiny little brochure and they mailed them all over Saskatchewan, and they 
forgot to tell Ottawa because everyone in Saskatchewan wanted the kind of protection that we’re talking 
about. You didn’t have to sell the people in Saskatchewan. You had to sell Ottawa. But where did your 
187,000 go? A nice little glossy thing that probably most people threw in the garbage. 
 
I think that the previous administration was less than sincere in their efforts relative to the crow. I think 
probably what they were trying to do was get a little hype just prior to going into an election. Obviously, 
it didn’t work. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I guess the minister wants to debate this issue for a long time. When you said, “We 
forgot to tell Ottawa,” I have this same cabinet document dated January 12, 1982, and he remembers that 
the election wasn’t until April. What did Pepin tell cabinet about Saskatchewan’s position? What did 
Pepin think of the Saskatchewan position, and what doe she think of the Saskatchewan position today? 
That’s the question. Stay sitting until I tell you the answer; I want the minister to listen carefully. 
 
Those who maintain that the Crow’s Nest Pass rate must not be touched, the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the National Farmers’ Union, insist that any additional compensation be paid by the 
federal government. Others, including the wheat pool have indicated varying degrees of willingness to 
see increased payments by grain producers. Others. I bet if that memorandum would be written today by 
Mr. Pepin, they’d say that the Government of Saskatchewan is onside with change. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I guess we could go on forever bringing old material back to the debate 
because we’ve known for a long time what the previous government’s position was relative to crow. 
We’ve known for a long time what the NFU’s position was relative to crow. 
 
Going back to the previous government’s position, though, it was muddied from time to time by the 
former premier when he threw half of our energy revenues on the table in Pointe au Pic, Quebec in 
exchange for protection for the crow, so he bargained away 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2363 

half of our energy revenue on that one, or was prepared to. Another one at a SARM conference in 
Saskatoon, he allowed as to how perhaps it was time for some upward adjustment of the statutory rate. 
And that’s a paraphrase. It’s not a precise quote. 
 
I concede that your party’s official position was that crow must not be changed. Our party’s official 
position is that we must have additional capacity to meet the needs of the farmers in the future, and if it 
requires some change, we want it changed as set out in the resolution that all of us in this House voted 
for a week ago, or whenever it was. That is our position, and I assume that it is also yours, since you 
voted for the resolution. Now, if you’re going to go at it until you get me to say that, in spite of 
whatever, the crow must stay, I’m not going to say that, because our preference is to have the adjustment 
based on this resolution. Our fall-back position is simply if we have to pay a bigger bill for the status 
quo, we’re not prepared to dot hat and we will go with crow. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — What percentage of the additional capacity required by the railways do you anticipate, 
or does your department think, that wheat is going to take? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I’m going off the top of my head but I think at the end of the decade the 
percentage of total capacity used by grain would be in the neighbourhood of 17 to 20 per cent. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — How much increased capacity, Mr. Chairman, does that spell as far as the amount of 
volume that wheat is taking now and that you expect wheat will take in total grain being hauled? How 
much do you think wheat is going to increase? 
 
Mr. Chairman, the only point I’m making is that the additional capacity that grain is going to require 
isn’t in proportion to what they are asking the farmers to pay, and you are going to dicker away a 
constitutional right we have here in Saskatchewan, so that your friends, the CPR, can make an extra 
buck. And that’s exactly where it’s at. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — If you can predict for me, among other things, when the world economy is 
going to recover, world rainfall in other producing countries, many other variables such as demands 
around the world on coal, demand around the world on potash, demands around the world on sulphur 
and other bulk commodities that use the same railways. I will then make the calculation for you as to the 
percentage of capacity used for grain. I think all projections based on a recovery economy world-wide, 
and based on averages as it relates to production in the other producing areas, are that the percentage of 
rail capacity used for grain will decline. But I can’t give you that with any degree of precision because 
of all the variables in there, and you guys know something about variables because you are the people 
that were projecting $157 million profit from potash, and it came out about 10. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — When I get into the potash debate, I’d love that. Mr. Minister, I would love that, and 
how you’ve mismanaged the potash industry as well. The only thing I’m saying, Mr. Minister, is that 
I’m not sure that the former minister of agriculture did a good enough job of education. I’m not sure that 
those little play meetings, as you called them, those little committee things that were set up and funded, 
and that $180,000 was spent . . . Maybe he should have spent another $20,000 educating you, because I 
don’t think you know how serious the problem really is. And I don’ think that you and the organization 
that you belong to, as far as the Palliser group is concerned, realize the 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2364 

effect it’s going to have on a farmer your size or my size, let alone the small farmer, let alone the guy on 
two or three quarters of land. 
 
When you can spend two days in the Duck Lake region, for example, and I have to visit farmers till late 
afternoon to find enough . . . I’ve seen them accumulate half as much land as you farm, and you could 
cover that in a day. But those, what I visited there in a day, you could farm that with your equipment, 
and I know what kind of operation you’ve got, and so could I. And so could I. And so could I. 
 
Those are the boys that are going to really suffer because they depend on a mixed economy. They 
depend on some cattle. If we can’t sell our grain and decide to grow barley and feed cattle, that’s going 
to have quite an impact on the cattle industry, and I don’t think you and your friends in the Palliser got 
that message and realize . . . And the only reason I’ve taken close to half an hour on this issue is the 
seriousness of this question of the crow debate, and that’s the number one issue facing farmers today. 
And I think you’re only putting up a little 5 per cent effort. 
 
You think that $180,000 is misdirected and misspent fighting the crow, and consequently you haven’t 
spent any money fighting the crow. You haven’t done anything meaningful. There are some meaningful 
things you could do, and if you haven’t got any ideas maybe we’ll have to take time and I’ll have to give 
you some. But I think you should get your act in gear, and do the things that are easy to do, and that is, 
get your colleagues to support the same kind of resolution in Alberta, get them to go along with the one 
that’s already on the floor in Manitoba, and let’s start coming out with a unified voice, at least in the 
grain-growing area. The people of Canada know that everybody in the grain-growing area says no to 
Pepin, period. That’s my last word. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — The member opposite, Mr. Chairman, talks about wanting to have a 
unified voice coming out of western Canada, and I have some sympathy for that particular attitude. I 
think that is the best possible thing that can happen if we can pull that together. 
 
But while he says that, I can remember distinctly the amendment that he offered to our resolution the 
other day, clearly divisive in the sense that it precluded the invitation of several of the commodity 
groups that have a vital interest and stake in the very question that we’re dealing about. 
 
So while we’re talking on the one hand about a unified voice, you bring in an amendment to an 
otherwise sound resolution that would cause just the opposite to happen, so I really don’t know where 
you’re coming from. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There was a question you raised, and I’ve 
forgotten what it was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I know what the question was. 
 
The question was: why don’t I get a commitment from the Tories in Manitoba and the government in 
Alberta to pass a similar resolution in their jurisdiction so we can have this unified . . . (inaudible) . . . I 
expect that it will happen in Manitoba. As I said earlier, I’ve only had informal talks with the Alberta 
minister so far, and I'll raise it with him when I talk to him formally. Beyond that, I don'’ know what the 
member would have me contribute more at this time. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2365 

MR. ENGEL: — The second major increase. 
 
In my farm operation, in the last three or four years, fuel costs have risen — tractor fuels — from $2,500 
a year to over $6,000. 
 
Prior to you taking the reins of government, prior to you taking over and moving into that side of the 
House the farmers in Saskatchewan were enjoying a $65 million tax holiday — a $65 million advantage 
over their city cousins in farm fuel. The tax on purple gas alone that was saved by farm fuel, and the 
additional discount they got, totalled $65 million for our last year in government. 
 
That advantage is gone. Yesterday the price of grain went up again. That $65 million did more — that 
tax advantage did more than just the $65 million, is the way I want to word that. That purple gas tax 
advantage did for rural Saskatchewan much more than just create a $65 million activity. I don’t know, 
Mr. Chairman, if there are any in your area, but I don’t know of a farmer in my constituency that doesn’t 
own a half-ton or a pick-up truck. I don’t know of one. I don’t think I’m stretching it at all by saying that 
there’s not one farmer in my riding that doesn’t have a . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I farm in your riding. I don’t have a half-ton. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — His dad and his brothers that do the work have three of them — have three half-tons. 
Now if you can afford to pay your share on that truck, that’s your bad management. But the family has 
three — I was ready for you. We have a couple of more constituents but Ned doesn’t farm down my 
way, he just works there. 
 
The pick-up truck business was a fairly lucrative business for the car dealers and car agencies in 
Saskatchewan. You’ve destroyed that aspect of the business plus the other advantages. It is today . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s why you haven’t got a pick-up, because you knew there’s not going to 
be any advantage in having purple gas. You can now drive a little car, or whatever, because it’s just as 
cheap to use your old automobile junker, instead of having a pick-up truck. 
 
I think the minister should seriously consider, because of the increase . . . I can wait until he listens. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I’m listening. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — If you want to make light of this matter, that’s your business. I think the energy 
question, to the farmers, is a very, very serious matter. 
 
I think the farmers put you in office across the way because they expected some very special help from 
you in the light of energy. What you have done as far as the energy situation is concerned, and the high 
price of energy? You’re talking and crying about the deal we made. What have you done since then? 
What have you done since that time as far as the energy situation is concerned, and the serious energy 
problem? You’re not prepared to move on it. What have you done? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Firstly, I want to tell the member that I’ve spent quite a bit of time 
travelling around the province and visiting with farmers right across the province. I haven’t found one 
that would have us put the tax back on. They kind of like that. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2366 

In addition to that, we have announced some weeks ago an alternate energy source for rural 
Saskatchewan, called natural gas, that’s going to be implemented over the next 10 years, I think the 
announcement said. As I recall it — and I’m again going off the top of my head — as a source of 
energy, natural gas costs about 60 per cent of our traditional energy sources, a potentially very 
significant saving to agricultural Saskatchewan. It can be used to operate grain dryers, tractors, trucks, 
the whole ball of wax. I know of farms in North Dakota that are doing that right now. They’ve got 
compressors set up on their farms, and they operate the whole farm on natural gas, right from stem to 
gudget. And it’s a very efficient method. We’ve announced it; it’s underway, I understand. A 10-year 
program, and it’s a big program and a direct benefit to the farming community. 
 
In addition to that, as it relates to reduced input costs, we had this thing called a farm purchase program. 
Farm purchase program — an excellent take up, and a very popular program. And then I think back, 
there was another thing called the farm cost reduction program that seemed to be implemented each year 
prior to an election and dropped each year after an election . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And that one, 
the most recent one, was just prior to the ’75 election. I think it ran around a $15 million budgetary item, 
and the day after the election — and I remember the debates at that time, they said, “The reason that we 
have to put this rebate program in place is that the costs are escalating at such a ridiculous rate, and the 
farmers are under terrible, terrible pressure, so we’re going to rebate $15 million to the farmers of 
Saskatchewan” — the very next year, when they pulled the program out, nothing had changed. In fact, 
costs were escalating even worse, even higher. But no longer was the argument valid, so the program 
was scrapped. 
 
Now we have taken some very significant steps as it relates to cost reduction for agriculture in 
Saskatchewan, and we will continue to analyse and suggest and otherwise come up with programs, 
because we have a lot of innovative people in our department, and in our caucus, and in our government. 
Perhaps we can advance for further initiatives in this way. 
 
Finally, the motion that you supported the other day says that . . . Anyway, here it is. Point number five, 
“The Pepin proposal does not deal with unacceptable high taxation levels on farm inputs such as fuel.” 
So, you know, it’s part of the same thing. We recognize that there are serious input pressures as it relates 
to cost, and we’re trying to deal with them. We’re in tough economic times. In Saskatchewan we’re 
dealing with them a little better than other jurisdictions, but I’m the first to admit that there’s much more 
to be done. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — You’re making the farm cost reduction plan look as though it was tied to an election. 
Have you talked to your officials on the dates it was introduced and the price of grain, and when it was 
taken off and where the price of grain went? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I haven’t talked to my officials to ask precisely as to whether it was an 
election gimmick or not, because our officials are professionals and they don’t make political analysis, 
but I will ask them as to the dates if it’s important to you, and I’ll make my own political analysis as to 
whether it was a game of political gimmickry or not. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2367 

MR. ENGEL: — Well, Mr. Minister, I know when it was introduced and I know when it was taken off. 
It was not a legitimate thing when the price of grain escalated by 30 per cent to leave a farm cost 
reduction program on when we didn’t have a similar program in effect for the city people. 
 
That leads me to one more thing, and that is that the farmers of Saskatchewan expected last April a 
40-cent reduction in the price of their fuels. I have a full-page ad that has been displayed in this 
legislature before, on the Progressive Conservative policies for good government — “Blakeney says 
tested and trusted; the people say tried and rusted.” Maybe that’s so, but . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I’m glad you support the fact that advertising in Saskatchewan is taken seriously by 
the people of Saskatchewan. They believe what they read. They believe what they read and they 
believed this ad: “Removal of the 20 per cent sales tax on gasoline. This amounts to 40 cents a gallon.” 
Removal of the sales tax on gasoline at 20 per cent amounts to 40 cents a gallon — top line. That joker 
. . . You thought that $15 million thing wasn’t so bad. Mr. Pickering didn’t think it was that bad, and the 
other half of this page showed Bob. This is the Radville Star, Tuesday, April 15. “Reinstatement of the 
farm fuel reduction program,” as big as life, big as life. “10 per cent cut in personal income tax and 
removal of 5 per cent sales tax” are the two other promises you haven’t kept. 
 
You haven’t kept one of those first four promises — not one. You didn’t give me 40 cents a gallon off 
on my gas or diesel fuel or home heating fuel. You didn’t reinstate the fuel cost reduction plan. In fact, 
what you did do is you took away the $65 million advantage we did have over the cost. And if you think 
that’s honest advertising, Mr. Minister, I think this is a pack of lies, and you stuck it to the people last 
April. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I don’t quarrel with the merits of a farm fuel rebate program or whatever 
you call it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You laughed at it earlier. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — No, what I laughed at was the political motivation that prompted the 
implementation of the program when you guys were in power. I don’t quarrel with the merits of such a 
program. I have a great deal of difficulty right now, as a government, coning up with the dollars to put 
such a program in place and so that is the reason I suggested that particular type of program won’t be put 
in place, certainly not this year. Having said that, we have taken some other initiatives which I have 
already enumerated as it relates to reduced in put costs. 
 
Now that takes us to the 20 per cent sales tax on gasoline. A 20 per cent sales tax on gasoline — your 
tax — the sliding 20 per cent sales tax. And we removed it. We removed a 20 . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — You said 40 cents. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, I’ll get to that. We removed the 20 per cent sales tax from gasoline. 
Every penny of provincial sales tax on gasoline was stricken off the very first day we were in cabinet, 
isn’t that right? And when we brought the bill into the House, you voted for it. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2368 

Now you want to talk about the 40 cents. I understand that one some road fuels, it was as high as 40 
cents on the commercial units. I understand, in addition, that the projections, had the world price 
continued before the OPEC dive recently, would have exceeded 40 cents. Again, when I’m travelling the 
countryside, I’m not finding anyone who is asking us to put the tax back on. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — When you’re travelling the country, it isn’t going to be too long, Mr. Minister, when 
the farmers are going to be telling you that the negotiations with the federal government are your turn. 
For the last year, it’s been your turn. How are you managing, as far as your negotiations are concerned, 
when the OPEC prices that you just mentioned are taking a nose-dive and dropping by 30 per cent and 
40 per cent, and you are telling us that we’re supposed to pay more this year? What kind of negotiations 
are you doing? I think it’s time that this love-in that you have with the federal government ceases and 
comes to an end. I think it’s time you start opposing them and saying that enough is enough, and that the 
farmers can’t bear this additional price. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I don’t know how many times I have to say it. I’ll just simply remind the 
member that it was the incestuous relationship that his counterpart in Ottawa had with the Liberals in 
Ottawa that caused them to be there in the first place. You know, don’t hang it on me. I’ve said a 
thousand times that farmers imply can’t afford to pay any more. We’ve beat and beat and beat that drum 
till the cows come home, and we are going to continue to beat it, but don’t forget it was your boys who 
put them in there. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we need more than just a little talk. I think it’s time 
for a little action. Unless you start bullying your way around in Ottawa, we are going to keep on getting 
increases in the price of our fuel, while everybody else in the world is experiencing the discounts that 
are taking place. 
 
There are other areas that are of great concern. The concern is there because of the expectations you’ve 
raised. There is so much talk these days about the Premier’s thesis and the enthusiasm he had when he 
wrote that 20 per cent of the people could do the farming, and that theory that’s going now, there’s so 
much more we can be. 
 
How much more did you do for farmers, say, in the line of irrigation? It’s one of your top campaign 
issues as far as rural Saskatchewan is concerned. We’re going to make all this money available and there 
are all these farmers going to be irrigating. How many more farmers were in irrigation this year than 
would have been on the old budget? How much more money did you spend, and was introduced to be 
spent, in the last two budgets — the budget that was introduced in April and the one you introduced in 
June? How much more did you spend, say, on irrigation? There is so much more we can be. What did 
you do as far as irrigation is concerned? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, don’t forget that this is your budget. My understanding is that the 
estimate number is the same as it was, relative to irrigation, as the blue book you tabled. There is very 
little done as it relates to ditching and pumping, etc., in the wintertime. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — The question is: how much of that estimate did you spend? . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Well, I said how much more you can be. I said, how much 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2369 

more did you spend on irrigation? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I wonder if you’d mind dealing with this on a program-by-program basis 
as we go down the list, because it has just been pointed out to me that in fact the first one we looked at 
has in fact been overspent, and, as you know, relative to irrigation, more than one program. So if you 
want to go down the votes, we’ll deal with them on a program-by-program basis. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — I’d rather not. I have a series of questions I wanted to go through and you were 
talking about how much more you can be. If you have those numbers I’d like to have them now before I 
get to that subject . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, it isn’t. This is estimates and the estimates are held 
one month before the end of the budget year, so rather than talk estimates we can talk actual numbers. I 
mean, that’s basically a reasonable thing. We didn’t have our estimates in April, the end of April, first 
part of May, when we should have had them. Now that we’re down to February and the budget comes to 
an end in March. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I’m just telling you the right way to do it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Well, the right way to do it would have been, Mr. Minister, to have these estimates 
last April, and starting May 8. Okay, give it in May. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Okay. As it relates to capital expenditure, on irrigation and the flood 
control and drainage, which is all in that particular vote 2 — it is basically the same as in your blue 
book, except under item 1, vote 2, irrigation projects and development, it’s overspent by about $50,000, 
I’m told now. If you want any more precision than that, it’s going to take some time. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — You talked in your pocket policy and I could go through, Mr. Minister, your pocket 
policy statements, one by one, but I just picked out a few. 
 
You talked about diversifying and modernizing and speciality enterprises. How did the estimate 
compare, s far as FarmStart was concerned, with the previous budget and what you’ve done in this one? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — There’s no question. I’ll get you the numbers, but no question demand 
was down quite a bit in FarmStart. Economic times . . . It’s tough, people carrying debt loads, etc., but I 
want to point out that while demand was down and interest rates were climbing significantly we pegged 
the FarmStart interest rate at some level lower than it would have normally gone to under the regulations 
that were in place when we inherited it. We’ll get you the numbers in a minute. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Talking about it and pegging it and all doesn’t do an awful lot of good if there’s no 
money available to the farmers that need it. When things get tough, that’s when the farmer decides to 
diversify and get into an operation. My understanding of the problem, coming from farmers, was that 
they were refused in FarmStart, and that you were really cutting back on it. What did you actually do in 
FarmStart, compared to what would have been spent? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — The number budgeted is the same, identically, as your blue book that you 
tabled last April. In addition to that, there was a $400,000 injection to deal with the pegging of the 
interest rate that I talked about just a minute ago. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2370 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You used that entire number plus $400,000? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — No, we’ll get to that next. 
 
There were $21 million gone out through FarmStart; 35 million, ball-park, budgeted 400,000 in addition, 
for the interest rate pegging; and no one that was qualified was refused. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — When you pegged the interest rate, Mr. Minister, did you tighten up the qualification? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — There’s no change in the policy. We took your lovely program and carried 
right on with it. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Your plans are to continue propagating that type of diversification avenue open to the 
farmers? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Certainly that’s one of the thrusts that is important to us. As I say, we’re 
eight, nine months into a government and by the time our four-year term is up, we will have 
demonstrated, I think, that that is indeed one of the directions that we intend to take. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Before I ask a question on staffing, that kind of thing, I’ll let some of my colleagues. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, could you indicate to the House just what you are planning to do with 
the FFIB program? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — We have made a conscious decision to get out of competition with the 
private sector, and so we are getting out of the supply business as it relates to the pipe, and the pumps, 
and etc. That inventory will be tendered. I don’t know just when, but soon. The engineering function and 
that side of it will be retained, so that the service will still exist. The argument, quite frankly and I think 
very validly, was advanced by the previous administration when they were talking about the usefulness 
or the life of the family farm improvement branch to a large extent having expired, because there are 
very few farms except . . . the South has been very well taken care of and has progressed more and 
more, and it seemed like quite a big item to service what was left to be serviced. And the mandate, of 
course, was to get water and sewer on the farms, as you recall. So I guess the answer to your question is 
simply this: the competition side will no longer exist; the engineering and planning side will continue to 
exist. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — What you’re saying then, Mr. Minister, is that anybody that wants to get water and 
sewer on the farm, a young farmer that may decide that he’s going to install water and sewer, now has to 
go out to the private sector and pay the regular price, as he has no way now of getting some assistance 
regarding the prices of the equipment that he may require. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — The design and engineering is still available to him, and that’s important. 
Those of us on this side of the House tend to feel that competition in the private side, particularly if they 
have the volumes, can keep the price down to where it belongs. The family farm improvement branch 
was taking up a lot of that volume. If it now goes back to the private side, we don’t anticipate any sharp 
increases in the cost of equipment. 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2371 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the increase will be there mainly for the fact that once 
you go to the private sector to get the supplies for the waterworks, the increase will be there, because the 
farmers up to this point have been enjoying a reduced price for the products that they’ve been buying 
through FFIB, the supplies they’ve been getting through them. So, once you go to the private sector, 
your costs are automatically going to be up, and they’re going to be up by a fair percentage. So there’s 
no way then that you are saying that your department is going to assist the young farmers, or any farmer 
for that matter that may not have water and sewer that would want to put it in at this time. You’re saying 
that he’s going to have to go and pay the costs, and all he can receive is technical assistance from the 
department at this time. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, the numbers I have here — bearing in mind that FFIB was not a 
subsidized operation, their supplies were bought by tender just like private guys would do, I suppose, 
and they had to support themselves through revenues generated internally; and the mark-up on water and 
sewage materials ranged from 10 to 35 per cent, depending on what the item was, plastic pipe, or pump, 
or whatever — I’m told that historically there’s been very little difference in the price of family farm 
improvement and on the private side. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I tend to disagree with you on that, because just his 
past summer my son-in-law put in water on the farm. And I know, by buying some of that equipment 
through FFIB and checking with some of the supply houses in the cities, the costs are very much 
different. Regardless of whether FFIB charged 10 per cent or 35 per cent, they were very much cheaper 
than what you can get through the private sector, and I doubt very much that you’re going to see prices 
decrease any going through the private sector now, because FFIB will not be in competition with them. 
If anything, it will probably keep going higher now because there will be no competition or no source 
that the farmer can go to get his equipment any cheaper. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — You believe that and that’s fine. I don’t quarrel with your particular 
philosophy. I have mine and I kind of like the private side supplying it, and also policing themselves 
through competition on the private side. If you really felt strongly about your beliefs as it relates to 
helping the farm sector get water and sewer, you probably wouldn’t have cancelled the $300 grant that 
provided for assistance for that very thing about two or three years ago. It’s just another one of those 
little wrinkles that get in the road from time to time when we get through these estimates. But the $300 
grant that provided for water and sewer on the farms was cancelled by your administration two or three 
years ago and no longer exists. 
 
The other question you raise is purely a philosophical one, and we could talk about that all day, I 
suppose. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Chairman, that we could, Mr. Minister. The $300 grant was removed because 
the farmer could apply through another department to get assistance to put that waterworks in; it was 
there and he could have got a lot more than $300 through the other departments. He had the assistance 
available to him, and on top of that, he was able to get his supplies a lot cheaper. So there was quite a 
degree of assistance provided to these farmers in that area. 
 
I see now, Mr. Minister, you no longer have any of that assistance in place for the farmer, so they will 
have to go to the private sector. I can understand that, with your 



 
March 3, 1983 

 
2372 

open-for-business philosophy. I can see it’s not much sense pursuing that one anymore; it is a waste of 
time as my colleague says. 
 
One other question I have, Mr. Minister, is what are you planning? What is your policy going to be in 
the way of sales of land bank and lands branch land at this point? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that it may take awhile to get all of that 
on the table, Mr. Chairman, I’d ask that we call 5 o’clock. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


