






















































Hansard: May 30, 1983


2709 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 30, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Garner that Bill 
No. 81 — An Act respecting the Operation of Vehicles be now read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I just have a few comments in wrapping up second reading of the 
new Vehicles Act. I think we left off with the DWI program, which, Mr. Speaker, I believe would have 
been and is going to be a very good program under this government, because we’re going to make sure 
that it’s adequately funded, which is something that the previous government neglected to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite and the member from Quill Lakes touched on the highway program. 
Well, I know it . . . directly affect The Vehicles Act, but it is in connection, Mr. Speaker, the record of 
this government is going to be a lot more impressive in highway program than it was by former socialist 
government of this province. When I inherited the job as Minister of Highways and Transportation, and 
after the previous administration had been playing jiggery-pokery with not only the books, but trying to 
fool the people of Saskatchewan, for the year that the had announced, seven out of every 10 roads that 
they announced, there wasn’t funding in place to build those roads. Mr. Speaker, there’s been a change 
this year. The people wanted a change; they’re going to get a change. And what the people are now 
getting is the truth, Mr. Speaker, something that seems to escape the members opposite almost every 
time they stand in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite also discussed twinning of the Trans-Canada. Well, you know, he 
said that we’re not twinning any roads or doing any great expansion. I would like him to go out and visit 
with the people from Indian Head to Qu’Appelle, and tell them that they’re not going to get a road. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, there’s been many people have lost their lives on just that one section of road. 
That section of road . . . It was announced in this Assembly, the contract was awarded about two weeks 
ago. Mr. Speaker, that section of road is going to be built. It’s not a promise made by a government that 
doesn’t listen to people; a promise made by a government that cares about the safety of the travelling 
public in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite brought up the point about the school bus accident the other 
day. It was a tragic day in Saskatchewan. So right away they’ve got an end-all, cure-all solution for it, 
Mr. Speaker. Without knowing the statistics, without knowing the facts, they’re prepared to bring in an 
amendment. Don’t talk to anyone; don’t to SSTA — I mean the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association — just do it. You know, just do it without consultation. And, Mr. Speaker, this government 
doesn’t act that way. This government, as I had committed the other day . . . I’m going to be meeting 
with them to discuss many aspects of bus transportation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Oh, I hear the member opposite, you know, is saying ‘Sell more liquor.’ Mr. Speaker, 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2710 

this government isn’t going to force anyone in the province of Saskatchewan, as the previous socialist 
administration have done. They wanted to control everything; they wanted to own everything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank goodness for the government — the steps this government has taken to bring free 
enterprise back into this province. Free enterprise isn’t just a slogan with this government; it’s a 
commitment. 
 
But anyways, Mr. Speaker, pertaining to The Vehicles Act, I would like to just talk on one more thing 
on the school bus thing, as it affects The Vehicles Act, Mr. Speaker. Total number of buses that we have 
in the province of Saskatchewan, approximately 3,362. Total number of passengers every day, we have 
about a little over 61,000 students ride those buses every day in the province of Saskatchewan. Total 
number of miles that are travelled in one year, a little over 75 million kilometres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is also very concerned about school bus safety, whether it’s the travelling, 
the loading on — we’re taking steps in the new Vehicles Act to make it safer for children getting on and 
off the buses by allowing the lights to be flashing any time, anywhere they’re parked, but still providing 
that urban municipalities do have the opportunity to become exempt from it. And once again it’s step 
forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s many other things that I think we could bring up in third reading, but I think the big 
thing with the new Vehicles Act is the consultation that we’ve had with people. I’m just going to share 
with you and some of the members opposite the results of the survey of the thousands of people that 
responded and had input into their new Vehicles Act. This isn’t a Vehicles Act that was drawn up by the 
bureaucrats or by the politicians; this was an act drawn up by the people for the people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On the first one — alcohol and drugs to be checked by mandatory body fluid and breath samples — 71 
per cent, Mr. Speaker, of the people replying said, yes, they wanted to do it. All the members opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, say take it as read, you know. I mean, they don’t care. They don’t really care. Just take it as 
read. Just do it. But don’t talk to anyone about . . . That’s the way they ran government; that’s why the 
people of Saskatchewan decided they no longer were qualified to run the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school bus flashing lights to be used in both rural and urban areas — once again, 70 per 
cent of the people in favour of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, empty and loaded gasoline tankers and buses to stop at all controlled railway crossings —
54 per cent. It was very close, Mr. Speaker. But once again the majority of people wanted this in there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some sections in here that re controversial — the taking of blood samples, yes it 
is. But, Mr. Speaker, we have a federal government, a federal government in Ottawa that should have 
brought in amendments to the Criminal Code to allow this as the two lawyers, supposed lawyers, Mr. 
Speaker, on the other side should have been aware of this. But, of course, they wouldn’t attack the 
federal government, Mr. Speaker, because they’re their friends. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Bed partners. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2711 

HON. MR. GARNER: — As the Minister of Agriculture has stated they’re very close friends — very 
close friends. Mr. Speaker, I hope that al members in this Assembly will support this new bill because 
from the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, to the new Vehicles Act in the province of Saskatchewan is just 
simply to save lives. All of this work that’s gone into it, if we only save one life, Mr. Speaker, it’s very 
much worth it. So at this time I am very pleased and very proud to give second reading to Bill No. 81. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee 
of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

YEAS — 34 
 
Lane Hodgins Maxwell 
Muirhead Sauder Embury 
Pickering Glauswer Dirks 
Sandberg Meagher Myers 
McLeod Schmidt Zazelenchuk 
Garner Parker Folk 
Klein Smith (Moose Jaw South) Morin 
Katzman Hopfner Blakeney 
Duncan Martens Thompson 
Schoenhals Rybchuk Koskie 
Smith (Swift Current) Domotor Shillington 
Weiman   
 

NAYS — 0 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting Local Government in Northern Saskatchewan 
 
HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, just a very few comments to wrap up on the debate on this bill, 
so to speak. It’s an extremely important piece of legislation, as I said earlier in second reading debate, 
for northern Saskatchewan and for local government in northern Saskatchewan, that northern half of our 
province that has been through an evolutionary stage and is still going through that stage in terms of 
autonomy for locally elected people in the various communities of northern Saskatchewan. I would say 
that this bill — and it’s been received very, very well by local people in northern Saskatchewan — is a 
major step forward, and I’m pleased to be a part of a government that would bring in such a piece of 
legislation in about one year, progressive legislation one year after our taking office. It was a long 
consulting process and admittedly that process started when the former government was there; that 
process was completed and to the point where we finally listened to what the people were actually 
saying. As has been said I the couple of bills that are immediately preceding, and I know, Mr. Speaker, it 
must sound like a bit of repetitious thing, but it’s something that we’ve found — so many of the bills 
that were present and the progressive legislation we’re presenting is legislation that has been asked for 
by the people most affected out there, 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2712 

and this is another example of that. So I would say . . . And I understand that the member from 
Athabasca, who represents an area that’s very much affected by this, has some comments to make and I 
would welcome those and close debate later and respond to a couple of his comments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move third reading of Bill No. 58, An Act respecting Local Government and ask 
that it be passed under its title. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a few comments to make. I agree that this is a 
very important piece of legislation for the citizens of northern Saskatchewan. When this bill was tabled, 
Bill No. 58, the other day, I decided that I would take the bill and go into northern Saskatchewan and 
talk to some of the LCAs and some of the LACs just to get their opinions because of some of the new 
amendments that you have added into the act. It is an act and a bill that was proposed and presented to 
northern Saskatchewan by the former NDP government. We’ve seen that northern Saskatchewan should 
have been brought back into the South, and I have always said and indicated that I wasn’t happy with the 
structure of local government in northern Saskatchewan and I welcome this act. 
 
There are a few concerns that I have found, but I first want to say that I’m pleased to see that we no 
longer will have LCAs, local community authorities, and the head of the local community authorities 
has been called an overseer and I’ve always been opposed to that. And then we have the smaller 
communities which are called LACs, local advisory councils, and the head of that local government is 
called a chairman. I’ve always stated that they should be called mayors of the communities — they’re 
large communities — and I’ve always been opposed to the LAC, chairmen and overseers. And I’m 
pleased to see that we will now have in northern Saskatchewan, a local government board where we will 
have mayors in or communities and we can refer to them as such, and I sincerely hope that that is what 
will take place. 
 
You have indicated all along that you wanted to bring northern Saskatchewan into line wit southern 
Saskatchewan, and one of my concerns, and it was brought to my attention wile I was up in the northern 
Saskatchewan last week, is that you still refer to them as northern municipalities. I suppose in your 
wrap-up, Mr. Minister, you could indicate the reason for still referring to them as northern 
municipalities. 
 
Some of the concerns that they do have right now is the funding, the capital funding. I know that you 
have indicated in your trips into northern Saskatchewan that once this bill was passed, northern 
governments would have more money to work with than they have ever had in their history, and I 
sincerely hope that you will comment on that and reaffirm that commitment that you made in northern 
Saskatchewan, I believe, last October, stated in the Meadow Lake Sun — that northern communities 
would now have more funds to work with than they ever, ever had. 
 
Another thing that I would like to have you comment on — and it was brought to my attention — is that 
once the new act is given Royal Assent in this legislature, when will the first elections take place? Will 
you call elections as soon as it is given Royal Assent, or will it revert to the October elections the same 
as it is in southern Saskatchewan, and will all council members be up for election on the first election? 
 
You have indicated that this new act will make local governments more responsible — they will have to 
be more responsible — and as I spoke to the local governments in the North, they indicated that they 
were prepared to take on that task as long as they were 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2713 

given the tools to work with as they had before. And I think that you will agree that it costs a lot of 
money to run them communities in the North, and with no tax base, they most certainly have to have 
extra revenues in the revenue sharing that you have proposed. I suppose maybe you could just explain 
that a bit. 
 
And the last one that I have is, when this bill is given Royal Assent, is it my understanding that there 
will no longer be a county in Uranium City. Will the county system that we have in uranium City no 
longer be, and will you be appointing an administrator to operate that town? That, Mr. Speaker, is all I 
have to say on Bill No. 58, and I’ll take my seat. 
 
HON. MR. MCLEOD: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a very few comments to clarify a couple of the 
points made by the member who represents about two-thirds of the population of what we call northern 
Saskatchewan, so I’ll given him an opportunity to pick this up. 
 
First of all, his point about this act having been presented first to northern people by the former 
administration — a draft northern municipalities act, yes, was presented to them in the form of what was 
called Options ’80 at that time. 
 
This particular act and the provisions of this act certainly were never presented by the former 
government — never. And there are provisions in this act that would not have been presented either by 
them, and I refer here to the concept of regional government and some of those things that the hon. 
member knows well about. They are not here. They’re very conspicuous by their absence to a lot of 
people in northern Saskatchewan who ask that that kind of a concept be deleted. And it is deleted 
because the people and elected people in northern Saskatchewan were asking for that. 
 
The question that the hon. member raises regarding the reason that they’re called northern hamlets, 
northern villages, and the term ‘northern’: part of that . . . It’s because this is a different act than the 
urban act, and they have to be called that because they come under a different act of the legislature and a 
different framework. And the reason of course for the different act, again, is as you mention in terms of 
the revenue-sharing pool, and various other things that take into consideration the very unique nature of 
communities in the North. So they must be under a different act, and if they are, the communities that 
we refer to have to be. One of my concerns was as yours is, that if we can call them villages, towns and 
hamlets, that would be the best thing. But we couldn’t because of the act and the legality of it. So that’s 
the reason. 
 
The revenue-sharing pool: as I said in second reading debate, there will be a total of over 4.9 million in 
operating grants in this year; 1.5 million in conditional capital grants. Certainly that is a great deal of 
money for when you consider, you know, the size of the communities we’re talking about. And the 
reason that that money is allocated in a richer pool than what we know in southern Saskatchewan, just to 
reiterate, Mr. Speaker, is because we have taken into very careful consideration the fact that there is a 
very limited tax base in northern Saskatchewan. We understand that; we’ve recognized it; and the 
revenue-sharing pool will reflect that. 
 
As far as the elections are concerned, Mr. Speaker, the act provides for the way in which elections will 
be conducted as The Urban Municipality Act provides for that in southern Saskatchewan. The 
communities that are now LCAs will become northern villages when this act is proclaimed, and the 
present councils will remain until such a time as 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2714 

new elections are called for in the act. So it’s not a matter of before this act can take place that there 
must be specific elections in each community. That’s my understanding of it. So there will be elections 
provided for by the act as elections for other urban and rural municipalities are provided by the other 
acts that deal with those forms of local government. 
 
As far as the comments about Uranium City, the hon. member will know very well the Uranium City 
situation is very unique. It certainly will come . . . Under whatever form, it certainly will come under 
this particular northern municipalities act. The county system which is the only one in the province now 
where hospitals, schools and urban local government are under one board or one council, that’s the case 
now. The very marked diminishing size of Uranium City has caused some . . . certainly some problems. 
There is a request to me from the council of Uranium City in the form of a resolution that as of June 30, 
they would like to have an administrator for a period of time. And that’s what your question was. They 
would like to have an administrator appointed for a period of time because they’re having some 
difficulty with maintaining a council until the size of the town stabilizes. And we’re predicting 
something in the order of 250 people after June 30. But that’s a number that’s diminishing. 
 
So what we would see in Uranium City is probably not the county system and it would go to an 
administrator at this early stage, and as soon as it’s at all possible and feasible, it would go to a council, 
as we would in other northern villages or northern towns, depending on the size that Uranium City 
stabilizes to. 
 
So with those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, and to once again just point out very, very clearly how 
important that we in government feel that this legislation is for northern communities, northern people, 
and indeed for all of Saskatchewan in terms of the way in which local government is carried on in our 
portion of northern Canada. We think it’s extremely progressive and extremely forward-looking 
legislation and I’ll wrap up debate on the bill with that. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of An Act to amend The Queen’s 
Bench Act, 1983. There are a number of deficiencies in our court system which led and lead to the 
substantial delays and wasted time and money, both by litigants and by the government in running the 
court system. 
 
Since becoming Attorney-General, I have had the opportunity to discuss some of these matters with 
members of the bar in the province, with the judges of the Court of Queen’s Bench and to review some 
of the complaints about the court system which were communicated to me by members of the public. 
The result of these consultations and discussions are partly dealt with in this bill. Other initiatives, which 
are being considered for the court system to facilitate court proceedings and to shorten unnecessary and 
wasteful delays and the wasting of court time, are contained in The Small Claims Enforcement 
Amendment Act, which has been referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills and in 
legislation which is being considered for an introduction at a later date. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2715 

As many members will be aware, many of the procedures and rules that are applicable in court 
proceedings are set by the judges of the court, pursuant to their power to make Rules of Court under The 
Queen’s Bench Act. Over the past few years, the judges of the court have been reviewing thoroughly, 
and as a consequence simplifying the Rules of Court to expedite proceedings in the courts. A number of 
amendments to The Queen’s Bench Act have been made in the past to facilitate the changes proposed by 
the judges of the court, after the judges’ proposals for reform have been presented to the Department of 
the Attorney-General. Over the past year, the judges of the Court of Queen’s Bench have proposed other 
similar improvements that could be made in The Queen’s Bench Act, and in the rules, to improve the 
function of the court system. Some of these proposals are reflected in this bill. 
 
I would, Mr. Speaker, like to thank and give credit to Mr. Justice Kenneth MacLeod, of the Court of 
Queen’s Bench, for his significant work in modernizing the Rules of Court in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I’ve had the opportunity of spending some time with Mr. Justice MacLeod on these 
changes and the rules, and Mr. Justice MacLeod’s efforts at improving and modernizing the Rules of 
Court, improving the court system, deserve to be acknowledged with thanks. 
 
For example, section 15 of the bill adds two new rule-making powers. The first permits the judges to 
establish life expectancy in joint life expectancy tables, which may be used in combination with a 
prescribed rate of interest to determine the value of an award for future damages. In most cases, as 
members are aware, the person who’s successful in an action for damages — perhaps a motor vehicle 
accident — they may have to prove, in a very complicated way, with very costly expert evidence, life 
expectancy, interest projections, etc. We propose to allow tables to be established, and a successful party 
may simply rely on those tables without having to call expert witnesses. The evidence is based on a 
standard formula, and it will allow for standard tables. It should save litigants a significant amount of 
court costs and expert witness fees. 
 
The second rule-making power gives authority to the judges to make rules respecting commencement 
for continuation of actions against or by the estate of deceased persons where there has not been a grant 
of probate or administration. This latter amendment will remove the necessity for representatives of the 
deceased to obtain probate or administration would not be necessary for any other reason — also a 
potential significant cost saving to some people. 
 
The amendment contained in section 11 of the bill permits reports of qualified appraisers to be put into 
evidence to remove the necessity for these appraisers to attend in court to give what is often very 
detailed and repetitive evidence on how they reach their determination of the value of the property. This 
section is very similar to an existing section which allows medical reports to be put into evidence 
without the necessity of calling the doctor in each and every case. The section still permits the opposing 
party to call the appraiser as a witness if it is considered necessary, but the ability to produce a written 
report which is not subject to objection from either party will save considerable court time in proving the 
value of property in such cases as matrimonial property disputes — again saving money for the people 
who appear before the courts. 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2716 

The amendment proposed in section 6 of the bill will eliminate the necessity for a person who has 
suffered injury in an automobile accident from filing a statement of claim in the Court of Queen’s Bench 
prior to the expiration of the one-year limitation. As hon. members know, if a person wishes to 
commence an action resulting from a motor vehicle accident, they must commence their court action 
within one year of the date of the accident. We propose to file a notice within the one year which would 
have the effect of extending the limitation period for one further year. I many cases the injured party is 
engaged in what appears to be very fruitful negotiations with the defendant’s insurers for a settlement of 
the action. However, once the one-year limitation period is approaching, in order to protect his interests 
it is necessary for the plaintiff to file a statement of claim and thereby commence the action within the 
year. 
 
Under the proposed paragraph 1.1 of section 45, it will be possible to merely file a notice in the court 
that the plaintiff has a claim against the defendant. This notice will then extend the limitation period for 
one more year, which will give plenty of opportunity for continued negotiations. If negotiations break 
down, the plaintiff must merely notify the defendant or his insurers that they intend to proceed wit their 
action, and then the defendant may demand particulars or details of the plaintiff’s claim. This will prove 
to be a considerable cost saving to both defendants and their insurers, such as SGI, and considerably 
simplify procedures. A similar amendment is contained in The Small Claims Enforcement Act which, as 
I have indicated, has been referred to the non-controversial bills committee. 
 
Under the present law, court documents in civil cases cannot be served on Sunday. Many individuals are 
only to be served on Sundays because, for example, they work in a remote area of the province during 
the week, and only return to their homes on week-ends. In many cases people use this as an effort to 
avoid service of court documents. A person who is trying to enforce an action against them is put to 
considerable trouble and expense in serving them at a distant location or considerable expense in 
attempting to track down people who know full well that the Sunday service is not possible, and the 
amendment proposed in section 10 of this bill will permit service of documents in civil proceedings on a 
Sunday. 
 
Section 12 of the bill proposes amendments to section 77 of The Queen’s Bench Act. Under this section 
a defendant is given a maximum 35 days to apply to a judge for an order permitting him to pay off the 
debt in some manner other than by seizure and sale of his property. Unfortunately, by the time most 
debtors hear that a judgement has been entered against them and the plaintiff is seizing their property, 
the 35-day period has expired. Therefore, the amendment proposed in section 12 removes the 35-day 
limitation and permits a judge to make such an order at any time. The section continues to allow the 
creditor to proceed with seizure of the debtor’s property to satisfy his claim, but gives the debtor an 
opportunity to try and make other arrangements, if they are feasible, through the court. 
 
Another amendment proposed in subsection 12(4) of this bill removes the necessity for the local 
registrar of the court to notify a debtor that a judgement has been entered against him where the 
defendant has made no appearance. The proposed repeal of section 77, subsection 6, will mean that this 
will no longer be required to be done. In practice the debtor quite often receives his notice only after, or 
at best, the same time as he receives notification from the sheriff that a writ of execution has been taken 
out against him. In fairness to the creditor, the defendant has already received a copy of the statement of 
claim against him and he has been notified that if he does not answer it, a judgement will be entered 
against him in default. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2717 

The amendment in section 77(1) which I referred to will now give the defendant an opportunity to come 
back to court to make other arrangements for payment once the sheriff notifies him that he intends to 
seize some of his property. The requirement of a further notice is therefore superfluous. That gives an 
extensive protection to the debtor and also expedites court proceedings. 
 
The amendment contained in section 13 is consequential on the changes being made to section 77. As is 
often the case, judicial interpretation of existing provisions of the act has led to interpretations that are 
not on all fours with that intended by the section or which point out deficiencies in the law. The 
amendments contained in sections 4 or 5 are of this type and are necessary to clarify or improve the laws 
interpreted by the courts. 
 
Section 4 of the bill enacts a new section 39.1 providing that a spouse who refuses to comply with a 
maintenance order in favour of his or her spouse or children may be held in contempt of court for failing 
to do so without any other action being taken in the proceedings. This is necessity because of a recent 
ruling by a judge of the court of Queen’s Bench that the power of the court to cite in these situations was 
taken away by the repeal of an English statute, the Imperial Debtors Act, which had provided for the 
imprisonment of debtors who failed to pay their civil debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that the re-institution of the contempt power should assist the courts in making 
sure that those who are obligated to pay maintenance — make maintenance payments for a spouse or 
children will, in fact, do so. The new paragraph 11 of section 44 proposed by subsection 5(1) of the bill 
permits the court to amend pleadings even if the limitation period has expired, to prevent injustices, 
where an obvious error has been made. An example of this was illustrated in a recent judgement where, 
but for the interpretation of the judge on a strict reading of the statute, the plaintiff would have been 
denied any damages because he had sued by mistake the wrong party and had only discovered his error 
after the time — the limitation period for commencement of the action had expired. 
 
The new paragraph 12 and 13 of section 44 proposed in subsection 5(2) of the bill prevents two things. 
If a person brings an action in small claims court for a minor amount, such as a property damage, he will 
not be barred from bringing an action in the Court of Queen’s Bench; for example, personal injuries of a 
greater amount. This happened in a fairly recent case and the plaintiff was denied compensation for his 
personal injuries because he had sued for his vehicle’s deductible in the small claims court. In other 
words, Mr. Speaker, individuals, particularly in the case of an automobile accident, may be able to use 
the small claims court at a reduced cost for the deductible. If it became necessary to subsequently sue for 
personal injuries resulting from the same action, they would not be barred from doing so. 
 
The second purpose of these amendments is to prevent someone from being denied compensation for 
damages which arise after he has made one claim arising out of one incident but then discovers other 
damages later on. These two new proposals will not have the effect of extending litigation, but will 
provide justice in appropriate cases. 
 
Section 59 of The Queen’s Bench Act provides for appointment of process issuers in the province. The 
original purpose for these officials was to permit lawyers in outlying communities to issue court 
documents from their home community without the necessity of travelling to the nearest judicial centre. 
Changes to the Rules of Court in 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2718 

the past few years permitting issuance of court documents by telephone by a solicitor not located neat to 
a judicial centre have eliminated the need for process issuers. In fact, there are not now, nor have there 
been for a number of years, any process issuers appointed. Section 9 of this bill therefore proposes the 
repeal of section 59. 
 
Two amendments in this bill were requested by the chief justice in Queen’s Bench. The first is contained 
in clause 15(a). This proposed amendment will remove the requirement that all the judges of the court be 
present at a meeting to approve the rules of the court. This is a practical impossibility given 28 judges 
and a very busy court schedule. The second of these amendments in section 16 requires that there be two 
meetings a year of the judges of the court. This section will permit the judges to claim the expenses for 
travel and meetings from the federal government. 
 
Section 95 or The Surrogate Court Act presently authorizes an annual payment of $2,000 to each judge 
of the surrogate court for performing surrogate functions. This results in a payment of $2,000 to each 
judge of the court of Queen’s Bench. It does not include judges of the court of appeal. In fact, judges of 
both courts are often called upon the perform duties for the province which fall outside those that they 
are required to perform pursuant to the federal Judges Act. Examples are: sitting on the provincial 
government, a recent example being the, I believe cancer strike of last autumn, last summer, where a 
judge of the Court of Queen’s Bench was asked to arbitrate on behalf of the government. 
 
The amendment proposed in section 3 of this bill will authorize a payment of $3,000 to each judge of the 
Court of Queen’s Bench and the court of appeal. Section 95 of The Surrogate Court Act will be repealed 
as a consequence of this amendment in a separate bill. The payment is made retroactive to April 1, 1982, 
in accordance with an undertaking made by my predecessor, the previous attorney-general. 
 
Housekeeping amendments are proposed by sections 7, 8 and 14. Sections 7 and 8 clarify that judges 
and registrars of the unified family court have the same jurisdiction as judges and registrars of the Court 
of Queen’s Bench in respect of certificates of lis pendens, notices of an action against land, in 
matrimonial matters. 
 
Section 88 of the act now requires that a local registrar telegraph to Regina when no business has been 
entered for a chambers day, so that the judge who is scheduled to attend need not do so. This is archaic 
and therefore the amendment in section 14 will substitute ‘notify’ for ‘telegraph.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 1983. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, Hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I want, first of all, to indicate that there’s certainly general agreements 
in the direction that the Minister of Justice is taking in respect to the facilitating of the procedures in the 
Court of Queen’s Bench. I want to just draw his attention to the provision in respect to motor vehicle 
accidents, where the Minister of Justice indicates if you file a notice that you in effect extend the year 
one year in the limitation period. For motor vehicle accidents, there’s a one-year limitation. It just seems 
to me that this is a whole area, Mr. Minister, in respect to very much confusion to the public beyond 
motor vehicles. What I am saying is that if you deal with the city, or 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2719 

the town, or village, or legislation, or deal with the municipality, each individual act prescribes a 
particular limitation for giving notice. 
 
I welcome the particular amendment that you have introduced in respect to the motor vehicle accidents 
by giving the notice and extending it, and I think I concur with you there because often you’d have to 
file a statement of claim prior to really knowing the full determination of the medical evidence in many 
instances, and the degree of it, and so it would have to sort of generalize in respect to the claim. But I 
just raise for your attention that it might be worth looking at it in the future in helping to streamline the 
procedure, not only for the courts but for the public, to take a look at the whole variation of time limits. 
We have the one year in The Vehicles Act in the SGI, and as I’ve said in the various other acts, there’s 
such deviations. 
 
Generally speaking, I want to say that we are in agreement with the proposals that you have outlined 
here, and the method and the way in which they help to facilitate the procedures in the courts. And I 
think that insofar as the assessment of damages, certainly that was a very complicated method of calling 
in an expert accountant and trying to establish the life expectancy, and as a consequence, the amount of 
the damages that should be awarded, and I think this makes eminent sense what the procedure that is 
being followed here. With those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that we will be 
supporting the amendments. We may have some particular questions in committee of the whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 92 — An Act to amend The Liquor Act 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of Bill 92, An Act to amend 
The Liquor Act. This act may be cited as The Liquor Amendment Act, 1983. I’ll undertake to describe 
briefly some changes, and their purpose. 
 
To begin with, one administrative amendment deals with board member duties: as the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council may direct, members shall devote a portion of their time to the 
performance of their duties under this act similar to changes proposed in The Liquor Licensing Act. 
 
Another amendment moves the ceiling on the number of special liquor vendors from 135 to 160. I 
should point out that since the 135 limit was filled some time ago, 214 communities in this province 
have made representation to the liquor board in seeking a special liquor vendor licence. 
 
Over two years ago, the Saskatchewan Liquor Board and the Saskatchewan Brewers Association jointly 
agreed to develop a new computerized beer-ordering system. This ordering system provides for toll-free 
telephone ordering by licensees, special liquor vendors and board stores. Orders are keyed directly onto 
the computer by the order clerk, and pricing and order confirmation done immediately over the phone. 
There is also after-hours order-taking by a recording device. The system can automatically calculate 
freight payment, which means the truckers receive their moneys accurately and timely without them 
having to prepare an invoice. The system also allows for packaged differential pricing as well as open or 
competitive beer pricing. 
 
It was also agreed by the liquor board and the previous government that the SBA should 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2720 

operate the new ordering system. This made sense because the SBA warehouses, it assembles and ships 
the beer to licensees, to special vendors, and board stores, therefore, they are in a better position than the 
liquor board to know about product availability and to deal with ordering and shipping problems. This 
government also agrees that the SBA should operate the ordering system. However, it is questionable 
whether the current Liquor Act will allow it. The enactment tabled will regulate the Saskatchewan 
Brewers Association to the extent that the association will sell or deliver beer and malt liquor only in 
accordance with The Liquor Act and the standards prescribed by the liquor board. 
 
There is also, Mr. Speaker, an amendment dealing with the serving of liquor to minors in a dwelling 
house. Saskatchewan is the only English-speaking province where a person other than a parent, a 
guardian or a spouse, can serve liquor to a minor in a dwelling house. Public and police complaints have 
prompted us to amend this, therefore, to permit only the parent, guardian, or a spouse, to serve alcohol 
beverages to a person under 19 years in the stated circumstance. 
 
And there is an amendment to permit the establishment of duty-free shops in Saskatchewan. This action 
will be a service to the people of Saskatchewan who are travelling beyond our borders. It will also be an 
attractive feature to tourists who have enjoyed a visit to our province. The three other western Canadian 
provinces are offering this service. For example, Coutts in Alberta has a border duty-free store; Emerson 
in Manitoba has a duty-free store; and Blaine in British Columbia has had one for quite some time. If 
and when one of our major cities gains an airport with international status, no further amendments will 
be required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the so described amendments, I submit that we are demonstrating this government’s 
commitment to responsible and responsive government. I commend this bill to the Assembly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There are some things, Mr. Minister, about this bill 
we applaud. One is your acceptance of a suggestion from the opposition that the number of increased 
outlets be limited. There are some things, however, Mr. Minister, about this bill that concern us. You 
heard some of them in question period this morning. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What? 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — This afternoon, Mr. Minister. Suffice to say, Mr. Minister, the bill is not 
what we expected it would be, having heard your comments on it. Your comments were not quite . . . 
The facts to which you have quoted by the press did not quite describe the bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, and I say to the Assembly as well, Mr. Speaker, our position . . . We want an opportunity 
to review this legislation in detail and we therefore beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 93 — An Act to amend The Liquor Licensing Act 

 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of Bill 93, An Act 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2721 

to amend The Liquor Licensing Act. This act may be cited as The Liquor Licensing Amendment Act, 
1983. These are basically housekeeping amendments, Mr. Speaker, to reflect the amalgamation and 
some other licensing issues that have risen. I will describe briefly some of the changes, with reasons for 
making them. 
 
First of all, we’re expecting from seven to nine the number of licensing commission members. The 
purpose is to ensure an adequate number of commission members because commissioners of this office 
will no longer meet exclusively in the city of Regina. I have instituted through the licensing commission 
chairman a policy whereby the commission will hold public meetings in a variety of centres in the 
province in order to provide more convenience to the public. By the same token, the addiction of more 
part-time commissioners will facilitate a more decentralized approach without increasing costs. 
 
Another amendment to the licensing act relates to the positions of commissions chairman and 
vice-chairman. The liquor board chairman shall be chairman of the commission and the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council shall designate one of the commissioners to act as vice-chairman of the 
commission. 
 
It is interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, there will no longer be the need by the legislation for three 
full-salaried licensing commission positions — the chairman, the vice-chairman, and the secretary. 
There is also an administrative amendment to facilitate the chairman’s performance of his duties as 
directed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council in accordance with the act. All of the other western 
provinces — Alberta, British Columbia and Manitoba, have operated under liquor legislation similar to 
this being formed by our amendments. In these other jurisdictions, the chairman presides over both the 
liquor board and its licensing branch. Many reports in years past recommend the action this government 
is now legislating. 
 
Another amendment within the bill will enable all municipally owned golf courses to licence their 
premises. I accordance with regulations they will now be granted the same privileges enjoyed by city 
owned golf courses. This ends the discriminator practice of denying rural communities the same services 
as urban communities. 
 
And one further amendment deals with the city of Regina’s decision to ask for the sale of low alcohol 
beer at Taylor Field. We are amending the licensing act to enable the city of Regina to license the 
premises adjoining Taylor Field during Canadian Football League games. Granting of a licence will be 
subject to the passing of an approving by-law by the council of the city of Regina submitted to a vote of 
the electors in accordance with part V of The Local Government Election Act. 
 
I wish to conclude by stating, by this legislation we are continuing to demonstrate a commitment of this 
government to responsive government in tune wit other levels of government and the wishes of the 
people of Saskatchewan. We have stopped a discriminating practice against rural municipalities, plus we 
have given citizens of Regina their right to express choice. 
 
I recommend this bill to the Assembly. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. Similarly, Mr. Speaker, for a 
variety of reasons, including an opportunity to review not only legislation but review what people have 
to say about it, we beg leave to adjourn the debate. 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2722 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this evening to move second reading of Bill No. 67, An 
Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act. The Corporation Capital Tax Act was implemented in 
1980 by the previous administration, and it is essentially a tax on the paid-up capital or net worth of 
corporations. The amendments contained in this bill, Mr. Speaker, are primarily of a housekeeping 
nature, designed to clarify certain aspects of the act. The bill will also exempt insurance companies for 
capital tax. You will recall that last November, my colleague, the Hon. Minister of Finance, announced 
this change in his budget. It is designed to correct an anomaly under the present act whereby only 
co-operative insurance companies are exempt for the tax. This amendment, Mr. Speaker, will ensure that 
all insurance companies treated equally. 
 
The housekeeping amendments that I alluded to earlier are designed to align ourselves with other 
jurisdictions, and to facilitate the calculation of interest on instalment payments. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, 
I move second reading of Bill No. 67. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to the bill to amend The Corporation Capital 
Tax Act. With respect to the technical and housekeeping changes of the act, I express no view except to 
say that some comments may be made in committee. 
 
With respect to the point of principle in the bill, that provision which exempts insurance companies from 
the act, I must express some reservations. It seems to me that if other financial agencies are being asked 
to pay taxes, a good case can be made for insurance companies paying a corporation capital tax as well. 
I do not object to the effort of the bill to bring about equity and parity between co-operative insurance 
companies and non-co-operative insurance companies, and accordingly, that issue would have to be 
addressed. It has been addressed by exempting all insurance companies, rather then by including al 
insurance companies. I question this. I understand that the rationale is that, with respect to at least some 
insurance companies, the insurance . . . (inaudible) . . . tax has been raised to gain some compensating 
revenue. I will be enquiring into this in committee, and I advise the House that I will be supporting this 
on second reading, and asking questions in committee, and reserving the right to oppose it on third 
reading. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act 

 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the Hon. Bob Andrew, announced in his budget 
address of March 29 of this year that there would only be minor tax increases for the fiscal year ‘83-84. 
Bill No. 78, An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act, provides for one of these tax changes. This bill also 
authorizes increases announced by the former NDP government in their March 1982 budget statement 
and in our mini-budget of November 24, 1982. 
 
These tax changes, Mr. Speaker, are consistent with the approach taken by many of our sister provinces. 
The province of Ontario, for example, recently increased the tax rate 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2723 

on cigarettes for a package of 25, compared to or 52 cents, and they also imposed an additional tax of 7 
per cent at the retail level. Manitoba increased their rate to 52.5 per cent, and Alberta increased theirs by 
363 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the variation in tax rates has created an incentive for certain individuals to smuggle 
cigarettes from low tax jurisdictions to a higher one. To deter tobacco smuggling and to assist 
investigations, several provinces including Ontario and Manitoba have in recent years strengthened the 
enforcement divisions in their tax legislation. To protect our revenue base, Mr. Speaker, similar 
amendments are being proposed in our act. We feel that we probably lose about approximately $4 
million a year because of tobacco smuggling. The proposed amendments will permit police officers and 
officers appointed by the minister to stop and search vehicles that are suspected of illegally transporting 
tobacco products. If smuggling has in fact occurred, the legislation permits the seizure of tobacco and in 
some cases the impoundment of vehicles until the tax penalties and related storage costs have been paid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is essential that this legislation be implemented as a means of deterring organized crime 
from getting a foothold in Saskatchewan, which appears to have happened elsewhere. Furthermore, the 
RCM Police have indicated to us that they are not prepared to allocate the necessary manpower to 
investigate tobacco smuggling unless the enforcement provisions are strengthened similar to the 
legislation in Ontario and Manitoba. The intent of the proposed legislation, Mr. Speaker, is not to harass 
the individual who imports minor quantities of tobacco products, such as 20 cigarettes, 50 cigars, or 900 
grams of cut tobacco for his own personal use. Rather, Mr. Speaker, it is the intent of this legislation to 
provide a mechanism for prosecuting smugglers who import large quantities of tobacco products for 
resale. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, there is a provision in this bill for reciprocal agreements with other jurisdictions to 
assist us in or own common enforcement problems. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
Bill No. 78. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve just had an opportunity to look at this bill briefly, and 
clearly I do not oppose the increase in the taxes. Tobacco taxes are probably as fair and appropriate a tax 
as there is. Nobody likes to pay any taxes by particularly those of use who are non-smokers generally 
applaud increases in tobacco taxes. 
 
There are however a number of other provisions which seem to me to be vigorous, to say the least, with 
respect to enforcement — providing for arrest without warrant, as I recall them — and some other 
provisions, including one which provides for an offence for breach of regulations, and provides for a 
minimum fine. I have long objected to minimum fines for the most trivial offence that might be created 
by any regulation that none of us here sees. I wish therefore to look at the provisions of the bill with a 
little more thoroughness, and I beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 79 — An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act 

 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to introduce amendments to The 
Education and Health Tax Act, Bill No. 79. This bill sanctions exemptions for children’s clothing and 
electricity use for farm irrigation systems, which 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2724 

was previously announced by my colleague, the Minister of Finance. The members on this side of the 
House recommended for many years, Mr. Speaker, that the former administration should provide for an 
exemption of children’s clothing, and probably for an many years, they chose to ignore out 
recommendation until in desperation, they included such an exemption in tier pre-election budget. I am 
now extremely pleased that our government is able to enact such legislation to provide tax savings to the 
families of Saskatchewan with children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, this bill also provides an exemption for electricity used by farmers 
for the operation of irrigation equipment. This ensures that farmers will be treated in the same fashion as 
those who operate their irrigation equipment with tax-free diesel fuel. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this bill has two housekeeping amendments concerning fuel petroleum products 
and promotional distribution materials. The fuel petroleum products amendment is a result of our 
government’s removal of the gasoline tax and it ensures that fuel petroleum currently exempted from 
sales tax will remain exempt and those currently taxable will remain taxable. 
 
The amendment for promotional distribution materials is necessary due to a January 1982 Supreme 
Court of Canada decision concerning these items. It provides for the continued taxing of promotional 
distribution materials and it also aligns our legislation with that of most other provinces. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move second reading of Bill No. 79 at this time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a few brief comments and then I will ask leave to adjourn 
debate. With respect to the bill and its effect on taxation of promotional material distributed, we have no 
quarrel. With respect to the provisions dealing with children’s clothing and footwear, we welcome the 
legislation which gives legal substance of the policy decisions made by our government. And members 
opposite will know that no tax on children’s clothing footwear and clothing has been charged since they 
came to office and prior to that and we welcome this legislation which achieves the policy decision in a 
legal form. 
 
The other aspects with respect to fuel petroleums seem understandable but somewhat strange. It appears 
that if you burn diesel fuel, but if you burn it in a engine which is mobile in anyway, you do not have to 
pay E&H tax. And the same with respect to natural gas or let’s say propane: if you use propane to heat 
your house, then you have to pay E&H tax, but if you use it to fuel your truck, you do not have to pay 
E&H tax. 
 
All of those seem rather strange. The member opposite points out that they’ve been that way for quite a 
while and, of course, that’ so because at one time the motor fuels were subject to another tax and they 
are not now, and we acknowledge that out of hand. The question is whether or not it is logical to charge 
E&H tax on propane which is used to heat a house but not propane which is used to power a power 
vehicle and presumably members opposite will be able to defend that logic. I’m not sure that I fully 
understand all of the provisions of the bill. I want to look at it further and beg leave to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2725 

Bill No. 80 — An Act to amend The Insurance Premiums Tax Act 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, the march 29, 1983 budget speech indicated that there would 
be only minor tax changes in 1983-84. Bill No. 80, An Act to amend The Insurance Premiums Tax Act, 
provides for one of these minor tax increases. 
 
It is normal practice, Mr. Speaker, for insurance companies to establish their insurance rates on a 
national basis. This means that residents of provinces with a low rate of tax pay the same premium as do 
residents of provinces with a higher tax rate. This, in our view, is inequitable because the majority of 
provinces have a higher tax rate than does Saskatchewan. To rectify this inequity, we believe a small 
increase, from 2 per cent to the prevailing rate of 3 per cent in most other provinces, is justified for the 
following reasons. 
 
Firstly, the tax increase will not apply to insurance premiums for life, sickness, personal injuries. 
Secondly, the tax on supposed on insurance companies rather than on a person buying that insurance. An 
thirdly, Mr. Speaker, insurance companies will no longer be required to pay the corporation capital tax. 
 
It’s a fairly straightforward amendment to an existing act, Mr. Speaker, and therefore I would move that 
Bill No. 80 be now read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already alluded to the contents of this bill when 
referring earlier to The Corporation Capital Tax Act amendments. They are related, at least in part. 
There are a number of questions which arise under this bill but I would like to deal with them in 
committee, and I will be supporting the bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Berntson that Bill 
No. 62 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act be now read a second time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to make a brief comment in respect to the 
provisions of this bill. Certainly I share the concern as expressed by the Deputy Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture, in respect to the possibility of the threat of large tracts of land in Saskatchewan being 
owned by out-of-country corporations via way of a limited partnership. 
 
Recently, there has been a report, and this is evident primarily in Manitoba . . . A very significant 
portion of the very best land in Manitoba around the city of Winnipeg, a large portion of it has been 
taken up and owned by outside foreign interests, and steps have been taken there to counteract the same 
problem. In reviewing it, I understand that the foreign ownership of land in Saskatchewan is about 
equivalent with that of Alberta, somewhere in the same neighbourhood. So what I understand here is 
that what it is doing is covering off one potential of setting up a limited partnership as a vehicle to 
bypass the existing legislation, and also the other significant one, as I 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2726 

understand the minister indicated, is extending the period of time from the six months to two years, 
which certainly gives you more opportunity to become aware of it, and not be limited by a failure to 
comply within the summary convictions act. 
 
I want to say that, in this regard, we welcome the provision and direction that is taken under the 
legislation. My colleague from Assiniboia had hoped to be here to speak on the legislation; however, 
we’ve had a chance to review it. Unfortunately, he’s unable to be here, and we’re prepared to let it go to 
the committee of the whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 87 — An Act to amend The Horned Cattle Purchases Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the amendments to The Horned Cattle 
Purchases Act are designed to accomplish several things: first, to add new definitions to clarify 
references in the act to ensure that the definitions correspond with those in other legislation administered 
under the authority of this minister; and two, repeal provisions for paying losses sustained by a cattle 
producer an agricultural society within the meaning of The Agricultural Societies Act, or 4H club, where 
receiving order has been made against the livestock market, or livestock dealer, under the Bankruptcy 
Act of Canada. 
 
Third, amend the structure of The Horned Cattle Purchases Act advisory committee to include an 
additional representative from the Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association and a representative from 
the Western Canada Cow-Calf Association, and to remove the voting privileges of the government 
appointee. It will also clarify the legislation with respect to prescribing the purposes for which money in 
the fund may be used. It will amend the definitions; it will avoid problems by amending the definitions; 
it will avoid problems related to misinterpretations of the definitions in the act. 
 
The Horned Cattle Purchases Act advisory committee and Saskatchewan Agriculture are concerned that 
should claims be filed under those sections of the present act which provide for compensation to vendors 
of livestock when markets or dealers default in payment, that the horned cattle trust fund might not 
contain funds sufficient enough to pay the claim. For example, the committee approved expenditures 
totalling about $205,000 for ’83-84 fiscal year, yet anticipated revenues may fall short of that amount. 
Losses sustained by vendors of livestock from buyers defaulting payment are more appropriately dealt 
with by the bonding requirements prescribed in the livestock dealer regulations made pursuant to The 
Animal Products Act. 
 
The horned cattle purchases advisory committee are also concerned that approval for payments of grants 
to the national beef information centres was denied by the comptroller’s office because the latter ruled 
that the purpose of the payment was not for the improvement of cattle. The amendment is subsection 
6(4) of the proposed amendments to the act sets out specifically the kinds of purposes for which the 
funds may be used. The new proposal should eliminate or greatly reduce the chances for differences in 
interpretation. 
 
The horned cattle purchases advisory committee recommended the addition of representatives to this 
committee from the western cows and calf producers association. And it is also recommended that we 
have an additional member from 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2727 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association, and that the minister’s representative’s status be changed 
from voting to non-voting. There was a desire on this point, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that only those 
representatives from producer organizations make decisions with respect to how the funds are dispersed. 
 
The proposed new subsection 7(4) and (5) are housekeeping items designed to accommodate the 
advisory committee in setting up its operational procedures. 
 
And with those few comments, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 87, The Horned Cattle 
Purchases Act. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I want an opportunity to review in some detail the comments of 
the minister, and in order to properly assess the impact of the amendments, and therefore I beg leave to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 88 — An Act to amend The Animal Products Act 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments to The Animal Products Act are 
designed to accomplish: one, provide authority to make regulations with respect to a livestock payment 
insurance fund; make the manufacture and sale of imitation animal products subject to regulations 
written pursuant to this act; provide authority for animal keepers to create a lien against their animal 
when the owner defaults in payment for care and feeding charges. 
 
The act presently provides for the establishment of a fund known as the animal products fund, offering 
security of payment for vendors of livestock when purchasers default in payment. The animal products 
fund was never established. It is now proposed that the fund be established under the name of livestock 
patrons’ protection fund. This name accurately describes the purpose of the fund. 
 
A livestock patron means a farmer or rancher who maintains or feeds livestock for the production of 
propagation of animal products, and includes a duly constituted 4-H club, agricultural society, or 
licensed livestock dealer. 
 
The establishment of the fund and the appointment of a committee to advise with respect to the 
administration of the fund is being proposed in response to concerns expressed by the marketing sector 
of the livestock industry. Markets and licensed livestock dealers frequently face serious financial losses 
when purchases default in payment of large overdue accounts. 
 
Marketing of livestock is unique in that the system is dealing with a perishable product that must be 
moved out of the sales premises without delay, often before cheques are presented for payment or are 
cleared through the banking system. Once livestock leave the sale premises it is difficult, if not 
impossible, for the market to recover the animals in the event that buyers default in payment. 
 
The livestock dealer regulations written pursuant to The Animal Products Act describe that person or 
businesses operating as livestock dealers shall post a $25,00 bond as security against possible financial 
loss to a livestock vendor should the dealer default in payment for livestock purchases. 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2728 

During 1981 five Saskatchewan livestock markets and licensed livestock dealers suffered losses 
exceeding $340,000 as a result of payments default by livestock buyers. These losses were greatly in 
excess of the protection offered by the $25,000 bond posted by all licensed markets and dealers. 
 
In proposals presented at meetings, and through submissions of formal resolutions, members of the 
Saskatchewan Livestock Markets Association are asking for regulation and legislative amendment to 
provide for increased protection against financial losses for markets and dealers, and to ensure an 
acceptable level of security within the livestock marketing system. I creasing the value of the bond as a 
protective measure would make it difficult for all but the larger livestock businesses and individual 
dealers with large financial resources to obtain a bond. A reduction in the number of dealers operating 
within the marketing system would adversely affect competitive bidding. 
 
Members of the Saskatchewan Livestock Market Association, and livestock dealers, are therefore 
requesting to create a self-financed fund for the purpose of ensuring security of payment for all livestock 
patron, and by an annual assessment levied against livestock markets and dealers in accordance with the 
value of livestock business transacted. The act will provide for the appointment of a committee to advise 
and recommend with respect to the evaluation of claims for compensation provided by the fund. 
 
The livestock patrons’ protection fund will provide markets and dealers with a means to obtain 
compensation for financial loss resulting from default in payment by purchasers. The government will 
not be pressured to provide financial support to save businesses operating within the marketing sector of 
the livestock industry. 
 
The authority to make regulations governing the manufacture, sale, or possession of animal products is 
provided for in The Animal Products Act. From time to time, commercial interests seek to capitalize on 
the popularity of universally recognized nutritional high quality of dairy products by promoting the sale 
of food substances which imitate natural dairy products. In most cases the imitation products are 
nutritionally dairy products. 
 
The department, in attempting to write legislation prohibiting the sale of imitation cheese, etc., ran into 
some difficulties, and so now have come up with the provision to regulate the manufacture, sale, and 
distribution or imitation dairy products where we cover legislative authority for the Lieutenant-Governor 
in Council to make regulations with respect to the manner in which a lien may be placed against an 
animal or animal products. With those few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 88, 
The Animal Products Act. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — We want an opportunity to review the details of the minister’s comments. I never 
quite realized that he cold make such a long speech on the extent of the bill, but we will be reviewing 
those and putting forward our positions, so I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No 89 — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2729 

HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on The Provincial Lands Act, which isn’t a very complex 
piece of legislation either. And like the previous one, if the members opposite are more concerned with 
the length of the bill than they are with what I have to say about it, perhaps what we should do is just 
look at the bill and pass it and get on with the business of the House. But dealing . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . And I was . . . just as an aside, Mr. Speaker, suggest if the bill was so short. I wonder 
what the member opposite was doing this week-end . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Skiing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Department of Agriculture administers approximately nine million acres of land; 
13,000 leases, and those 13,000 leases take up 6.5 million acres of land; 7,500 leases are grazing leases, 
and they take 4.7 million acres of land. There’s a wide range of quality all the way from The Great Sand 
Hills to Class 2 and 3 soil suitable for cereal cropping. In addition, there is land that’s critical to wildlife 
habitat — land that would have significant recreational potential, land that is otherwise environmentally 
sensitive. 
 
And sale policy on leases since the ‘50s have existed, particularly to veterans, and then a couple of years 
ago the previous administration brought in a policy to sell Crown land to existing tenants under similar 
criteria, except they had a one-section ceiling on the amount that could be purchased. Sale of grazing 
land in the ‘60s discontinued in 1971. Grazing land sales being in 1981 and that was by the previous 
administration limiting it to one section. 
 
These amendments, quite simply, remove the one-section limit on selling grazing land to the 
leaseholder. It enables the leaseholder to purchase eligible grazing land providing, and those criteria 
have been set out, the land is not critical to wildlife habitat and it’s not environmentally fragile, and land 
that’s otherwise deemed to be best held in the name of the Crown for the public good. We take the view 
that the tenants would be every bit as good stewards of the land as owners. And philosophically we 
believe that that land falls outside of the criteria that I’ve already set out should in fact be offered to the 
tenants and in fact given them the right of ownership. 
 
In addition, we removed the three-month limit in this legislation to remove improvements if agreement 
on value cannot be reached. Quite often, the three-month limit is not enough to facilitate the orderly 
resolution of disagreements in the event of a dispute over the value of improvements. 
 
Additionally, this legislation will remove the January 31 deadline for rural municipalities to request 
cancellation of a lease because of tax arrears. Tax revenue to the rural municipality, of course, is 
important from all sources, and presently the act provides for cancellation on request of the municipality 
if taxes are in arrears. The acts provide for payment by the department of two years tax arrears, if the 
lease is cancelled. The rural municipality has to be received before January 1 to effect cancellation in 
that year. With the amendment — the removal of the January 31 date — it will allow the rural 
municipality to request termination at any time in the year. It would limit losses to the rural municipality 
from unpaid taxes, and give more flexibility in dealing with tax collection problems. 
 
Fourth, the new section in the act provide authority for establishing an appeal board to hear appeals 
against allocations and terminations. Allocations of all Crown land, in most instances, causes some 
difficulty in the area because everybody feels that they’re 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2730 

qualified to have it, and only one, in fact can get it. The previous land allocations under land bank and 
the lands branch did provide for an appeal board. And it was provided for in regulation. The 
Ombudsman and the McLaughlin report recommended amending The Provincial Lands Act to provide 
specific authority for an appeal board in legislation. So we are accommodating both the Ombudsman 
and the McLaughlin report here. Amendments provide that specific authority for establishing an appeal 
board and basic operating direction. Appeals may be made to the appeal court of Queen’s Bench on a 
point of law. Appeals against allocation and lease terminations, except for non-payment of rental of 
rental and taxes, can be heard by the appeals board. Selection of the appeal board will be members 
nominated b individual farm organizations. 
 
That essentially is what this legislation is all about: primarily, to facilitate our Crown land sales policy, 
number one; and secondly, to deal with the tax collection problem of the rural municipalities; and 
finally, to provide in legislation for an appeal board for those allocations that may be in dispute. And 
with that, I’ll move second reading of Bill No. 89, The Provincial Lands Act. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want again to have the opportunity to take a look at the 
minister’s comment, and my colleague, who is particularly concerned with this, would like to also be 
present tomorrow. Accordingly, I would beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 

 
Bill No. 91 — An Act to establish a Horse Racing Commission for Saskatchewan 

 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, a little background on horse-racing in Saskatchewan. While 
horse-racing has been a feature of recreation for residents of Saskatchewan almost since time began, 
horse-racing in conjunction with pari mutuel betting was a minor industry until 1968. As part of the 
Western Canada Racing Association circuit, which originally encompassed Calgary, Edmonton, 
Saskatoon, and Regina, there were only seven to 10 days per year of thoroughbred racing in Regina and 
Saskatoon and less than one week of standardbred racing in each of these Saskatchewan cities. 
 
The western circuit was supervised by a joint board of representatives from Alberta, Saskatchewan, and 
Manitoba, but when Calgary and Edmonton decided to organize their own circuit in 1968, Saskatchewan 
had to organize its own. The Saskatchewan directors representing the established race-tracks formed the 
Saskatchewan Thoroughbred Society to supervise the conduct of the thoroughbred horse-racing in 
Saskatchewan, and the organization was recognized by the federal government as the governing body 
for the province. 
 
With the start of a program of assistance to the horse-racing industry whereby Saskatchewan Agriculture 
has provided grants to an annual percentage of the pari mutuel tax collected, the total amount of bets 
almost doubled in ’76 over ’75. The significant increase in the number of racing days, coupled with 
higher levels of betting, have resulted in a total amount bet in 1982 of almost $20 million. However, it 
should also be noted that in addition to the dramatic increases in the handle, costs have more than kept 
pact with revenues, and the complexities and demands of operating a governing body have likewise in 
creased. The Saskatchewan thoroughbred Society continued to function, as the governing body setting 
the rules of racing and supervising the conduct of thoroughbred horse meets until 1980, when the 
Canadian Trotting 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2731 

Association withdrew as the governing body for the standard horse meets in Canada, and the STS filled 
the vacuum by necessarily adding that function to their role. 
 
In order to reflect their new role as the governing body for both major forms of horse-racing in 
conjunction with pari mutuel betting, the STS was reorganized as a non-profit corporation in 1981 under 
the name of the Saskatchewan Racing Commission Incorporated. 
 
The Saskatchewan Racing Commission Incorporated is a non-profit corporation funded by way of a 
daily assessment upon each of the two major race-tracks in the province, operated by a small staff based 
in Saskatoon. The organization has been viewed by some horsemen as a management-oriented body 
which, in part, is inevitable since its immediate predecessor, the STS, was created by the major 
race-tracks when no governing body existed in Saskatchewan. While the tracks in the Saskatchewan 
Racing Commission Incorporated do not accept the validity of the allegation, they, in conjunction with 
the rest of the horse-racing industry, agree that a horse-racing commission established by an act of the 
provincial legislature would bolster the integrity, public profile, and the credibility of horse-racing in 
Saskatchewan. Moreover, such legislation will bring Saskatchewan in line with virtually ever other 
province in Canada, and provide a focal point for both the industry and the public to express their 
concerns. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, we are responding to the needs of an indigenous industry in bringing this bill 
before the House, and have a signed petition and other correspondence from the various organizations 
soliciting legislation in this area. 
 
Essentially, the role of the horse-racing commission can be summarized as supervision of all aspects of 
horse-racing, except for those within the jurisdiction of the Government of Canada, pursuant to certain 
provisions of the Criminal Code regarding betting. The federal government, through the race-track 
supervision branch of Agriculture Canada, supervises the operation of pari mutuel betting, including the 
calculation and distribution of the betting pools, drug testing of horses, film patrol in the photo finish, 
operating permits, and equipment specifications for race-tracks. 
 
Generally, all other matters pertaining to the supervision, control and conduct of horse-racing, including 
licensing, the rules of racing, security, disciplinary action, and appeals of decisions, are the 
responsibility of a horse-racing commission. Accordingly, the bill before this House has been modelled 
on legislation setting up horse-racing commissions in all other jurisdictions west of Quebec, and it 
incorporates the basic principles and features common to all such acts. Moreover, we anticipate that the 
federal government will have no problem with either the form or the content of this bill. 
 
Major features of the bill. Subsection 2(f), the definition of race-track, is intentionally broad in order to 
enable the commission to exercise its jurisdiction not only with respect to the race-track, per se, but also 
in related locations where experience in this and other provinces has shown there to be a need. 
 
Section 6 — in selecting a minimum of three commissioners to oversee the performance of the 
commission, impartiality will be the key requirement for selection. Also we will be looking for 
commissioners to be people of integrity who are knowledgeable about all aspects of horse-racing, but 
are not presently active representatives of those organizations comprising the industry. 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2732 

Section 9(1) — with respect to the daily management of the commission, our present intention is that 
this will be handled by an executive director reporting to the commissioners, who will be also be a 
person of integrity with a broad range of knowledge and experience in horse-racing. 
 
Section 12 of the bill may be constructed as the key section of the proposed legislation, since it sets out 
in broad terms the jurisdiction of the commission and the powers which it may exercise. Again these are 
the powers which are either spelled out in similar legislation in other jurisdictions or in fact exercised 
under a general power to do all things related to horse-racing. We believe that insofar as it is possible to 
do so, such powers should be clearly set out in the act and this bill reflects that belief. 
 
Sections 16 and 17 — while the bill clearly establishes the commission as the final decision-making 
authority, under section 16 flexibility is provided by way of an appeal to the Court of Queen’s Bench 
where a person’s livelihood is in jeopardy, should his licence be suspended or revoked for a period 
greater than 12 months. While this may not be a safeguard provided in other jurisdictions, we believe it 
to be a fair and reasonable provision. 
 
Section 19 of the bill provides for the appointment of an advisory board consisting of not less than seven 
members. Such a provision is not generally incorporated into similar legislation in such a form, and will 
provide a forum for the various interest groups involved in horse-racing to express their views. 
 
Section 19 — consistent with our belief that, insofar as possible the betting and not the general taxpayer 
should be bearing the cost associated with horse-racing, members of the advisory board will not receive 
remuneration for costs for attending meetings. We believe this is reasonable and is also in keeping with 
the high level of commitment to the development and enhancement of horse-racing demonstrated by all 
facets of the industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I wish to make two points. Firstly, the various groups comprising the 
Saskatchewan horse-racing industry have been consulted on the needs for, and general provisions of, 
legislation in this area. Not only have they recommended such a bill, but all of those with whom it has 
been discussed have endorsed it highly. Secondly, it is our intention that the costs associated with 
operating the commission and providing grants to the industry should, to reiterate, be met out of 
revenues generated by the pari mutuel tax on betting and not borne by the general or non-betting 
taxpayer. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of a bill to establish the Horse Racing Commission 
Act. 
 
HON. MR. MUIRHEAD: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to rise to speak on the bill before us, because it is of 
prime importance to an industry that has been sadly neglected for many years. Many in this Assembly 
may not be aware of the fact that the province of Saskatchewan has for a number of years lagged behind 
the rest of Canada, and indeed North America, in not providing a legally constituted act for the 
organized control and improvement of the racing industry in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I represent a constituency which I suggest has the largest population of standardbred 
horses of any constituency in Saskatchewan. On one location alone, I 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2733 

would conservatively estimate there are at this time 60 head of horses. The location I refer to is a 
breeding farm known as Sherlock Acres at Davidson, Saskatchewan. Also in my home-town of Craik, 
we have a breeding establishment. And there are many other owners and breeders from which many 
well-known race horses have come. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, where do many of these well-bred, trained, and owned horses race? Mr. Speaker, we 
have exported some of the best horses — and I might add, many former Saskatchewan resident owners 
and trainers — to the provinces of Alberta and British Columbia, where the horse-racing industry has 
been recognized by government in those jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it hadn’t been for many dedicated horsemen, the racehorse industry in Saskatchewan 
would have been one more industry which would have completely left this province. As you are aware, 
Mr. Speaker, there are two main tracks in Saskatchewan: one in Regina, under the control of the Regina 
Exhibition Association; and one in Saskatoon, under the control of the Regina Exhibition Association. 
And in addition, there’s a very good track in the city of Moose Jaw, which has approximately six days of 
horse-racing each year. Moose Jaw’s track, they tell me, is one of the better tracks in Saskatchewan, but 
the accommodation for the public and pari mutuel operation leaves much to be desired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the accommodation for the public in Regina in respect to grandstand is deplorable. But the 
barn accommodation for the horses and horsemen is very acceptable. Mr. Speaker, the accommodation 
for the public in the grandstand in Saskatoon is very good and is being improved at this time, and the 
track is excellent. But, Mr. Speaker, they tell me the barn area and accommodation for the horses and 
horsemen in Saskatoon is deplorable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right at this time, there is harness-racing in Saskatoon four days per week, and in Regina 
there is thoroughbred racing four days per week. The season started on May 6 and runs through till 
October. And I want the members of this legislature to know that this industry employs thousand of 
people, and generates thousands of dollars into the economy of the province. It is an industry that 
deserves more attention and consideration than it has been getting. And I am sincerely hopeful that when 
this racing commission is chosen, there will be new people with a sincere desire to bring all facets of the 
racing industry together to give those people that kept the industry alive with their time, investment, and 
horses a more secure and promising future in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is interesting to note that of the four western provinces, Saskatchewan is the only 
province that does not have racing year-round. I really don’t believe that it is colder in Saskatoon and 
Regina than it is in Winnipeg in winter. Ad I might add that Edmonton, in addition to Calgary, is being 
considered for winter racing of harness horses this coming winter. 
 
I strongly recommend the passage of this bill and an early implementation of some sort so that 
Saskatchewan can and will take its rightful place in horse-racing, one of the oldest agricultural industries 
in the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to congratulate the government, especially the Minister of Agriculture, for bringing 
in this long overdue bill. The past government knew of the problems in the racing industry of 
Saskatchewan but did nothing about it. Mr. Speaker, 



 
May 30, 1983 
 

 
2734 

this is just another example of our government listening to the wishes of the people by implementing 
this bill. I also would like at this time to thank the agriculture committee for meeting with the racehorse 
people and helping solve many of their problems. 
 
It will be a pleasure for me, Mr. Speaker, to support Bill 91, An Act to establish a Horse Racing 
Commission for Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I just want to make a few comments. First I say that I 
would support a horse-racing commission. I won’t support this bill. This bill represents regulation gone 
mad. And I invite all members to look at the bill to see what you’re doing. 
 
You’re setting up a horse-racing commission — fair enough — to deal with, as you say, the problems of 
the standardbred and thoroughbred industry. That’s what you say. But you’re setting up a commission 
which can regulate all forms of horse-racing. If you know where there are any chariot races around the 
province, the commission has power to regulate them. If you know where there are any chuck wagon 
races around the province, the commission has the power to regulate them. I f you know where there’s a 
rodeo around where they may have some barrel-racing, the commission has power to regulate them . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . If the members doubt that, I invite them to look at the provisions of this act 
which make it apply to racing in all of it s forms, horseracing in all of its forms and horse-racing is 
defined as any race involving a horse. So there’s no question about the jurisdiction of the commission 
being far too wide — far wider than it needs to be and far wider than it would be if the government 
opposite were interested in regulating those horse-races which involve betting and pari mutuels and the 
ordinary forms of horse-racing, the thoroughbred and standardbred racing. But this is not what they’ve 
done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know you will be surprised to hear that under this bill the horse-racing commission will 
be entitled to require anyone to get a licence who acts as a groom of the horse . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, members opposite say, ‘Always has been.’ When they say that they mean 
a groom at a particular track where racing is being carried on in the circumstances of a standardbred or 
thoroughbred meet. But that’s not what their bill says. Their bill says anyone who grooms horses may be 
required to get a licence . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, if members opposite deny this, I hope that 
they will get up and argue the case, not for what they think is in the bill, but what is in fact in the bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this goes the same for . . . Exercise-boys need a licence. Now it seems to me it could be 
going a little farther than we need to be in this House to set up a crown corporation to issue licences to 
exercise-boys. There ought to be a few things in this province that you can do without a government 
licence. And I would have thought that maybe an exercise-boy was one of them. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Are you going to filibuster? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — No, Mr. Speaker, I am not proposing to filibuster at all. I’m just calling to 
the attention of hon. members some of the aspects of this bill. Members shake their head and I think they 
ought to shake their head, because what they would wish to do is set up a racing commission to regulate 
thoroughbred and standardbred racing in this province and the tracks where thoroughbred and 
standardbred racing meets are held, and that would make sense. And I invite the hon. members to restrict 
their bill to that and not to bring in a bill which sets up yet another crown corporation 



 
May 30, 1983 

 
2735 

with the very widest of regulatory powers — the powers to restrict people from entering into all manner 
of ordinary occupations having to do with horses without getting a licence from the government 
opposite, the power to do a number of other things. And if members opposite know some other breeds 
where there are races and where there are betting, where there are pari mutuel betting, they could 
obviously include them. I am not familiar with any Arabian or Appaloosa racing where there is pari 
mutuel betting but there may well be, and they obviously can cover that. 
 
But we obviously do not need a bill that covers barrel-racing at rodeos and chariot-racing at small points 
throughout Saskatchewan, as this bill does. 
 
I must say, Mr. Speaker, that there are a number of very, very rigorous provisions of this bill whereby 
the commission can exercise very, very strong powers. Now if it has to do with things which happen at a 
race-track, we all understand that. But the bill is not restricted in all its aspects and the powers of the 
commission are not restricted in that way. So I say, Mr. Speaker, that what we need indeed is a 
horse-racing commission bill — one which regulates the industry which needs regulating. That is the 
one which involves betting and pari mutuel and which does not attempt to regulate all manner of 
activities with horses; that doesn’t need licenses. And if the government opposite has no intention of 
instructing their commission to regulate those aspects of horse-racing, then it strikes me that they ought 
not to put it in their bill. 
 
We simply do not need that type of extensive powers and yet another new crown corporation, and for 
that reason, Mr. Speaker, I think that this bill ought to be very substantially changed in committee. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Some of my other colleagues who are 
not here today, and who in fairness had no warning that this was coming, may wish to speak on it, who 
want to consider the comments of the minister on the bill, and they were extensive. I therefore beg leave 
to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — After having dealt with 20 pieces of legislation today, with penetrating 
and vigorous opposition to all of them, and having decided that it’s been a super-tough day, particularly 
after the last one where I was really zinged, I would move that this house do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:58 p.m. 


	YEAS — 34
	NAYS — 0
	THIRD READINGS
	SECOND READINGS
	Bill No. 75 — An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act
	Bill No. 92 — An Act to amend The Liquor Act
	Bill No. 93 — An Act to amend The Liquor Licensing Act
	Bill No. 67 — An Act to amend The Corporation Capital Tax Act
	Bill No. 78 — An Act to amend The Tobacco Tax Act
	Bill No. 79 — An Act to amend The Education and Health Tax Act
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	SECOND READINGS
	Bill No. 88 — An Act to amend The Animal Products Act
	Bill No 89 — An Act to amend The Provincial Lands Act
	HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, on The Provincial Lands Act, which isn’t a very complex piece of legislation either. And like the previous one, if the members opposite are more concerned with the length of the bill than they are with what I have to...
	Bill No. 91 — An Act to establish a Horse Racing Commission for Saskatchewan



