






















































Hansard: November 18, 1983


11 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 18, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 10:00 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Radio Time in the Legislature 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I direct my question to the Government House Leader, and Minister of 
Finance. I have noticed — and maybe I’m presuming something — that there’s no arrangement for radio time in this 
session, and just before we get going on question period, I would like to clarify a point. Maybe . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. I wish to inform the member that the subject of radio time 
is under the jurisdiction of the Board of Internal Economy, and paragraph 365 states that no question of any sort may 
be addressed to the Speaker. If information relating to matters under the jurisdiction of the Speaker is required, it 
must be obtained privately. If the member has a concern about radio time, I would invite him to meet with me in my 
chambers. 

Unemployment in Saskatchewan 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Premier. It has to do with 
Saskatchewan’s unemployment problem which is the worst that the province has seen since StatsCan began to keep 
records in the current form. The throne speech talks about Saskatchewan having the lowest unemployment rate in 
Canada . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — . . . But it ignores the fact that Saskatchewan is one of two provinces whose 
unemployment rate has gone up in the last 12 months, and I wonder if the members will clap that. 
 
The facts are that the unemployment rate in Canada has gone down 11 per cent, and in Saskatchewan has gone up 11 
per cent in the last year. In fact, we’re doing poorly. My question to the Premier is this: the throne speech refers to 
the active job creation program of his government. Can he assure the unemployed of Saskatchewan that this active 
job creation program is in fact ready to go and will provide meaningful jobs for the unemployed in Saskatchewan 
this winter? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I am happy to respond to the hon. member’s question. To put the question in 
perspective, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the executive summary of the Conference Board of Canada’s 
provincial forecast. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Which one? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — The latest, October 1983, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it says about Saskatchewan, the first 
sentence about Saskatchewan, and I quote: 
 

The claim that the country had a recession, but Saskatchewan decided not to participate, is borne out 
in large measure by the Conference Board of Canada. 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 18, 1983 

 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — The first sentence of the next paragraph, Mr. Speaker. The first paragraph of the next 
speaker say, “Saskatchewan is forecast to exceed the national growth rate again in 1983 and in 1984.” Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s important to point out to everybody in Saskatchewan, and indeed across Canada, that the population of 
Saskatchewan is increasing rapidly. We will soon be celebrating our millionth person for the first time in the history 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, of the kinds of programs we’ve initiated in agriculture, in energy, in mining, in housing, in 
employment, people are coming home to Saskatchewan. Not only people who’ve left, but other people who have 
never been in the province of Saskatchewan, are coming here looking for work and looking for employment, and Mr. 
Speaker, they’re finding it. We lead the nation. We lead the nation in the creation of jobs. When every other 
province was going the other way, losing jobs, Saskatchewan was increasing in jobs. Now, Mr. Speaker, if from time 
to time the population rate is rising faster than we can increase jobs, we can’t help it if Saskatchewan is so popular 
that people want to come here. We’ll take some responsibility for that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Finally, just let me say, Mr. Speaker, for the first in Saskatchewan’s history, our labour 
force exceeded 500,000 people, and that happened in July of this year. And in the last 18 months, Mr. Speaker, we 
have created at a minimum 25,000 brand-new jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, and sometimes as many as 
3,000 to 3,500 new jobs per month. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do I understand the Premier to be offering the large 
number of unemployed in Saskatchewan who have increased by 11 per cent in the last 12 months . . . Do I 
understand you’re offering them the report of the Conference Board of Canada, in lieu of any program to create jobs 
for them this winter? Have you any program to create jobs this winter? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the conference board says that Saskatchewan did not participate in the 
recession. What that means is that we are leading the nation in economic activity, in creating new jobs, in new 
investment, in confidence, in terms of people wanting to find full-time employment anywhere in this country. We 
have done things like remove the gas tax in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — We have provided 13 1/4 per cent mortgages to people in Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I would ask that the answers to questions be kept succinct, please. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I have a list, Mr. Speaker, of about 35 things that we have done to create a climate to fight 
recession, to be productive, to put people to work. I have a list. And I can go through them, and I’m prepared to go 
through them. The hon. member said, “What have we done?” I’m prepared to go through a list of at least 50 things 
that we have done to create this climate that’s become nationally and internationally well known. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, may I ask a supplementary? Do I conclude that, Mr. Premier, that you 
have no program, other than the ones that you have announced heretofore,  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

13 
 

other than the lowering of the gas tax and similar items that you’ve referred to, no program to provide any jobs for 
the many thousands and the increasing number of unemployed this winter? No program for winter employment of 
any kind. Is that your position? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, we have a whole basket of programs that are actively being pursued right 
now and in force. If you want to go through industry by industry, we can look at the jobs created in the energy patch, 
in the oil markets. We can look at the jobs created in housing. We can look at the people going back to work in 
mining because we’re leading all records in potash sales. Every industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is going 
positive, increasing in a relative sense compared to Manitoba, or Alberta, or British Colombia, or Ontario, or in fact, 
most of the states in the United States. So we look at industry by industry by industry, Saskatchewan is leading in the 
employment generation and in terms of competence. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. As the Premier well knows he could 
create jobs by getting on with the construction of hospitals, which he has frozen, the construction of rehab centres, 
which he has frozen, and the construction of highways, which the Minister of Highways has frozen. My question to 
the Premier is this: does he propose to unfreeze even some of the many projects which he has frozen in order to 
provide employment for the number of unemployed in Saskatchewan which, I repeat, has increased by 11 per cent 
since last year and is going up sharply? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not so sure the hon. members want me to go through the list but if I 
could just take a quick example. The hon. member mentioned something about health care in hospitals and so forth. 
In special care home construction we have spent $11 million in two years as compared to $14 million over the 
previous seven years under the former administration. Just as an example of public expenditures in areas of health 
care, $11 million in two years compared to $14 million over seven years. In terms of cancer services, a total of $17 
million, Mr. Speaker, in additional funding over the next few years on clinics, on equipment, and additional staff. A 
total of 180 new positions in hospitals, of which 120 are brand-new nursing positions. And I can go on and on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I would dare say that any minister in this House could take his portfolio or 
her portfolio and go through the things that we’ve been doing that have increased expenditures, whether it’s in 
natural gas redistribution programs, whether it’s in health care, whether it’s in nursing homes, as well as all the jobs 
created in the private sector, and we’ll match it with anybody in North America. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, in view of the fact that the unemployment 
rate among people 24 years of age or under is now 12.4 per cent, and in view of the fact that there are actually fewer 
people of that age bracket who are now employed in this province than was true a year ago — and these are StatsCan 
figures and not figures out of your fertile imagination — my question is this: are you going to take any additional 
steps over and above the steps you have now taken to provide jobs for these young people during the winter months 
— young people who are losing jobs and of whom there are 3,000 fewer working this year than there were last year? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member suggests that we should increase government spending on 
public projects. Mr. Speaker, I want to remind the public of Saskatchewan of the attitude of the former 
administration when they were in power. This is dated January 4, 1976, and it’s signed by a Mr. Smishek. Mr. 
Speaker, this is regarding  



 
November 18, 1983 

construction grants for special care homes, and it says, and I quote: 
 

Until such time as the need for additional beds can be clearly identified and a suitable construction 
policy defined, a moratorium on further commitments should be enforced. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. It’s impossible for the minister to answer the question and when he is answering 
I can’t hear him. I would ask for decorum in the Chamber. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — All I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is that it seems to me somewhat hypocritical, when we 
have led virtually all categories in public spending on health care and on nursing homes, and in creating economic 
activity for young people and seniors and so forth, and the opposition members imply that they would never do 
anything like that, or in fact that we are controlling this spending to not protect the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. When we are leading in these categories, and have broken their record — and we go back to look at 
that record, and they would put a moratorium on the construction of nursing homes — it just doesn’t seem to lie all 
that way. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. Would the Premier acknowledge that the unemployment 
rate among young people is (a) greater than it was last year, and (b) at least twice as high as the year 1976, from 
which he was quoting documents? Will he admit that the unemployment rate among young people is twice as high 
as it was in 1976, and higher than it was last year? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the honourable member fully knows that unemployment is up all across 
North America. Unemployment is up. It’s 12 to 14 per cent in the province of Alberta; it’s 10 to 12 per cent in the 
province of Manitoba; and it’s 6 .9 or 7 per cent here in the province of Saskatchewan, the lowest in the country. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Again, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is the lowest in the nation and one of the lowest 
anywhere in North America. Now, that is not to say that unemployment isn’t higher than it was at some time. But we 
are winning in every category to create new jobs in this province. People are coming here from Alberta, from 
Manitoba, from Ontario, from the United States, to find work. And we are employing more young people in the 
province of Saskatchewan than ever in its history — ever! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Do I understand the Premier to say that he is 
happy with the situation of the level of unemployment of young people, happy to the extent that he is offering no 
new programs but simply reciting what he has done in the past — the policies which have led to an increase in 
unemployment among young people in the last year according to StatsCan? Do I understand him to say that he is 
happy with the programs which he has initiated and is unwilling to take any steps to alleviate — in particular, the 
high and rising unemployment among young people under the age of 24. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, it is well known across Saskatchewan that an awful lot of young people are 
on this side of the House, and, Mr. Speaker, they identify with and they reflect the views of young people across the 
province of Saskatchewan. They have worked extremely hard — my colleagues have worked extremely hard — to 
create more jobs ever in the history of the province of Saskatchewan, during a recession. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, during a recession. This is the worst recession since the depression of 1930s — the worst, the worst. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the conference board said this province did not participate, because we’re going the other way. I think 
it’s clear to everybody in this country., Mr. Speaker, it’s no small feat to  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

15 
 

buck the trend, to go the other way, to create jobs when everybody’s losing jobs. All the young people that come into 
the province of Saskatchewan, come in here for optimism. They feel that this government is doing something no 
other government in Canada is doing in the job creation, and we’re winning at that. 
 
So finally, Mr. Speaker, I would say it’s one thing in 1976 or in 1980 to have potash prices going through the roof 
and oil prices going through the roof, three, four, five hundred million dollars extra money at that time period — not 
in a recession but in a boom — and at that time, Mr. Speaker, with all those revenues, putting a moratorium on 
senior citizens’ construction. And now, during a recession when we’ve spent more than anybody else in these 
categories, creating more jobs, we go the other way — a single, solitary example of not only good management, but 
the commitment to the youth, the farmers, the home owners, and the general public, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to the Premier. Another area where 
unemployment is extremely serious is in northern Saskatchewan, but incredibly, there was not one word in the 
throne speech about the government’s plans for northern Saskatchewan. My question to the Premier is this: when 
can the people of northern Saskatchewan, where unemployment is now running between 85 and 95 per cent, expect 
some action which will stimulate employment? What hope can you give to them for jobs this winter? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, as most people in Saskatchewan know, our policies clearly are not the 
continuation of the policies of the former administration that was so soundly defeated. One of the things that we did 
was to allow northern Saskatchewan to be part of mainstream Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a demarcation 
line that says there is a North and there’s a South. It’s all Saskatchewan. 
 
In the Speech from the Throne yesterday, the Lieutenant Governor identified things that we are doing in economic 
development all over Saskatchewan, which includes the North — things like wild rice production. We are now 
processing and marketing wild rice. Well, I would call it the brand-new wheat crop of Saskatchewan. The quality is 
first-class; the equipment is first-class; we have more than 500 people all over northern Saskatchewan producing it; 
it’s private enterprise; it’s co-operation; it’s a joint venture between the government, the natives, co-ops, general 
citizens of the province of Saskatchewan; and it’s first-class. And for the first time in our history we are now 
marketing it professionally, we are processing it professionally, and incidentally, it happens to be in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of tourism, in terms of agriculture, in terms of timber, our programs don’t say: just for 
Shaunavon. They don’t say: just for Weyburn; they don’t say: just for La Ronge. They say: fort he province of 
Saskatchewan, and we’re proud of it. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Premier gets up and he talks about the 500 people who 
are employed raising wild rice in northern Saskatchewan. I want to ask the Premier, could he indicate to this House 
what the per capita income is from wild rice for the 500 individuals that you mentioned? And I tell you that you’ll 
find that this is very, very low and in some places, it’s a total loss. But I ask you, Mr. Premier, you say that northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. Do you have a question? If you have a question, get directly to it. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — My question, Mr. Premier, is: do you not feel that northern Saskatchewan is an area that 
needs extra money and extra cash put in there to develop the situation that we now have, with 85 and 95 per cent 
unemployment, and that needs to be done right away? 



 
November 18, 1983 

 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t give the information with respect to, and I don’t know the 
information, what the average rice farmer is getting in northern Saskatchewan. I do know that he has more 
opportunities now, and the prices are better, and the production is better, and the marketing is better than ever 
before, so the income will rise. When we look at Saskatchewan, we look at all of Saskatchewan. In some areas, in 
some communities, there are different opportunities as well as different needs. There are mining opportunities in 
some communities, and there are agriculture in others. We are not going to revert to the old ways of saying we just 
have a North and we just have a South. We look at Saskatchewan as one complete province, and the people in all 
these communities deserve our single most positive attention that they can receive on an equitable basis. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. A final supplementary to the Premier. Would you not 
agree that when you have an area such as northern Saskatchewan where unemployment is running at 85 to 90 per 
cent, that that does not need extra attention by your government? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, areas that need more attention receive more attention. We are not going to 
isolate areas and call them a separate province or a separate jurisdiction. When we talk about tourism, we talk about 
timber, we talk about fishing, we talk about wild rice, most of it tends to be in northern Saskatchewan. It’s part of 
the entire province. So when we’re looking at programs, whether it’s timber or outfitters’ associations or tourism or 
whatnot, it applies to those particular areas. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to announce that a new record has been set 
this week for oil and gas drilling in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Total number of wells drilled to date this year has reached 1,537. That shatters the 
previous record of 1,498 wells that was reached in 1980. I would emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that figure represents the 
total drilling year of 1980. We still have roughly a month to go in the drilling year of 1983. And as my colleagues 
have indicated, 1983 is described as a recessionary year. Included in the total are 147 gas wells. That is up from four 
which were drilled in 1982. Total drilling in Saskatchewan this year is projected to be double the drilling of 1982, 
and this compares with modest increases in drilling projected for Manitoba and Alberta. 
 
This activity is directly attributed to the oil industry recovery program introduced by this government in July of 
1982. The previous record was set before the introduction of the national energy program, and at a time when 
industry’s expectation of increasing energy prices were much high than they are at the present. This new activity will 
bring direct benefit, and I think this applies to question period, in the form of jobs, in the form of investment, in a 
higher return to the people of Saskatchewan from our resources. We estimate that over 1,000 jobs have been created 
in the drilling and associated activities alone. 
 
Additional spin-off jobs and income which have not been measured will be realized in the province. Investment in 
the oil industry this year is expected to reach $500 million. I would not that the drilling activity has been spread 
throughout all the producing areas of the province. I would also note that smaller Canadian-owned companies have 
been particularly active in the drilling program this year. 
 
The major factor influencing Saskatchewan’s dramatic increase was the one-year tax and royalty holiday given for 
new wells in July 1982 recovery program. The cost of this program in revenue foregone is estimated to be $40 
million. This is a smaller cost than the $60 million paid out annually in the previous administration’s cash incentive 
grant program, and, Mr. Speaker, I would  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

17 
 

indicate that the Alberta report indicated that that program was quite simply dismal. The foregone revenue will be 
more than offset by increased receipts from the sale of drilling permits and leases this year which are expected to be 
up by over $50 million over last year. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — The increased drilling activity will lead to significant additional production over 
the long term. The royalties on this production, which will be realized at the full rate, will generate continuing 
benefits for all the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this impressive record is yet another example of our government’s economic policies at work in the oil 
and gas industry. I am confident that this House will see more evidence of the success of our initiatives in the 
months and years ahead. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a few comments on the member’s statement. I 
would like to express the pleasure of the members on this side of the House that Saskatchewan is participating in the 
general revival of the oil industry in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I know that members are familiar with the magazine Oilweek and I have the latest 
copy which indicates the record of oil drilling in Canada. And for this year, up to October the 15th, the number of 
oil-wells drilled in Canada has gone up in every area but British Columbia, and we’re delighted at that. 
 
There were, in 1982, 1,632 wells drilled, and in 1983, 3,026 oil-wells drilled in Canada. Now that’s just about a 
doubling of the number of oil-wells drilled in Canada in 1983 over 1982. 
 
I am glad to know, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan has got its full share. I’m glad to know that Saskatchewan has 
got its full share, but so indeed have other provinces — provinces like the much-maligned province of Manitoba 
which has seen an increase in drilling from 110 to 168 wells; provinces like Ontario, even, have seen their wells 
drilled number increase from nine to 24. Alberta, Mr. Speaker, has seen a greater increase in the number of oil-wells 
drilled than has the province of Saskatchewan. The province of Alberta has had a greater increase in number of wells 
drilled than the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We are happy that the oil industry in western Canada is proceeding apace. We are glad of that and we are glad that 
we’re participating. We’re happy, too, to know that oil revenues, according to the minister, are at a high level, and 
accordingly we will expect no more comments from the Minister of Finance that he can’t afford hospitals or he can’t 
afford schools because of decline in resource revenues. Oil revenues are, if I can believe the minister, higher than 
they’ve ever been, and accordingly, we may expect balanced budgets and a vigorous expansion of public services as 
was previously the case. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 
INTRODUCTIONS 

 
Introduction of Pages 

 
MR. SPEAKER: — Before orders of the day I would like to introduce the pages that will be serving us this year. 
This year we will have Linda Kaminski, Rosanne Mazenc, Heather Potter, Andrea Sebastian, and Susan Thiele. 



 
November 18, 1983 

 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Introduction of Guest Clerk 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — As well, I would like to inform the Assembly that we have David Gussow, the Deputy 
Principal Clerk in the Table Research Branch of the House of Commons. And he will be a guest Clerk at the Table 
for this portion of the session. David. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Resignation from Committee Deputy Chairman Post 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — As well, I would like to read a letter that I have received from Louis Domotor. He said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, circumstances make it necessary that I ask the Legislative Assembly to allow me to 
retire from the post of deputy chairman of committees, a position which I have felt greatly honoured 
to have occupied. 

 
I have endeavoured to uphold the traditions connected with the position and if any success has been 
achieved therein it is because of the support and co-operation received from yourself and other 
members of the Assembly. 

 
Please convey my sincere thanks to them. (Signed) Louis Domotor. 

 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of New Deputy Chairman 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member for Meadow Lake: 
 

That Grant J. Schmidt, Esq., member for the consistency of Melville, be elected deputy chairman of 
the committees of this Assembly. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would also move, seconded by Mr. MacLeod, the member for Meadow Lake, by leave 
of the Assembly: 
 

That the by-laws of professional associations and amendments thereto, tabled as sessional paper no. 
5 of the Second Session of the Twentieth Legislature, be referred to the special committee on 
regulations, and that the professional association by-laws of current session be referred, as tabled, to 
the special committee on regulations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, by leave of the 
Assembly: 



 
November 18, 1983 

 

19 
 

 
That the report of the Provincial Auditor for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1983, be referred as 
tabled to the standing committee on public accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the public accounts of the province of Saskatchewan for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1983, 
be referred, as tabled, to the standing committee on public accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the report of the Legislative Librarian as tabled at the present session be referred to the standing 
committee on communications. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the annual report and financial statements of various crown corporations and related agencies be 
referred as tabled to the standing committee on crown corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the names of Mrs. Caswell and Mr. Johnson be substituted for those of Mr. Domotor and Mr. 
Pickering on the standing committee for crown corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the name of Mr. Embury be substituted for that of Mr. Schoenhals on the standing committee 
on municipal law. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the names of Messrs. Morin, Sutor, and Martens be substituted for those of Messrs. Embury, 
Folk, and Dutchak on the standing committee on public accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, by  



 
November 18, 1983 

leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the name of Mr. Hopfner be substituted for that of Mr. Morin on the standing committee of 
communications. 

 
Motion agreed to. 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I’m sure that all members of the legislature 
would want to join with me in this expression of sorrow and regret in the passing of one of this province’s finest 
daughters, Marj Mitchell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday, October 18th, Marj Mitchell, one of the world’s champion curlers, died in Regina of 
cancer. Marj was just 35 years old when this terrible disease struck her down. She fought that disease with all the 
tenacity, determination, and courage that she had shown throughout her sporting career. 
 
In 1980 Marj Mitchell, Nancy Kerr, Shirley McKendry, and Wendy Leach won the women’s world championship 
curling award with a magnificent win over Sweden. That feat, in a match that literally had the spectators sitting on 
the edges of their seats, prompted Marj’s induction into Saskatchewan’s Sports Halls of Fame in 1981. It was an 
honour, Mr. Speaker, well deserved. 
 
Throughout her life, Marj had shown herself to be full of energy and enthusiasm for anything and everything she 
undertook. She was born and raised in the Glen Ewen district. From her childhood, she was known as a girl and a 
lady who loved life and loved everyone she met along the way. In 1973 and ‘74, she played for the provincial 
champion Baldwinettes, a follow-up to her original involvement in softball with the Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance women’s team in 1971 and ‘72. By 1972, Marj skipped her University of Regina rink, and in 1975 skipped 
the winning rink in the CBC classic. 
 
Not only did she give of herself in the sports life of this province, but she was an avid worker in many community 
projects and organizations on behalf of those less fortunate than herself. Marj was never known to say no to anyone 
who needed her help or inspiration in any way. She was an outstanding credit to her parents, Hugh and Muriel, to her 
sister Norma, to her community, her province, and her country and, Mr. Speaker, above all, to herself. 
 
She was a dear friend and she will not be forgotten. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my words to those of the Deputy Premier with 
respect to the most untimely passing of Marj Mitchell. 
 
Marj was a person who gave of her all in so many endeavours, and she had with it all a sense of humour and a sense 
of representing our province and our country with dignify and distinction. I had an opportunity in my previous 
capacity to write to her when she was playing for the Canadian championships in Edmonton, and she wrote back: 
 

Your letter dated February 23 was delivered to the president of the Canadian Ladies’ Curling 
Association in Edmonton and was well received by the entire curling association. We appreciate you 
taking the time to extend greetings from the province and to remind the rest of Canada that 
Saskatchewan not only supports their provincial representatives, but also believes that sport has a 
positive influence in promoting an understanding and a common fellowship among Canadians. 
 
As you are aware, curling is a very competitive sport in this country, and in particular  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

21 
 

in this province. We felt it was a very special honour to wear the Saskatchewan crest in Edmonton 
and we’re extremely proud to accept the Canadian maple leaf which we will wear during the world 
championship in Perth, Scotland. We will do our utmost to represent both Saskatchewan and Canada 
to the best of our ability, both on and off the ice. Yours truly, Marj Mitchell. 

 
Then, when they were over in Perth, I had an opportunity to send a little note which was saying it was a very 
pleasant tradition for me to extend best wishes as you enter the championship. And I mentioned that Saskatchewan 
and Sweden have in the past had a very friendly and co-operative association. “For this day only, you are invited to 
ignore that relationship,” and ignore it she did. “Best wishes in the playoff games.” 
 
And then when they won, I wrote again and said: 
 

Dear Marj and Nancy and Shirley and Wendy: 
 

Unless there’s a championship tournament somewhere that I don’t know of, this is my last letter to 
you for a while. Let me say how delighted I am that this letter too is one of congratulations. I am 
proud of your latest and final victory and all Saskatchewan shares that pride. Not only did you win 
once again with another of your patent and thrilling finishes, you represented Saskatchewan and 
Canada very ably and helped make Saskatchewan better known around the world. For that, we are all 
in your debt. Once again, my heartiest congratulations. 

 
Then she wrote back, saying: 
 

Just a note to express our appreciation to you and the Government of Saskatchewan. Thanks for the 
telegrams, the letters, and the provincial dinner. We feel very honoured to have been presented in the 
House along with the Rick Folk team. 

 
Members will recall that we honoured Marj Mitchell and Rick Folk, each of whom were world champions at that 
time. 
 

The Celebrate Saskatchewan medallions and the watches will be treasured always. Yours sincerely, 
Marj Mitchell, Nancy Kerr, Shirley McKendry, and Wendy Leach. 

 
It’s a record that very, very few in this province or indeed in this country can match. She not only displayed great 
skill on the ice but she was an outstanding representative. As the Deputy Premier has said, “A curler, a woman, and 
a lady,” and we understand those words as indicating that she was to the fullest extent a competitive curler and a 
lady who we were proud to have represent our province and our country. 
 
And I know that all of us regret her passing and it is with a good deal of personal regret that I say that my last bit of 
correspondence with respect to Marj Mitchell was a letter to Mr. and Mrs. Hugh Mitchell of Glen Ewen expressing 
my personal sadness and those of people with whom I’m associated on the death of Marj, a life which was tragically 
shortened, which was one of service not only in competitive sport but off the ice, and one which we very much 
regret came to such an untimely end. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, I am honoured today to move the address in reply. Considering the state of affairs 
in Canada at this time and the state of the death of the Crow rate, I have worn my black suit in mourning for the loss 
of the Crow. 



 
November 18, 1983 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have taken a new seat in your Chamber here. It used to belong to the member for Turtleford and I 
assure you it will continue its ethnic tradition as it is now occupied by a member for Melville. It’s a difficult seat to 
fill, Mr. Speaker. It’s very close to the opposition and you can hear all those things they say. I felt I was much better 
off over there where I couldn’t hear them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a duty to represent my constituency even if I have to sit close to the opposition and I will do that 
duty, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s no secret that I used to be closer to the opposition, Mr. Speaker, I have 
personally experienced both parties in this Chamber today and I can tell you that I have personal knowledge of 
hypocrisy and the radicalism of the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I received my law degree I received it from the late Hon. John Diefenbaker. And it’s true, Mr. 
Speaker, that he patted me on the head and said, “Do well, young man.” 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I fell by the wayside, and I was led down the garden path of socialism. They led me to the 
dreamland of the flower children, the dreamland of the waffle. And I stayed long enough to, I think . . . I thought, 
Mr. Blakeney, and I apologize, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, I thought we had expelled the waffle, but I see they are 
coming back, and I see you will have your work cut out for you. And I know that your party has, for years and years, 
waffled, and this is what causes the hypocrisy. I challenge you to expel the waffle again. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, I found out that the dreams were actually nightmares and, Mr. Speaker, I woke up and I 
became a born-again Progressive Conservative. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to say that on April 26th, 1982, Saskatchewan was born again. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, for years I tried to convince the then Premier and his government that they should 
give this province good government, and finally, Mr. Speaker, two and one-half years ago, I decided to run for 
public office. Mr. Speaker, I had a choice. I could have pursued the accumulation of personal wealth and material 
goods but, Mr. Speaker, I felt that this province needed good government, and therefore I am pleased to be here and 
part of the new good government of this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, I can tell you, and I can assure the Leader of the Opposition that I don’t release 
all of his secrets, but I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that in 1976 I attended my last New Democratic Party convention. 
And I experienced first hand the hypocrisy and the philosophy that that party stands for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that in 1976 this province had gift tax and succession duties implemented by the former 
government, and I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that those gift taxes and succession duties were driving our farmers and 
our business people out of this province. Not only were we exporting children but we were exporting capital. 
 
And I tried to convince the then minister, the hon. Walter Smishek, minister of finance, as we say in law, “as he then 
was,” Mr. Speaker. I tried to convince him that he should do away with gift tax and succession duties and, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s possible I was not much of a politician in those days because after the debate ended Mr. Smishek’s 
forces won and the vote was 134 to 2. I had convinced one person in that party that they should follow common 
sense. And I say to you, Mr.  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

23 
 

Leader of the Opposition, you do have one good man left somewhere . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — . . . And I encourage you to have him seek the leadership. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, in 1982 my election material will show that I only made two promises. The first 
promise was that I would give strong representation to the Melville constituency and, Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried my best 
to do that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, while the members of the opposition ran about the province crowing, I worked 
within my party to help save the Crow. Mr. Speaker, when the Liberal-socialist coalition in Ottawa killed the Crow, I 
am proud to say that from within and from Saskatchewan our party was able to implement in that bill some saving 
provisions that will save these farmers who are suffering in this province millions of dollars in the long run. I am 
telling you, Mr. Speaker, that this government, the government of Saskatchewan, doing the most it could, did at the 
very least accomplish for farmers a safety net so that they have some protection. 
 
I mourn the loss of the Crow, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible) . . . You have to have your second choice, and I think if 
we can’t save the Crow we at least have to make some improvements and we did. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the second promise that I made was that I would help give this province good government, and, 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech assures this province of continued good government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the throne speech is truly enlightening, but, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not compare it to 
hypocrisy and the radicalism of the former government, Mr. Speaker, I have read recently that the members of the 
opposition think there is a double standard in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s true — there is a double 
standard in Saskatchewan. It’s true. You don’t understand it, but at least that statement is true. Mr. Speaker, there is 
a double standard — there is a socialist standard and there is a Progressive Conservative standard. And I am pleased 
that there now is a Progressive Conservative standard in this province. The Progressive Conservative standard of this 
government is peace, order, and good government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, the throne speech shows this government’s philosophy of peace, order, and good 
government, where all citizens are not necessarily equally rich, Mr. Speaker, however they can work to build 
prosperity for all. Mr. Speaker, on the other hand, we have the hypocrisy of the double standard of the New 
Democratic Party. Mr. Speaker, socialists believe in equality for all. But, Mr. Speaker, they practise unequal poverty 
for all, Mr. Speaker, and I can give you examples. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, look at Russia, look at Cuba, compare North and South Korea, if you want a 
close comparison. Mr. Speaker, consider even China. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Manitoba and Saskatchewan. 



 
November 18, 1983 

 
MR. SCHMIDT: — I’m glad you mentioned that. Let’s compare Manitoba and Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, they practised no restraint and had no recovery. Now, Mr. Speaker, they have a discovery. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, they have a discovery, and I show you part of the Leader-Post of November 16, 1983, and they’ve 
discovered that money doesn’t grow on trees in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. It says, “Manitoba government blasted for 
crack-down on provincial hand-outs.” Mr. Speaker, the NDP of Manitoba have been engaging in hand-outs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, just to bring to the attention of this Assembly some of the comparisons . . . if my little friends 
think that the comparisons . . . The comparisons, Mr. Speaker, they think they are unfair to compare Russia or Cuba 
or China. But in Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, the information I have is that after two budgets and a record $580 million 
deficit expected this year. Pawley and Schroeder came up with guide-lines — they have discovered that money does 
not grow on trees — guide-lines for grants to outside agencies. It was said the government already was making its 
internal spending plans based on similar limits. Now hear this: hear this what’s happening in Manitoba — schools, 
universities, hospitals, municipal governments, and other institutions were urged this year to keep budget increases 
anywhere from zero to five per cent. And I understand, Mr. Speaker, that Schroeder made it clear 3 per cent is what 
the Government of Manitoba had in mind. And we were encouraged here to spend money on costly capital 
programs. And we were told, Mr. Speaker, that we should not have a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition knows how to grow money he should tell me about it because I 
certainly don’t know, and our government doesn’t know, how to grow money or tress, Mr. Speaker, the situation and 
the comparison is even worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Manitoba spending is expected to hit about 3.3 billion dollars this year, or a 15.9 per cent increase in 
the province of Manitoba. And I suggest that the opposition take a lesson from the province of Manitoba and 
become reasonable in how the government of the province of Saskatchewan should be run. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy continues. The hypocrisy continues, Mr. Speaker. In Mr. Speaker we have declared that 
Saskatchewan is open for business. Mr. Speaker, the opposition scoffed and they laughed. And they continue to 
scoff and they continue to laugh. Mr. Speaker, the opposition couldn’t recognize business if one started despite their 
radicalism. Mr. Speaker, by bringing peace, order, and good government to this province the effects of this good 
government are starting to show. 
 
As the Premier earlier pointed out, Mr. Speaker leads the nation in economic growth. Mr. Speaker, the Conference 
Board of Canada agrees that Saskatchewan has not participated in the recession, or depression, as the depressionites 
next to me like to call it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy continues. The members of the opposition complain that we have hired our friends. Mr. 
Speaker, it is true we have hired a few friends. It is true, Mr. Speaker, that we needed good workers and we’ve hired 
a few good people and put them to work. However, Mr. Speaker, from 1971 to 1981 the opposition, who was then 
the government hired 10,000 additional people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan cannot afford to pay the salaries of 10,000 extra people. Mr. Speaker, 
the former premier and Leader of the Opposition and his party had what would be understood very well in Regina. 
They had a “taxi squad” where they kept their friends in waiting for elections and future political use at the expense 
of the public, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I agree we have hired a few of our friends. But, Mr. Speaker, they had the opportunity to hire 10,000 of 
their friends. I’ll ask this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, whose friend is Mr. Van Mulligan, who after he left the 
Government of Saskatchewan worked for the Hon. Simon Dejong, MP, and is now running for president of the NDP 
party? 



 
November 18, 1983 

 

25 
 

 
Mr. Speaker, we reduced the civil service. We did it fairly and reasonable. Mr. Speaker, I want to bring to your 
attention today the facts and circumstances on the reduction of the civil service in this province. Mr. Speaker, we did 
it fairly. Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard complaints from Progressive Conservatives that they were laid off, that they lost 
their jobs along with other government workers. Mr. Speaker, I can give you an example. The safety dog at SGI was 
laid off. And I want you to know, Mr. Speaker, that the safety dog was the son of the Minister of Small Business, 
Jack Klein. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite with their double standard and their hypocrisy tell us there are mass 
firings. Well, Mr. Speaker, consider the facts. On April 1, 1982 there were 16,725 public servants in Saskatchewan. 
On April 1, 1983 there were 15,142 public servants in the province of Saskatchewan, a reduction of 1,583 public 
servants. And, Mr. Speaker, where did they go? Well, I can tell you that vacant positions were no filled. 1,138 
vacant positions were not filled. Mr. Speaker, there were retirees — 220 retired because of retirement age and early 
retirement. Mr. Speaker, there were orders in council cancelled — 182. Now, Mr. Speaker, we all know that the 
Leader of the Opposition concurred in the cancelling of some of his friends. Mr. Speaker, we all know that people 
who are hired by order in council can expect to be fired by order in council. So, Mr. Speaker, I do not apologize for 
the loss of those 182 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were terminations: 43 people were terminated in that year. Fired in simple English. Mr. Speaker, 
in a work force of 16,725 people, I submit it is not unusual for 43 people to be terminated. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, consider these facts, that crown corporation staffs were reduced by about the same number 
which means that there are about 3,000 fewer public sector jobs in Saskatchewan. And now I hear the gears churning 
in the minds of the opposition, and they’re saying, “Aha, they’re creating more unemployment.” Well, Mr. Speaker, 
compare this: that in Saskatchewan, in the same period, the private sector provided more jobs. And on April 1, 1982 
there were 427,000 people employed in Saskatchewan. And on April 1, 1983 there were 469,000 people employed. 
That, Mr. Speaker, is new jobs to the extent of 42,000 new jobs. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Now, Mr. Speaker, while we reduced the public payroll by 3,000 the total number of jobs is 
increased by 39,000. Mr. Speaker, people are still working; it’s just they are not working at the expense of the public 
purse. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, there have been new jobs created in Saskatchewan at the rate of three and one 
half thousand per month. And I want the members of this Assembly to take note, Mr. Speaker, that for every single 
job lost in the public sector of Saskatchewan there have been 14 new jobs to replace that job that was lost. Mr. 
Speaker, we are proud of that record. We are proud of the Progressive Conservative standard of good government. 
Mr. Speaker, we are not proud of the way the opposition tries to chase business and jobs out of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan’s unemployment rate is the lowest in Canada. In addition, Mr. Speaker, our government has 
brought in budgets and has introduced new measures in the throne speech which will continue the creation of new 
jobs. 
 
In our last budged, we allocated $8 million for continuation of the Saskatchewan JOBS program. This program, 
along with the federal JOBS program, created three and one-half thousand jobs. In comparison, Mr. Speaker, the 
hypocrisy of the former government, where they exported young people from the province of Saskatchewan. And I 
can say, Mr. Speaker, that the last time the province had such a population as we have now was in the 1930s. Times 
were tough, Mr. Speaker, and the party of the opposition was spawned through those tough times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we lost many citizens during the scourge of war, from 1939 to 1945. In 1944, the CCF were elected to 
power in Saskatchewan and, Mr. Speaker, it has taken now 39 years to  



 
November 18, 1983 

today where we have a Progressive Conservative government to give us peace, order, and good government. And I 
can tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell the people of Saskatchewan that the day is fast approaching — it will be 
within the life possibly of this session —- that the population of Saskatchewan will reach 1 million people for the 
first time in the history of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, when that day comes there will be a large cheer and a celebration in this 
province. But I’m afraid, as I saw earlier this morning, that there will be glum faces in the seats of the opposition 
because, Mr. Speaker, our standard is positive, good government and their standard is negativism. They want 
Saskatchewan to fail so they can crawl back into power, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sorry if that day ever comes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can give you examples of the behaviour of the opposition in trying to chase jobs and business from 
this province. I understand that the provincial council of the opposition, on Oct. 1, 1983, passed a resolution. Mr. 
Speaker, I will leave out some of the whereases in that resolution for fear it will scare more business out of the 
province. But, in part it says: 
 

Whereas Luscar Mining Co. has indicated interest in buying mines at Coronach, be it further 
resolved that this council warn Luscar and any other potential buyer that mines sold by Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation will be expropriated for $1 when the NDP are returned to office. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this kind of radicalism scares the people of Saskatchewan. This kind of radicalism scares the people of 
Canada. I can tell you and I say to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to the members of the opposition, they had 
better save that dollar, and they had better protect it very carefully because it’s going to be a very old and mouldy 
dollar when they get back into power. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately this type of radicalism . . . Can you believe it, to threaten to take 
someone’s valuable property for $1? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They’ve done it before. That’s socialism. 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — That’s worse than socialism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can you believe that they have put the world on notice that if the Government of Saskatchewan were to 
sell one potash mine, they would expropriate it when they got back to power — for $1? Well, last time I heard it, 
members, the last time I heard it they weren’t even going to pay a dollar. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They are getting generous. 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, on the contrary. I heard in the throne speech and I’ve seen by the conduct of this 
government, that this government is building the economy. There are new businesses. We are building a strong 
economy. There are over 6,582 new businesses in this province since we took power, and that is in 19 months, Mr. 
Speaker. On the contrary, in 1981, before the recession that didn’t come, Mr. Speaker, in 1981, there were 696 fewer 
businesses registered under The Education and Health Tax Act. There was a decrease in 1981 and an increase of 
tenfold in the 18 months that we have been in power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the double standard continues, Mr. Speaker, when we allowed youth to be employed by not only 
government, in summer jobs, but also by private business, the Opportunities ‘83 program placed 4,200 students in 
summer jobs last summer. And the opposition wants to know what are we doing about jobs. Well the opposition 
should be taking  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

27 
 

notes, Mr. Speaker, so that we don’t have to repeat this over and over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t repeat it for the benefit of my colleagues. They did it and they know about it. But now that I 
stand closer to the opposition, I think maybe they will hear it and be able to take note. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we offered small business the $5,000 tax credit if they hired new people. This program cost $17 
million and they want to know what are we doing to create jobs. And they want to know why is there a deficit. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, the equation must balance. We are concentrating on jobs. And this program has created a very large 
number of jobs. There is an increase of 22,000 jobs in the work force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you heard from the throne speech that we are also developing an economic strategy for treaty Indians. 
Mr. Speaker, we are trying to include all citizens in the activity of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must remind this Assembly of the gasoline tax. I wait, Mr. Speaker, and I wait very briefly for the 
usual laughter from the opposition about the gas tax. But, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that a tax reduction of $139 
million is a great benefit to the citizens of Saskatchewan. And they want us to decrease the deficit. I ask them, Mr. 
Speaker, will they put on the gas tax and will they let it float up? And I’d expect that it would not be somewhere 
near Quebec’s at about a dollar a gallon more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of farmer, I can tell you, that we delivered. We delivered that we are the farmer’s best 
friend. And there is a tradition of the Progressive Conservative Party being the farmer’s best friend. It was started 
recently (well it was started many years ago when the Conservative Party introduced the Canadian Wheat Board), 
and it was continued by John Diefenbaker and Alvin Hamilton and it is continued by this government. 
 
On the contrary . . . the hypocrisy of the opposition, Mr. Speaker . . . I hear them ask the price of rice. Would you 
believe they ask the price of rice and how much a rice farmer is making? I suggest, Mr. Speaker, they ask Mrs. 
Broadbent the price of rice. She’s the one who thinks the price of meat is too high. Maybe she will also tell us the 
price of rice is too high. That is the hypocrisy of the New Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — And now I hear comments from the members opposite that I’m not a cabinet minister. And I 
don’t take that as a serious threat to me. I can tell the members opposite that we Conservatives, Mr. Speaker, we 
Conservatives are patient. Peace, order and good government takes patience. But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the 
radicals who sit in opposition have no patience. Therefore, they are concerned about such material things as the pay 
and the prestige of cabinet. Mr. Speaker, we have many, many members and these members are concerned with good 
government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — Mr. Speaker, I have to raise the hypocrisy of health care, Mr. Speaker, you have heard in the 
throne speech that your government remains firmly committed to making Saskatchewan’s health care system the 
best in Canada. He continues to be opposed to health care premiums and hospital user fees. But, Mr. Speaker, what 
did the opposition tell us in 1978 and what did they spread at the doors in 1982? They, the Conservatives, will take 
away medicare. But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that their standard is to be scaring the old people of the province and 
our standard is to care for the old people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t doubt that the roots of their party did some good works. Mr. Speaker, the  



 
November 18, 1983 

CCF were the party of medicare and I congratulate them for it. Mr. Speaker, the NDP are the party of medicare and I 
denounce them for it. The Progressive Conservative Party is a party of peace, order and good government, and we 
continue a good thing and we improve it. That’s what we are doing with medicare. 
 
Consider the record of this government in a year and a half, Mr. Speaker: where this province now spends $1,000 for 
every man, woman and child in this province; where we now spend $1 billion or about one-third of our budget on 
medicare. Let them criticize that kind of concern for the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I hear nothing but 
silence from the opposition benches, Mr. Speaker, we have improved medicare; we have put more funding into 
cancer; we have improved ambulances; we’ve introduced foot care. Mr. Speaker, this is all in one and a half years. 
But, Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy and the comparison is just devastating — the comparison that I see between the 
hypocrisy of the opposition and the good government we provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the members opposite that we have many members here and they know the good works we are 
doing. We are just trying to convince you and the opposition, Mr. Speaker, this province has suffered under the 
world recession. We have lost $300 million per year of resource revenue. This was a windfall that came to this 
province in the days that the opposition was the government. Did they save this windfall or did they put it to good 
use? No, they did not. They told us, through their double standard, Mr. Speaker, that we had a heritage fund of $1 
billion. Mr. Speaker, 87 per cent of that was stored in holes in the ground and other such crown corporation. Double 
accounting, Mr. Speaker. On the one hand they told us we had $1 billion and on the other had they told us that we 
had crown corporations worth $1 billion and, therefore, we had $2 billion. Magic! A sleight of the hand. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we had $1 billion and not in cash but in holes in the ground. Mr. Speaker, I told them years ago not to buy 
holes in the ground and they wouldn’t listen to me. Mr. Speaker, buying holes in the ground is bad enough but when 
you take the money from the hole in the ground and give it to your competitor so that the competitor can take your 
money to the province of New Brunswick and dig another hole in the ground and compete with you, that is bad 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — If there was a great need for pious expansion, Mr. Speaker, I told them, “Don’t buy holes in the 
ground. Let’s dig our own.” But they didn’t dig one single additional hole, Mr. Speaker, they dug one. They dug a 
hole in the election of 1982, and they have jumped into it. On the contrary, Mr. Speaker, you have had record oil 
drilling at a time when the windfall of oil money is gone. Mr. Speaker, the facts are that industry land sales in oil in 
June, they were 15.2 million. This September they were 28.9 million. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is open for 
business and there is confidence in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is so much hypocrisy that I could go on for two days. Mr. Speaker, I understand that this debate is 
limited to seven days, and my learned friends and colleagues have many, many other instances that they can bring 
up. But, Mr. Speaker, the epitome of hypocrisy exists in this province, and I can give you an example. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure. I’m looking at a comment of the Maple Creek News, and Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure where 
Admiral, Saskatchewan is: 
 
AN HON. MEMBERS: — It’s in Shaunavon. 
 
MR. SCHMIDT: — In Shaunavon? I’ve recently received the information, Mr. Speaker, that Admiral, 
Saskatchewan is in the Shaunavon constituency. And, Mr. Speaker, I have before me a clipping dated July the 26th 
from the Maple Creek News, and it says, “NDP picnic. Come to Admiral, Mr. Speaker on Saturday, August 13th. 
Enter a team in the softball tournament.” Had they asked us, the Premier and I and several of us would have went. 
“Take part in the horseshoe pitching. Play some bingo. Ride real ponies. Cool off at the beer garden.” 



 
November 18, 1983 

 

29 
 

 
And the very next word is “children.” It says, “Cool off at the beer garden. Dot, dot, dot. Children will receive free 
ice cream.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time in July 1926 when this government had not yet made legal the advertising of beer and wine 
commercials, the NDP of Shaunavon constituency were publicly advertising, cool off at the beer garden. Cool off at 
the beer garden, bring your children, and we’ll give them free ice cream. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is true. There is a double standard in Saskatchewan. There is a Progressive Conservative standard 
of good government — peace, order and good government — and, Mr. Speaker, there is a New Democratic standard 
of hypocrisy. Mr. Speaker, for that reason I have laid out all of these facts before the members here, and it’s been a 
pleasure to speak with respect to the throne speech, and Mr. Speaker, I would like to make a motion that a humble 
address be presented to His Honour the Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 

To His Honour, the Honourable Frederick W. Johnson, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
May it please Your Honour, we, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the Legislative Assembly 
of the province of Saskatchewan in session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the gracious 
speech that Your Honour has pleased to address us at the opening of the presentation. 

 
Seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana, Mrs. Evelyn Bacon. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As we commence the third session of the twentieth legislature, 
I would like to start my remarks today by expressing my appreciation to Premier Devine for the honour he has 
extended to me and to the people of the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, some 19 months ago the people of Saskatchewan were offered the challenge of envisioning 
greatness and the sloth of mediocrity. On hearing the Speech from the Throne read in this chamber yesterday by His 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan there can be no doubt in anyone’s mind that the Saskatchewan 
people opted for greatness and turned their backs forever on the lost years of being second and third-rate. 
 
They called a halt to the steady decline of our great province — the moratorium for Saskatchewan prolonged by the 
NDP. And they decided that after years of lost opportunity our province should again stand alongside other 
provinces in this great nation of ours with a buoyant economic opportunity and fine social programs for our people. 
They decided that Saskatchewan deserved to have prosperity. They decided that Saskatchewan residents deserve to 
have good jobs. They decided that Saskatchewan residents deserve to have first-rate medical and social services. 
And they decided that for far too long the people of our province had suffered because of a foolhardy allegiance to 
the dogma, the hollowness of which has been proven time and time again. They voted for a government that would 
be a servant to the people and not a master. 
 
And they have not been disappointed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Progressive Conservative government of Premier 
Devine has been held coast to coast for innovating programs and challenges. Many of those programs and policies 
such as the home mortgage interest rebate plan have been copied by other governments in other provinces. 
 
When I listened to the throne speech I marvelled at the bold and progressive legislation it outlined for talks about 
policies and programs for people, not about policies for some ill-starred philosophy. It aims at people who are proud 
of what they are and who have the courage to face  



 
November 18, 1983 

a challenge. It tells people what they can be and what they can do. It does not say what they can’t be and what they 
can’t do. 
 
Under socialism Saskatchewan people were told time and time again that they couldn’t have this and they couldn’t 
have that. They were told that this wasn’t possible and that wasn’t possible. They were never told why this province 
had to second; they were never told why their dreams could not be fulfilled. They were simply told their hopes and 
aspirations were foolish. It was impossible to create jobs. It was impossible to spur economic development. It was 
impossible to build better hospitals, schools or old folks homes. 
 
When mortgage rates were sky-rocketing ahead to dizzy heights of 18 and 20 per cent the socialists said it was 
impossible to help people in danger of losing their homes. Our government believes the word impossible, when it 
concerns the future of our province and the lives of our residents, is an abomination. I has no place in our jargon. 
 
Our government rests its faith on the word “possible.” It was possible to create 14,000 new jobs within little more 
than a year. It was possible to enhance medical and social services in our province to match those available in other 
provinces. It was possible to prevent good citizens and solid families from losing their homes when mortgage rates 
were high. It was possible to create an environment in which some 1,200 new job and prosperity-creating businesses 
have been established in the past year. 
 
That’s the difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, between the world of the socialists and the world of the Progressive 
Conservatives. We believe things are possible; they believe they are not. If it came to a question of free enterprise 
and jobs or socialism and no jobs, the New Democrats would opt for socialism every time. That is why almost 1 
million Saskatchewan residents have been forced to leave the province over the past few decades. 
 
The New Democrat and CCF governments refused to allow jobs to be created for the province’s residents. The 
socialists didn’t want the jobs. We do. And our policies have provided them. At a time when Canada has been in a 
severe recession, our economic performance has been the brightest of the nation. More jobs, lower inflation rates, 
lower gasoline prices, secure homes, new business opportunities, a new bouncy confidence and pride among the 
people. 
 
A rapidly awakening interest among people in other provinces are looking to Saskatchewan. and this and more has 
been accomplished in the past 19 months. The socialists say nothing can be done about our problems. We say 
everything can be done. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — The Conference Board of Canada mentioned earlier this day, a very prestigious organization, 
recently said that economic growth in Saskatchewan will again in 1983-84 exceed the national growth rate. When 
the members of the opposition were in power, the Conference Board of Canada was indeed a very prestigious 
organization. And I would like to stress that word again, as used by the conference board. The sudden change in 
economic direction in our first year of the government was no fluke. And they say we’re going to do it again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has often seemed to me that economic and political freedom go hand in hand. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — Nations or provinces which have the greatest economic freedom have the greatest political 
freedom. If you look around the world, you will see this to be true. 
 
In Soviet Russia there is no political freedom and there is no economic freedom. In the United  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

31 
 

States, the nation with perhaps the greatest amount of economic freedom, you will also find the greatest amount of 
political freedom. This is no unconnected coincidence. Politicians who are scared, hate, and fear freedom. They feel, 
if people have freedom, they will plan and direct their own lives. Prosperity gives people the means to plan and 
direct their own lives. But socialist governments want to direct the people’s lives for them. Socialist governments 
want to control people. They don’t have the faith that people can look after themselves. So they can’t allow them to 
have economic freedom. They have to chain people to government institutions. 
 
If people have well-paying, productive jobs in the private sector, then they are free of the reins and chains of 
government control and manipulation. So socialist administration tries to keep free enterprise from creating new jobs 
and eroding its bureaucratic base. In the meantime, the socialist government uses the taxpayer’s money to create 
non-productive and non-essential jobs within government. Through these jobs, it uses the taxpayer’s money to buy 
the chains which bind them. 
 
Socialists create vicious circles. And we and the Saskatchewan people know all about these vicious circles and the 
lost opportunities in our province. 
 
I see some of the members opposite have returned with their mouths open. The people of Saskatchewan have seen 
through your sham of socialism. They are tired of being told they can’t have jobs, they can’t have homes and they 
can’t have farms. 
 
The mention of farms brings me to another point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the major accomplishment of our 
government. You may recall that the former New Democratic administration established a land bank. That bank was 
supposed to preserve the family farm and enable children of farmers to eventually purchase the family farm initially 
sold to the land bank. Mr. Speaker, through the land bank the socialist Saskatchewan government, the NDP, was 
gobbling up all the land in the province. No other government in the free world has gone on such a spree to 
collectivisation of farmland. 
 
It brought me to mind of the plight of many of our good and decent Ukrainian residents who were the victims of the 
worst excess of Stalinism. But the NDP administration repeatedly said that the land bank was one of its finest 
achievements. Do you know, Mr. Speaker, do you know how many tenants were eventually able to own their own 
farm under the land bank scheme? I’ll tell you. In the ten entire years of land bank operations, just 151 of the 
province’s finest sons and daughters were allowed to own the land they farmed. The land bank dashed the cherished 
dreams of many of our young people. Yet when this government decided to abolish the abomination, the NDP went 
into a hue and cry and organized demonstration after demonstration. 
 
They also tried to throttle the emergence of the farm purchase program that we intended to take the place of the 
notorious land bank, but your campaign didn’t work — Saskatchewan people weren’t having it. The land bank went 
to a well-deserved death, and the farm purchase program was born. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MRS. BACON: — Now let’s briefly compare the success ratio of the land bank with the farm purchase program. As 
I mentioned, in 10 long years the land bank turned only 151 tenants into owners — only 151 serfs of your state were 
given farm ownership and economic freedom in an entire decade. In less than one year — one year — the farm 
purchase program has enabled almost 1,800 young, starting-out farmers to buy their own farms. That’s more than 
151 every month. 
 
These energetic, enthusiastic, dedicated, and determined young farmers, the farm families, are having their 
mortgages rebated down to 8 per cent under this innovative program. The New  



 
November 18, 1983 

Democrats said it couldn’t be done. They used their favourite word, “impossible.” We used our favourite words, 
“yes” and “it is possible,” and we brought economic freedom for these young farmers. 
 
The members opposite may mumble and murmur amongst themselves, but I doubt if they have the courage to stand 
up and say they would like to scrap the farm purchase program. The members opposite haven’t the courage to tell 
those young farmers they don’t deserve to have 8 per cent mortgages. 
 
But let us not be fooled, Mr. Speaker. The New Democrats believe in neither economic nor political freedom. They 
don’t trust the people with either. They don’t care when mortgage rates were 20 per cent, and the good and decent 
families were losing their homes and farmers were losing their farms. In fact, I suspect they welcome such situations, 
for the socialists abhor private property. One has only to look at the position of our former premier at the 
constitutional conference in Ottawa. They want to see people in state-owned houses, working on state-owned farms. 
That way they have more control over them. They want to see our residents chained and shackled to the state. I have 
read speeches from the throne given under the previous administration, Mr. Speaker. They are litanies of lost hope; 
they are a concordance of defeatism; they are messages of despair. There are no dreams in these epistles, Mr. 
Speaker. There are no words of trust placed between the government and the people, and there are no bonds of good 
will. 
 
I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, one could weep at the abuse our people suffered under members opposite. No wonder they 
are down to eight; no wonder they are afraid to walk through the halls with their heads high. I noticed during the 
address by the hon. colleague from Melville that the Leader of the Opposition could not once face him, but kept his 
back to him the whole time with his face toward the Speaker. 
 
And it is no wonder, Mr. Speaker, that you hurl half-truths at our government. It is no wonder that you must buy 
newspaper advertising that fails to pass the truth-in-advertising test. They are ashamed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
are ashamed because they know the people of Saskatchewan have seen through their shoddy scam. They are scared 
because they know once the people of Saskatchewan have been given their economic and political freedom, the 
people are going to walk as quietly back to socialism as an innocent man would walk into incarceration without a 
fight. So they try and tell us the big lie. Well, we won’t fall for it anymore. 
 
Our home-owners who are now secure in their homes, thanks to our Mortgage Interest Reduction Plan, won’t fall for 
the big lies of New Democrats. Our farmers who now own their own farms instead of renting them from the 
government, won’t fall for the big lies of the New Democrats. The drivers on the roads, who pay no provincial 
gasoline tax, won’t fall for the lies of New Democrats. Thousands and thousands of people, who are now employed 
in newly created jobs, won’t fall for the lies of the New Democrats. The province’s children, who have better health 
services and educational facilities, will not fall to the trap of your lies. Women in our province, who have seen their 
talents and abilities truly recognized, won’t fall for the lies of the New Democrats. Young aspiring businessmen, 
who were told by the previous administration not to try and create new jobs or companies, will not fall for the lies of 
New Democrats. 
 
In truth, Mr. Speaker, no one is going to fall for the big lies of the New Democrats. The New Democrats should 
know about double standards — they worked at them for years and years and years. 
 
The New Democrats would like to think that Saskatchewan people are simply out of parole from their socialist, 
economic, and political prison. But the Saskatchewan people are not out of parole. Their unjust sentences have been 
commuted by this government and everything in the throne speech and the previous two throne speeches attest to 
that. The Saskatchewan people value their new-found political and economic freedom. They value their new jobs 
and their  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

33 
 

prosperity. They love to see those oil rigs moving into the province and creating new jobs and new businesses. 
 
Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the curtain has come down on a shoddy play that never should have been staged in this 
province — a play with the plot of hypocrisy. And it’s a good job the curtain came down before the final act. It’s a 
good job the curtain came down before the NDP government owed every single acre of farm land in this province. 
And it’s a good job the curtain came down before the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan was the highest in the 
nation. And it’s a good job the curtain came down before every single company in this province was forced to move 
out and leave us an economic vacuum. The curtain has come down on the NDP play of sanctimony forever, and the 
curtain has gone up on a very different scenario. It has gone up on a scenario in which optimism has the major role 
and pessimism has been evicted. It has gone up on a province whose people are proud and whose abilities have been 
recognized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, actions speak louder than words: thousands of new jobs, hundreds of new farms, all those new 
companies, all those oil rigs bringing wealth to the province, all those young people being given new opportunities, 
all the sick people being given better medical facilities and treatment, all those senior citizens being provided with 
better service that they deserve. Mr. Speaker, the days of doom and gloom are over. The days when the words “no” 
and “can’t” and “impossible” reigned over this province are over. The days when the graph on statistics charts 
always snaked down instead of steadily progressing upwards are over. The NDP weatherman always called for grey 
skies and we have made him reluctant. We now have a weatherman and forecaster who predicts sunny days and a 
bright future. I’ve no doubt the New Democrats would like to fire our weather forecaster and reinstate their own 
stand-by. Well, I don’t think the people will allow him to do it, 
 
When I walk through the streets of Saskatoon or Regina, visit North Battleford or Prince Albert, when I talk to the 
young people and the senior citizens, I see a confidence radiating from them. The communities are being spruced up. 
There’s a bounce in people’s walk. There’s an eagerness out there and there’s an atmosphere that not only do we 
deserve something better but we’re already getting it. The people’s trust in this government has been validated, Mr. 
Speaker. It was validated in the first throne speech. it was validated in the second throne speech. It has been 
validated in this throne speech and it will be validated in many, many throne speeches to come. 
 
We trust the people of Saskatchewan. We want to neither run nor to ruin their lives. We want to give them the 
opportunity and the framework to create something positive for themselves. We want them to have a heritage to 
leave to their children and to their grandchildren. We think we owe it to the determined and dedicated pioneers who 
laid a solid foundation for us so many years ago. It is cognizant of us to build up that foundation into something even 
more solid for the generations to come. I believe the many measures contained in the speech read here yesterday 
afternoon will help to build that foundation. 
 
It has been an honour for me at this time to second the Speech from the Throne and I want to thank you for hearing 
me out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Deputy Speaker, I would like to add some comments to the debate which I’m sure 
will be a long and lively one. 
 
This was the first throne speech read by His Honour the Lieutenant Governor, Frederick W. Johnson. And on the 
occasion of the first throne speech read by His Honour I would like to make a comment or two about the Lieutenant 
Governor. I want to congratulate him on his appointment as the Queen’s representative in our province. This is 
perhaps an appropriate time to say a few words about the role of the Lieutenant Governor as an institution in our 
government and in our lives. And I’m going to take a moment or two of the House’s time to offer some  



 
November 18, 1983 

thoughts on that. 
 
The creation of institutions by which free men and women govern themselves is one of the greatest achievements of 
human history. We sometimes are not fully aware of that, just what has been done, because it is by no means a 
natural phenomenon if one can judge by history. 
 
Parliamentary democracy is one of the ways that men have found to govern themselves. And it’s perhaps as good a 
way as exists. A key part of that system of parliamentary democracy is the role of the monarch (in our case the 
Lieutenant Governor), who plays an important role as a referee in cases where that may be required; as a symbol to 
all our citizens of our system of government, of our heritage; a symbol that transcends any political party or any 
political leader, and is an embodiment of all those things which bind us together, regardless of partisan political 
loyalties. 
 
Now political leaders of premiers and prime ministers are controversial figures, warmly appreciated by some, less 
cordially embraced by others. Some people fully support our Prime Minister. People can be found who do not. Some 
people support our Premier. Again, people can be found who do not — and admittedly not enough yet, but some can 
be found and more are being found every day. I even found that to be the case when I occupied the role of premier, 
unlikely as that may seem. 
 
Midst this turmoil, the office of Lieutenant Governor represents continuity, order, and the stability of our system. 
The Lieutenant Governor represents the Queen as the head of state in Canada, and the head of the Commonwealth 
. . . the Commonwealth, that interesting and unique body of self-governing states around the world, some of whom 
are islands of political liberty in a sea of tyranny. We, in our way, give them support through our membership in the 
Commonwealth and our support of the common unifying symbol, the monarchy. 
 
The Lieutenant Governor represents the Crown in Canada, and I know that there will be no stronger voice for 
Canadian unity in Saskatchewan than Lieutenant Governor Johnson. Some of us had an opportunity to hear him 
speak perhaps 16 or 18 months ago, on the occasion of the celebration of the patriation of the Canadian constitution, 
and he spoke with power and passion of his belief in Canada. So I have no doubt that he will be a strong advocate of 
Canadian unity. 
 
I think it’s an obligation of all of us to shoulder our responsibilities as citizens and to make our full contribution to 
preserving and strengthening the system of government which offers us freedoms not even dreamed of by most 
people in the world. You know, this freedom is a blessing which is not infinitely bestowed by someone from outside, 
but is something which must be defended by each succeeding generation. The Crown and our heritage of free 
institutions will be well served by our new Lieutenant Governor, and we wish His Honour and Mrs. Johnson a term 
of enjoyable and fruitful service. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So I congratulate His Honour on his appointment, and I congratulate him on the 
delivery of the speech. I congratulate the mover and the seconder. They did well with the material at hand, and I ask 
any member to recall what they said, and try to recall what either of them said about the Speech from the Throne — 
just anything that they said about what was contained in the Speech from the Throne. There was almost a total 
absence of any concentration on the Speech from the Throne, and that was a very wise decision on the part of the 
member for Melville and on the part of the member for Saskatoon Nutana, because any speech based upon the 
contents of the Speech from the Throne was bound to be a disastrous failure. A speech based upon newspaper 
clippings, or upon perceptions of political philosophy might well have some credibility. Any based upon that 
particular Speech from the Throne was bound to be ignored by the public. 
 
They made that wise decision because they had already given their speeches on that Speech  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

35 
 

from the Throne. I want to quote a few things for you. 
 
“Measures will be introduced to streamline the operations of the corporations and increase their effectiveness.” 
 
“The regulatory reform at will be presented for your consideration.” 
 
“A planning and development act will be introduced.” 
 
“The urban municipality act will be introduced late in 1983.” 
 
“My government intends to introduce measures to bring all water-related legislation and services under one body.” 
 
“An act respecting the transportation of dangerous goods will be placed before the Assembly.” 
 
“Legislation to establish a licensing authority for cable services will be placed before the Assembly.” 
 
Do you think I reading from the Speech from the Throne? If you did, you were wrong. I was reading these quotes 
from the Speech from the Throne last March. Every one of those was in the Speech from the Throne last March. 
What we have been offered is a rehash, a warmed-over rehash of what was offered last March. There is hardly a 
single idea in the speech that has not been trotted out at least once before, and sometimes several times. Sometimes 
several times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to believe that any government could run out of stead and out of ideas in less than two years in 
office, but this government has done so. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — We were presented with a second draft of last March’s speech, and I am afraid that 
much of this session will consist of dealing with the leftovers of the last session. For the government, that should be 
a source of embarrassment, not embellishment over 35 or 40 minutes which we heard yesterday. But nonetheless, 
devoid of ideas, they put together their old speech, added a goodly number of words of embellishment, but not of 
enlightenment, and offered it as a new throne speech. 
 
Let me just remind you, again, what is in this speech. A regulatory reform act, again. Changes to the urban 
municipalities act, again. The government is working on a high-tech philosophy. I invite all members to look at the 
speech last March, look carefully at the announcement that there was going to be, very soon thereafter, an 
announcement of a high-tech development strategy. Have you heard that announcement. I haven’t. We have it 
announced yet again, but this in the form of a department. In lieu of any policy, they’re offering us a department. 
 
Changes to The Planning and Development Act, again. The member for Saskatoon-Sutherland waxed eloquent last 
session about The Planning and Development Act. It is now going to be introduced in this session, nothing having 
been done notwithstanding the eloquence at the last session. 
 
Changes in cable TV licensing. Another leftover. The news that the government is going to create a new crown 
corporation to deal with water-related issues. Yet again. “Play it again, Sam, play it again” is what should be said 
about this throne speech, because almost everything that’s in it has been trotted out at least once in this legislature, 
sometimes more. 
 
And all of these, Mr. Speaker, there would perhaps be nothing worse with saying, “We had this idea last time, and 
we didn’t do anything about it, and we’re going to offer it again, this time.” But  



 
November 18, 1983 

this is not what they said. They trotted them all out as new initiatives — bright, shiny, new initiatives. And while the 
throne speech was cluttered with these leftovers of the last session, it was silent on the two key problems facing 
Saskatchewan today. And those to problems are unquestionably unemployment and the rising cost of living, 
inflation. There is no blueprint, not even the glimmer of a blueprint, of how to deal with these two problems 
contained in the throne speech. Indeed the government paid lip service to the problems, no doubt because their 
Toronto pollster, who is a very good pollster, has pointed out that the public are talking about these. So the 
government also talks about them, but they offered nothing by way of constructive policies to deal with either the 
problem of unemployment or the problem of the rising cost of living, or inflation. 
 
The throne speech says, “Job creation will continue to be a top priority.” Job creation will continue to be a top 
priority — that should be ominous enough. The should be ominous enough, because when this government wishes 
to talk about something, and do nothing, it declares it to be a top priority. Far from meaning quick action when 
something is announced as a priority, it generally means study, review, delay, inaction. 
 
Now take the rehabilitation centre — the rehabilitation centre, the plans for which were drawn when this 
government took office. It has been announced as a top priority, but not a muscle has been moved in 18 months, not 
a muscle. It has just been announced as a top priority. 
 
School bus safety, according to a recent news release, is a top priority of the Minister of Highways. That means that 
he is not going to do anything about it, except perhaps put up a new sign: he’s very good at putting up new signs, but 
when it comes to doing anything about school bus safety he is not going to take action. We have seen two studies on 
school bus safety. The record, by the way, of school bus safety is worse under this government than in any 
comparable 19 months in the history of the province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — But what about job creation? What about job creation? The government has claimed 
that since it took office 18 or 19 months ago, job creation has been a top priority. And we have one other response to 
these responses when something is announced it’s a top priority. We have had studies, delay, inaction, and we have 
added to that applause, but what we do not have is action. What we do not have is action. 
 
The highest unemployment in this province since StatsCan began keeping records are the facts. No amount of 
applause will clap away those facts: the highest unemployment since StatsCan has begun keeping records. 
 
We’ve not only done poorly compared with the past, but we’re also doing poorly now compared with other 
provinces. In what province did unemployment go down in the last year and in what provinces did they go up in the 
last year? Unemployment went up last year in two provinces of Canada and two only: Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
Every other province did better. We did worse. 
 
On a national average unemployment went down 11 per cent last year. In Saskatchewan it went up 11 per cent. 
 
Canada Employment Centres across this province have now got 60,000 people registered as looking for jobs, and 
that’s nearly the combined populations of Moose Jaw and Prince Albert. Just think of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, every 
man, woman, and child in Moose Jaw and Prince Albert, that is he number of people who are registered as looking 
for jobs at Canada Employment Centres across this province. 
 
What is being done about it? The government opposite is preening itself, congratulating itself  



 
November 18, 1983 

 

37 
 

on having created jobs, notwithstanding the fact that 60,000 people do not have jobs which they are seeking. Some 
priority, Mr. Speaker, some priority. 
 
The government talks about the need for long-term job creation but what have we had, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We 
have had, when the government has acted, action to produce short-term jobs, make-work projects, pruning trees and 
painting park benches. As desirable as that may be, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a very large number of people in this 
province don’t want a job at minimum wage for eight weeks painting park benches. They want a solid job building a 
hospital or building a road which they know their fellow citizens need, and which this government is not now acting 
to do. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are two very, very different approaches to unemployment 
and employment by members opposite and by our parties. It is their belief that the public wants short-term jobs 
painting park benches. It is our belief that the public wants to see the Regina General Hospital and the Pasqua 
Hospital completed, and they want to see people working at that. They want to see that project which has been going 
on for five years completed and not frozen, and I’m surprised that my fellow members from Regina would suggest 
that the people of Regina would sooner see park benches painted than having the two hospitals regenerated. That’s 
their position. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — That’s the position of members opposite . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Never — 
and I speak now to the members for Saskatoon — never having waiting lists been longer in Saskatoon hospitals. 
Never in the history of this province have they been longer, and yet no action has been taken either to build hospitals 
there or to build level 4 nursing homes which would clear out some of the people from Saskatoon hospitals. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — We know, Mr. Speaker, that this is a high priority of the government opposite, and 
that means that they’ve issued a press release. They’ve issued a press release saying they’re going to build some 
level 4 beds, the exact project which they froze 18 months ago, exactly the same number of beds. Well, I’m glad of 
that. I’m glad they now realize that their decision to freeze that project was a disastrous error. But if they had made 
their decision to unfreeze six months ago we could see some jobs in Saskatoon this winter, some relief from the 
overcrowding in Saskatoon hospitals, and some care for senior citizens. All that has been delayed by members 
opposite. 
 
What about the second issue, the second issue I mentioned a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, the cost of living or 
inflation? Again the throne speech expresses concern, but again it fails to offer any concrete solutions. The 
government has discovered that interest rates are too high. But what are they proposing to do about it? What about 
this promise of nine and five-eights per cent loans for Saskatchewan small business? What happened to that one? 
What happened to that one now 19 months into the term of this government. That promise has been forgotten. 
 
There was an acknowledgement — and I know the Minister of Finance will recognize this as a fact — that interest 
rates in terms of the spread between the interest rate and the rate of inflation are at almost historic highs, perhaps 
historic highs. The real rate of interest is at 5 or 6 per cent, the difference between inflation and the rate of interest. 
 
There’s a suggestion that the banks are getting too much out of all this, which indeed is true. But do we get the 
slightest indication that the government opposite is going to do anything about it? do we get the slightest 
indication, the slightest indication, that they are going to speak to  



 
November 18, 1983 

their friends, the bankers, the people who financed their party, and ask those bankers to ease up a bit, to just 
charge 3 per cent over the rate of inflation instead of 5 or 6? The banks have operated with 2 and 3 per cent for 
decades. Now they want 5 and 6 per cent, and they’re getting it, and members opposite are doing nothing, even 
though their connections with the banks are close, and well known to be close. 
 
Is there anything in the throne speech about relief from interest rates? Well, there is one thing there that I don’t think 
members opposite will be speaking of very much. They are promising to make it easier for the banks to foreclose 
mortgages. They are promising to, as they say, streamline, streamline the foreclosure proceedings. Everybody in 
Saskatchewan knows what that means. It makes it easier — easier for banks and easier for mortgage companies to 
foreclose mortgages. 
 
Was there, Mr. Speaker, anything in that speech to offer any support for farmers who are facing a cost-price 
squeeze? There was none. None of these things were in the throne speech. And also absent was a promise made to 
farmers in the last throne speech. The member for Souris-Cannington will remember that. At that time he said that 
the government would introduce subsidies to help Saskatchewan farmers maintain their competitive edge if the 
Crow rate was abolished. It’s right there in the speech of last March and I invite all hon. members to read it. 
 
Well, the Crow rate has been done in, thanks to the tepid opposition mounted by the government opposite; thanks to 
the tepid opposition acknowledged by the press when the member for Souris-Cannington is characterized in a 
cartoon as giving his policy in opposition to the Crow rate and the press right say, “Zero.” Nothing. He doesn’t know 
what his position is on the Crow. And for month after month after month, when farmers could have been mobilised, 
he was trying to figure out whether the Crow benefits should be paid to the railways or the farmers when, in fact, if 
the Crow rate was going to be maintained, there would be no Crow benefit. His whole activity presupposed that the 
Crow was dead, and he was actively promoting the death of the Crow until he made his switch around six months 
ago. 
 
Be that as it may, Mr. Speaker, we have the promise made in the throne speech last March that this government 
would introduce measures to keep our farmers in a competitive position. I ask where those measures are in this 
throne speech, where those measures are, and, Mr. Speaker, they’re not there. They are simply not there. 
 
Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are these issues not addressed in this throne speech? Why doesn’t the government, which 
calls itself a people’s government or a populous government, deal with the needs and concerns of ordinary 
Saskatchewan people? Well, I think the reason is simple, Mr. Speaker. I say that the reason is clear because it is 
becoming increasingly clear that the government is not a people ‘s government. On the contrary, it is a big business 
government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I hear a member opposite saying it’s a small-business government, and I ask hon. 
members who got the big breaks? Was it the large oil companies or was it all those small businesses who had been 
promised nine and five-eights per cent money and who haven’t seen one penny of that nine and five-eights per cent 
money? 
 
I ask hon. members why, if you have on your own figures 40 million, and I say $100 million for the major oil 
companies, why are you not providing some little kernel or crumb for small-business people who are not getting one 
cent of the nine and five-eights money you promised them? 
 
Members are suggesting that I should recall the multiplier effect: the theory that when the big oil companies get a 
whole lot of money all of us are going to share that, the so-called trickle-down theory. John Kenneth Gailbraith calls 
it the horse-and-sparrow theory and I think you know why. 
 



 
November 18, 1983 

 

39 
 

He takes the view that the people who espouse that theory believe that if you feed the horse enough oats, there’s 
going to be left something behind for the sparrow. I rather think that that is not what the people of Saskatchewan are 
looking for. 
 
You people should go about and talk to some small businessmen and find out which of them are prospering, which 
of them have an operating statement which was better than the one two or three years ago. 
 
I have been visiting a good number of small businessmen, and I have found them almost universally saying that 
they’re having a tough patch this year. They’re having a tough patch. If anyone is suggesting the major oil companies 
profits are increased by 21 per cent . . . That’s a fact. Now I ask you how many business people you can find whose 
profits are up in the third quarter of ‘83 by 21 per cent? Not the ones I’m talking to. They’re still talking that there is 
problems. I met some at Prince Albert recently, and I’ve been around to many other places, and they’re saying, 
“Small business is in trouble.” 
 
I only need to walk up and down the main streets of our cities to see a good number of shops which are not 
occupied. We just need to look at the bankruptcy figures. As is well know, the bankruptcy figures across Canada are 
down but in Saskatchewan they’re up in 1983 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s true. Whoops! With respect to 
bankruptcies so far, in January to October the total number of Saskatchewan business and consumer bankruptcies is 
761, a 20 per cent increase over the number for the same period last year. So far in ‘83 there have been 39 
bankruptcies, and that’s about double the 1982 rate, so that very, very clearly the number of bankruptcies is going up 
in Saskatchewan for every category, and across Canada the bankruptcies are going down. I hope members opposite 
don’t deny that. I hope they don’t deny it because those are hard facts. The bankruptcy rate across Canada is going 
down, but it’s going up for businesses; it’s going up for farmers, and it’s going up for consumers in Saskatchewan. 
 
What are we offered in this throne speech, Mr. Speaker? There are tax cuts to the oil companies, and they’re very 
happy to talk about that. There are reduced protection for working people and the environment, and the buzz words 
there are deregulation. There are changes to make it easier for the banks to foreclose. There are cuts in the assistance 
for the needy. It’s pretty clear that this is not a legislative plan designed for ordinary people, for ordinary teachers, or 
nurses, or small business men. It’s a legislative plan which has priority for large business. 
 
Members opposite are very anxious to get into this debate and I’m delighted, because I know that I’m going to hear 
some very spirited speeches by members opposite when they enter the debate. And I hope they will focus on some of 
the issues which I’m raising, because in my judgement this is not a throne speech for ordinary people. It’s a throne 
speech which will be attractive to big business, but not to ordinary teachers or nurses. If you were a teacher or a 
nurse or a small farmer, what comfort would you take from that speech? What line would you read and say, “Well, 
there is something for me; there is something for me” . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I think not. 
 
This big business bias runs throughout this government’s policies. The double standards in public policy which our 
caucus has been talking about all summer are so very, very obvious in this speech, the double standard by which a 
government says that it can afford $100 million in tax cuts to the oil companies, but that it can’t afford nine and 
five-eighths loans to small business men. 
 
AN HON. MEMBERS: — There was no taxes coming in the first place. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Members opposite are busy saying that there are no oil taxes coming in when they 
took office. I am delighted to hear that because it obviously means that our revenue from resources is going to be 
higher this year than last year, and accordingly, the member for Kindersley, the Minister of Finance, will not be 
proposing a budget deficit. I am glad  



 
November 18, 1983 

to hear that because it’s high time we had some responsible finance in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A word or two just before I take my seat, Mr. Speaker, on some of the comments 
made by the two previous speakers, the mover and the seconder. The mover indicated that in his judgement the 
reduction in the civil service had been fair and reasonable, that the lay-off of the 140 or 150 highway maintenance 
people was fair and reasonable, the replacement of their jobs with contractors from Alberta, who are operating in and 
about Saskatoon, is fair and reasonable. When I see those trucks with the Alberta plates during the seal coating on 
Saskatchewan highways which was done by these 150 employees who were laid off. I ask myself whether that’s fair 
and reasonable. You may think that’s fair and reasonable; I don’t. I believe our people ought to have the first 
opportunity to repair our highways and not trucks with Alberta plates, driven by Alberta drivers. 
 
I note also the reference in the throne speech to user fees. Did you note that one, Mr. Speaker? This government 
opposes hospital user fees, but not medical user fees. Nobody would possible put that word hospital in front of there 
unless they meant to distinguish between hospital and doctor user fees. Mr. Speaker, can you think of any reason 
why anyone would talk about hospital user fees other than medicare user fees, or the term which is being universally 
used across Canada in the debate, user fees both for medical and hospital? This government very carefully selected 
hospital user fees because they want to commit themselves to no user fees for hospitals, and they want to leave open 
the prospect of applying user fees for medicare. 
 
The member for Melville scorned holes in the ground. I don’t know how he can exist in the same caucus with the 
member for Saskatoon Sutherland, the minister of mineral resources, who was absolutely ecstatic about the extra 
number of holes in the ground. Holes in the ground are good things. Holes in the ground produce wealth, and I am 
happy that the member for Sutherland wants holes in the ground and I’m disappointed that the member for Melville 
doesn’t want holes in the ground because . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I say in all seriousness, Mr. Speaker, that 
holes in the ground, whether they be oil or potash, have produced a great deal of the wealth which this province has 
enjoyed, and will continue to produce a great deal of the wealth that this province has enjoyed. I know the Minister 
of Finance acknowledges this, and I know he acknowledged it in his last budget, because he took $50 million from 
those potash holes in the ground to use to pay for services. And I think that’s good. 
 
It is a matter for congratulations, Mr. Speaker, that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan was able to provide $50 
million to pay for some of the programs which we all want. I think that’s good, and I’m very disappointed that the 
member for Melville thinks that the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan and its $50 million should be scorned, and 
that that’s the last $50 million we’re going to get from that corporation. It is a solid investment. The member from 
Melville may think it’s a bad investment, but I know he has no support from the member for Kindersley, the 
Minister of Finance, who has had his hand in that little pot of money, and is going to take some money out. I believe 
that to be sound, and I am sorry that the member from Melville is so unaware of the financing of this province that 
he scorns this 50 million and the previous 50 million and the previous 50 million before that, that have come from 
the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are discussing the throne speech. I want to point out again that it does not contain anything 
to deal with inflation or unemployment and any government that says it’s for the people of Saskatchewan, that 
claims it’s a people’s government and offers a throne speech which offers nothing by way of support and assistance 
for the 60,000 looking for jobs and the many others, many of them farmers, who are concerned about the cost of 
living and the cost of farm inputs, is giving a Speech from the Throne which is not addressing the real problems. But 
that was done . . . The Government of Saskatchewan has declared itself to be a big business government, because it 
had lots of things in there which were of interest to big business. And we heard many of them started again today. 



 
November 18, 1983 

 

41 
 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is obviously a great deal more I want to say about the speech. I will relieve the House of 
the further enjoyment of listening to me this morning and accordingly I will beg leave to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:28 p.m. 


