






















































Hansard: February 28, 1983


(2140) 2141 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 28, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today to introduce to the 
Assembly Mr. Sabian, who is the Deputy High Commissioner from India stationed in Ottawa. Mr. 
Sabian is seated in the front row of the Speaker’s gallery. I met with him for a few brief moments before 
question period, and I understand he will be meeting with other ministers sometime this afternoon. 
 
I would ask members on both sides of the Assembly to join with me in wishing Mr. Sabian a pleasant 
stay and a welcome to Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. KLEIN: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you, and through you to this Assembly, 
approximately 75 young people most of whom are from the constituency of Regina North. They are 
filling up the Speaker’s gallery, almost, this afternoon. They are grade 12 students from O’Neill High 
School. They are accompanied here today by their teachers, Mr. Berezny, Mr. Ripplinger, Mr. Hudson 
and Mr. Allan. 
 
Hopefully they will find their visit to the legislature here informational and educational. I look forward 
to meeting with them a little bit later to determine how they enjoyed today’s question period. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Proposed Sask Tel Rate Increase 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Premier, in light of today’s news release regarding Sask Tel’s application for a 
19 per cent rate increase in general telephone services, could the Premier tell this House today if that 
increase is going to be the general policy of the government, that it is going to say that the corporations 
should now be making a profit rather than providing a service at cost, as the government across and the 
members opposite have been saying in the past? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe we have always said that a public utility like 
Sask Power or Sask Tel should be run as efficiently and as effectively as 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2142 

possible to provide the service at break-even. Now you do the best you can to break even in your given 
forecast period, from a little bit of a deficit to a little bit of a surplus. But the intention is to run it as 
smooth as possible to get the job done, to provide the service to the public, and not accumulate large 
debts or deficits in the public utility, because the public has come back many times and said they want 
that to be run squarely and fairly as a normal, natural monopoly of public utilities. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary to the Premier. Less than 12 months ago, when you became the 
government, surely were you were aware that there would be required some increase in the rates. 
However, you decided at that time to freeze the rates. Are you saying now that you have made a 
mistake, and that the rates cannot be frozen and you require a 19 per cent increase today? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — What we said, Mr. Speaker, is that we would do two things. Number one, we 
would freeze the rates until we could set up a public utilities review commission, so that the public could 
be involved, and in justifying those rate increases. Number two, we said we’d open the books and see 
what was going on inside, because many people across the province of Saskatchewan wanted to know 
what was going on inside. So as a result of that, there are commissions and reports and reorganization 
associated with departments and crowns because we have opened the books and sadly to say, the 
cupboard was bare. So we are doing two things, allowing the public to be involved in this decision-
making by having a public utilities review commission, and so that we wouldn’t do anything prior to the 
operation of that organization, we said we’d freeze the rates and until PURC could operate. And that’s 
exactly what we’re doing. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Premier, in light of the answers that you are giving, are you not prepared at this 
time to admit to the hypocrisy of that government opposite in saying that they require 19 per cent now, 
when less than a year ago they promised no increase whatsoever? Are you not prepared to admit that? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I said we would freeze the rates until we set up a public utilities 
review commission and they could decide whether the rate increases were justified. And that’s the 
process that they endorsed and they endorsed it again on Monday. And as a result of that, we are going 
to let the public utilities review commission review these, study the stats and the information to make 
sure that it is justified, and then the people will know. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Premier, are you saying then that you agree that a 19 per cent increase is 
required? Because if you didn’t you have the last say. You said so a few days ago. You have the last say 
in what the rate increase is going to be. Do you really feel, at this point then, that 19 per cent is 
justifiable? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I said the last time I spoke about this that cabinet didn’t tell the 
crown corporations what to apply for. That’s a crown decision. The minister may be involved in those 
decisions in looking at and providing the guidelines and so forth, but the crown corporation decides on 
the application and brings it to the public utilities review commission. Now that’s exactly what’s going 
on. We can always say it’s cabinet, if I understand the legislation right, and I believe that I have it here. 
We can say, “Would you please go back and review that decision? We think it’s too high. It should be 
lower. But the public utilities review commission, by law as I understand it, can’t make the increases 
any larger than the application, and number two, we could ask 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2143 

them. We said that we have the final say. We could ask them, “Could you go back and review this 
because it may be too high”? But it’s their decision and they will decide. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Premier, supplementary. In that answer that you just gave me, you are saying 
that cabinet does have the right to tell them to go back to it. It’s unfortunate that the minister of Sask Tel 
is not here today, but in essence he is the one then who had a say as chairman of the board, who had a 
say in whether that rate increase would even go forward to PURC. In essence what he was saying then 
was that he agreed that a 19 per cent increase was required, and he approved of it, and allowed it to go 
forward to PURC as chairman of the board on behalf of the cabinet. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the officials in any public utility who put together their 
information, because they are good professionals in the province of Saskatchewan bring together the 
information knowing that it will be made public to the public utilities review commission so that it can 
be reviewed. If the public utilities review commission decides that it isn’t justified, they won’t grant it. 
Under the previous system, the cabinet minister was the person, and cabinet, who decided. But the 
general public across Saskatchewan said, “No. We want to get in on this. We would like to be in the 
process of deciding, particularly when it gets closer or nearer elections as it has been for years and years 
and years, when the ministers could do some funny things with rates.” Now the public utilities review 
commission, at arm’s length from the cabinet, can make those decisions. They have endorsed that 
position and we are going to let it operate. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier. The Premier has, at least 
in my judgment, stated and stated clearly that it is the policy of Sask Telecommunications, the board of 
directors of Sask Telecommunications, headed by your minister, your Attorney General, to ask for a 19 
per cent rate increase in Sask Tel rates. My question to the Premier is this: do you support that policy 
position of your minister? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, what I support is that the application goes to a public utilities 
review commission — whether it’s 6.7 per cent out of SGI, or whether it’s 17 per cent coming out of 
Sask Tel, or wherever it may — that it goes to the public utilities review commission and they look at it 
and decide if it’s justified. That’s what I support — that mechanism. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, as the Premier will know, obviously the public utilities 
review commission cannot deal with an application which is not made, and the application has been 
made by your minister. What I am asking you is: do you agree and support the policy contained in the 
application made by your minister, a request for a 19 per cent rate increase? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I support the crown corporation gathering its information and making 
applications to PURC for the final decision. I support that mechanism. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Do you then believe that your minister 
should exercise any judgment over what applications are made to PURC, or do you assume that that is a 
matter only for the officials? 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2144 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, the public utilities review commission will make its decision, 
and obviously that decision will be based on its information and justification. Then, at that time, we can 
send it back if we think that it is unfair. They may even bring it in somewhat less. By law they can’t 
bring it in higher. So the mechanism is set up with its checks and balances. So I don’t understand the 
concern. The concern obviously is that the previous administration had only one mechanism. That was 
cabinet. Now we have a new mechanism which involves the public, which is much fairer. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — A short final supplementary. Is the Premier saying that a request for a 19 
per cent rate increase for Sask Tel rates is fair? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — What I am saying is that the public utilities review commission, as a system 
or as a mechanism, is much fairer than the previous mechanism, because that utilities review 
commission can justify the rates and look at then and call for information when it makes its 
recommendation. That’s fair. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I ask a new question of the Premier. In view of the fact that 
the system which he decries never, never, in the history of the corporation, so far as I’m aware, ever led 
to a 19 per cent rate increase at one time, does he continue to believe that his new system is fairer, when 
the ratepayers the subscribers, are asked to pay much more by his government? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I don’t think I can agree with the premise of the question — that the previous 
administration never had rate increases anywhere close to that. I think SGI had some that might have 
been 28 per cent, some others . . . (inaudible) . . . So, I would want to make sure that you weren’t 
misleading the House in giving us false information. I’d take notice on all other rate applications before 
I would make any comparison. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. Surely the Premier can understand 
the unfairness of controlling workers’ wages and not controlling their costs. I remind you that you have 
it within your power to control their costs in this area at least by instructing Sask Tel not to apply for 
more than 6.5 per cent. Surely, that’s only fair. Why didn’t you so instruct Sask Tel? Surely, it’s only 
fair to control workers’ costs of living when you control their wages. Wouldn’t it have been only fair to 
control the costs of living where you can by instructing Sask Tel not to apply for a higher percentage 
increase than what you were giving workers? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Are you saying that we should have large debts or deficits in crown 
corporations? If that’s what you’re saying then I’d have difficulty defending that on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan because you have to put the corporation in a difficult situation. Secondly, much more 
of your tax dollar would have to go to pay interest to pay for that debt. So, I’m not sure that’s what you 
want. If it is, I don’t know if I’d agree with you. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — At least, Mr. Speaker, the federal government controls the costs where they 
can by instructing the crown corporations not to increase their prices by 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2145 

more than the amount of the . . . Surely, that’s only fair. Why don’t do you do that where you can, such 
as in Sask Tel — control their costs as you’re controlling their wages? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I think it’s becoming a little more clear now — the position that all of you are 
coming from. You would like to see us go into a situation where we’re looking at massive increases in 
deficits like they are at the federal level to pay for some inadequacies or inefficiencies or whatever else. 
Is that what you’re looking at? We are not about to get caught like they are at the national level where 
they haven’t taken their guidelines on crown corporations and dealt with them efficiently or effectively, 
so they are looking at — what is it? — a $28 billion or $20 billion deficit. Do you want us to increase 
the deficit based on the size . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You just answered your question. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — A question to the Premier. Mr. Premier, only about a year ago, when we proposed a 
much smaller increase than what you have proposed now, you (it wasn’t you, it was your party at that 
time) said that that was real rip-off on the public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you consider a 19 per cent increase a rip-off, or not? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — It seemed to me, if I recall (we can go back and check it), that you had rate 
freezes prior to the election. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Briefly. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, it was brief because you lost. 
 
I don’t know what you would have done after April 26 if you had won — whether you would have taken 
the freeze off or not — but you had it frozen going into that election. So you can’t say that you didn’t 
freeze them, or that you didn’t have some sort of influence over them toward an election. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Supplementary to the Premier. Could the Premier indicate to this House when his 
party is now going to provide the free telephones for senior citizens, as they have promised? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — No. I can’t advise the House. I take notice as to the question, but I can’t give 
you an answer today. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — Could I rephrase that question, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Premier, have you been looking at the possibility of doing that, or have you even considered 
implementing that election promise that you made, to provide free telephones for senior citizens? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, I’m not in a position to answer: the minister could talk much more 
about it. It has been discussed, from my recollection of talking to the minister who deals with the 
particular crown corporation, and they have addressed it. It’s like several other things that we said that 
we were going to do. We’re going to get them done. We couldn’t do them all in the first eight or nine 
months, but we’re getting there. 
 
MR. LUSNEY: — A question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. Going back to a statement that you made 
earlier in question period, Mr. Premier, that the public is going to have the 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2146 

opportunity to have input into this rate increase: if the public says that we reject the 19 per cent increase 
and that we want the government to go back and apply the inflation minus one increase, as they are on 
everything else, are you prepared at that time to accept that decision of the public and tell Sask Tel that 
they cannot increase their rates any higher than inflation minus one? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, it’s difficult to know how you’re defining it. In my view, the 
mechanism that we’ve set up was one requested by the public. It’s called a public utilities review 
commission. People involved from the public can come in here, gather the information, look at it, talk to 
the officials, and see if it’s justified. If it isn’t justified, then they can’t go home to their communities 
and talk about it, that is, as being a justified rate increase. If it is justified, they will defend it and say the 
crown corporation needs to get its act together so it can have a long-run balance and we’d better do it 
now, or whatever they’re going to come up with as a justification. That’s the role for this new 
mechanism, and it’s one that’s been endorsed all across the province, and we’re going to let it operate. 
 

Deficit of Upcoming Budget 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Premier. In view of the Premier’s 
expressed opposition to deficits by government organizations, would he give this House an assurance 
that the upcoming budget will have at least a deficit somewhat reduced from the massive deficit brought 
in by the Minister of Finance last November? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — . . . (inaudible) . . . to the hon. member. I just wouldn’t want to scoop the 
Minister of Finance. So . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . you’re right, it is an exciting time and I think 
we’d like to give him full stage. I’ll just hold back any comments about the precise size of the budget till 
he . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 

Transfer of Sharon Young 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, question to the minister in charge of government services. 
Last week, on February 24, I had asked the minister a number of questions relating to the Sharon Young 
transfer. She informed me that she was going to check and see whether or not (on one issue in particular) 
Sharon Young had seniority over other people in the same office. Can she clarify that point for me 
today? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes I can, Mr. Speaker. I can give a response to all the questions I took 
notice of last Friday. Whether or not she arrived on the 14th (I think I indicated to the Leader of the 
Opposition I would take notice): she did arrive in Regina and reported to work on Monday, February 14. 
She was sick on February 15, absent on the afternoon of the 17th, and called in sick on February 22. 
 
As to the seniority, there are two clerk-typist 2 positions in public works in Prince Albert. The senior 
person is Shirley Bentile, who started work November of 1972. Miss Young started in July of 1979. 
 
How long was she given to report to work in Regina? She was informed verbally and by letter on 
February 8. As to a grievance, no grievance has been filed as of yet. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary. The minister informs me that she was 
notified on February 8 to be in Regina on what day? 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2147 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — February 14. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister can inform the Assembly and the 
workers for the province of Saskatchewan if in fact this is the new policy of the government: that 
employees are now given less than 10 days notice of a transfer from the time they are notified to the 
time they have to arrive in their new working place. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can just say, Mr. Speaker, that obviously it must have been acceptable to 
Miss Young as she reported on the 14th and her time for filing grievance has lapsed. So obviously she 
was not opposed to the transfer. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister can inform the Assembly what her 
position would have been if this employee had not complied with the request to report for work in a 
short eight days. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s a hypothetical question. I refuse to answer it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I imagine the minister would refuse to answer it, because I don’t think the 
employee had any choice at all. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order! The member is making statements. Does the member have a question? 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes. I’ll preface my question by a one-sentence statement. What I would 
like to know of the Minister of Government Services is whether or not the resignation of one Mr. Wallis 
Cousineau is related to the Sharon Young affair. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I would say no, it isn’t. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister inform us whether it was woman’s intuition that this 
came about at the time that it did during the turmoil that was surrounding the transfer of Sharon Young? 
Did it have anything to do with the fact that the deputy minister had a conversation with Miss Young in 
regard to political activities? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No. 
 

Resignation of Wallis Cousineau 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister. During estimates on 
government services the minister informed the Assembly, gave a great long explanation about why Mr. 
Dennis Foley had been replaced by Mr. Wallis Cousineau from Ontario, and said what a great job he 
was doing. Can she now inform us when Mr. Cousineau informed her that he would be leaving that 
position? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Perhaps the member is not aware that there are plans for reorganization 
within government, in particular the Department of Government Services and the Department of 
Revenue, Supply and Services. Mr. Cousineau’s resignation is a result of the reorganization which has 
proceeded. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. I asked the minister if she could inform us 
when she knew that Mr. Cousineau would be leaving his position. Can she tell us that? 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2148 

HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — He tendered his resignation on Friday afternoon, the 25th. 
 

Public Service Guidelines 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. I think it becomes more and more 
clear as time goes on that the lack of guidelines for the civil service is responsible for a great deal of 
turmoil which is going on in the public service at the present time. My question to the Premier is 
whether or not the guidelines that were laid down for Sharon Young by the acting deputy minister — 
that is, that politics should not be involved while she was working for the government — were given to 
your brother-in-law, Rene Archambault, when he took his position in Gravelbourg? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Well, I don’t know what the acting deputy said to some of his employees. So 
it’s very difficult for me to comment on it. With respect to the guidelines, I think the minister 
responsible for the public service commission has advised the House that there are investigations or 
applications at the national level with respect to guidelines. Many cases involve legal matters, so we 
respect what’s going on in the province of Ontario, I believe it is. We’ll move on it subsequent to that 
proceeding. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier was: does he know whether or 
not the guidelines that were laid down by the acting deputy of government services were given to his 
brother-in-law when he was hired by the government; that is, that politics should not be involved while 
he was on the job? 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — I just have no idea what Mr. Cousineau said to an employee, so it’s 
impossible for me to comment on. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the Minister of Education. We 
understood from comments made by the Minister of Government Services that one of the employees of 
the Department of Government Services was advised not to engage in political discussions, or 
alternatively not to engage in political discussions in the office, and that this was the same sort of 
treatment that was given to all employees. Our question to the Minister of Education is: was that sort of 
information tendered to your employee, Mr. Archambault, when he was engaged by your department? 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid I don’t know the answer to that; I don’t know 
whether it was or it wasn’t, quite frankly. That’s about as honest as I can be in answering that question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, if I may be allowed a preamble. I have every confidence in 
the minister’s honesty. I therefore ask him whether he will investigate that — the conversations with Mr. 
Clayton or whoever else — and report to this House on whether or not such information and guidelines 
were given to Mr. Archambault. 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, am I supposed to reply to that? 
 
In reply to the Leader of the Opposition, as I recall — and this is from the top of my head — I had the 
opportunity of visiting with — of interviewing, I should say, that’s the proper word — of interviewing 
Mr. Archambault. And, you know, from the impression that he 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2149 

made upon me with regard to his qualifications, with regard to the competence that he brought with him 
for that particular job that we wanted done, with regard to the personality traits that I read about him 
(and you know I’m not Confucius; I could be in error), but keeping all those things I mind, quite frankly 
I wanted that particular person for that particular job. And whether he was the brother-in-law of the 
Premier (whom I have a great and a high regard for), or if he had been the brother-in-law of the Leader 
of the Opposition, or for that matter if he had been Joe Stalin’s nephew, I would have hired the guy. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I have a motion that I believe has been 
given to the Leader of the Opposition. I move, seconded by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing of a former member of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 
Arthur Joseph Thibault died on February 22, 1983. He was a member of this legislature for the 
constituency of Kinistino from 1959 to 1978. He was born at Bonne Madone, Saskatchewan in 1914. 
He was educated at Kaminka schools. He farmed at Tarnopol, was a member of the Saskatchewan 
Farmers’ Union and served as a school trustee for 12 years. He was a reeve for the rural municipality 
of Invergordon from 1952 to 1959. 
 
As a member of the legislature, he developed a strong interest in the area of highway and traffic safety, 
and served as chairman of the special committee on highway traffic and safety, 1973 to 1975. 
 
He worked with a variety of community organizations, including the St. Louis Alcoholism 
Rehabilitation Centre and the Prince Albert Council on Alcohol and Drug Abuse, before retiring at 
Wakaw in 1981. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathy with members of the bereaved family. 

 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to add a few words to the formal language of 
this motion. Art Thibault was a person who, as the motion indicates, served in this House for a period of 
close to 20 years. He was known very well to a number of us. I served with Art from 1960 until 1978 — 
18 years. He was a person who was well-loved as well as appreciated because of his particular traits of 
personality. I think this was illustrated by the fact that the funeral, which was held on Saturday and 
which was attended by the Deputy Premier, Mr. Berntson, as well as a good number of Art’s former 
caucus colleagues, was exceedingly well-attended. I would have thought there were probably 500 people 
filling the main floor, the balcony and the basement of the Roman Catholic church at Wakaw. 
 
This indicates the sort of man he was. He had deep roots in the community, having been a reeve, a 
school trustee and an MLA for that period of time. He had fine qualities as an MLA and a particular 
ability to establish rapport with people from all walks of life. He spoke English, of course. He spoke 
French. When he was reeve of the R.M. of 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2150 

Invergordon he taught himself sufficient Ukrainian so that he could deal with a good number of his 
constituents who were more comfortable in that language. And accordingly, he was able, I suppose, in 
not a literary, but none the less three languages in a workable nature. 
 
Here in this House he established a number of characteristics which I remember him for, and I suspect 
others remember him for. 
 
One was certainly his concern for young people, particularly for school children. I know of no MLA 
who promoted more school visits, who was more assiduous in meeting the students and, by the way, of 
buying them the appropriate glass of milk or Coca-Cola or whatever was called for, and providing 
pictures — generally talking to them about the legislature. He was also fairly assiduous in caucus in 
pointing out to us in caucus that we ought to mend our ways and be a little more orderly in this House so 
that we would present a proper example for school children. I regret to say that Art is not now here, and 
not now able to deliver the same lesson, because I think it is equally needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He had another characteristic which endeared him to his caucus colleagues, and that was his belief that 
public issues had a natural flow, and that one should not move on an issue decisively until the public had 
an opportunity to consider it and appreciate it so that he as an MLA would be able to go out and talk 
with his constituents about the need for a particular change, they having had at least some opportunity to 
apprise themselves of the issue. It is, I suppose, always the case that the MLAs will be ahead of the 
public in the consideration of issues, but it was his view that we should not be too far ahead, otherwise 
the system which we operate would not operate effectively. 
 
As was indicated, he had a couple of other strong interests, in some cases almost passions. These 
included traffic safety, the problem of alcoholism as it related to driving, and the problems of alcohol 
consumption as it related to driving. He was a strong member of a series of traffic safety committees we 
have had, advocating measures which have subsequently become accepted, and which were certainly not 
popular when first introduced — one thinks of seat belts and other restraints, child restraints, which were 
hotly opposed by a good number of the public, but now have been more or less generally accepted by 
the public and, I think, by all the statistics, certainly by the press releases issued by the present Minister 
of Highways, the thrust of which I agree with, that this has indicated that many lives had been saved. 
 
Perhaps his greatest single interest was in the problems associated with driving under the influence of 
alcohol. He made himself a very considerable authority on that. He studied the programs which were in 
operation throughout the world. He was able to discuss with a great depth of knowledge what was going 
on in Minnesota, where he had visited their programs. He visited Australia and spent some time 
discussing with the officials in the state of Victoria the programs they operate. Out of all of this, he had 
distilled a particular theory, a particular approach, to that pressing social problem. 
 
He continued to advocate it. When I received the news of his death, I had on my desk an answer which I 
had prepared to the last bit of correspondence I had from Art on the issues of highway safety and what 
we ought to be advocating in this House. It was a commentary on the white paper put out by the 
government on traffic safety. 
 
Art’s view — and I won’t recount them all here — was that state punitive measures would be 
unsuccessful; on the other hand, remedial measures offered to people who did 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2151 

not feel any sense of crisis would be unsuccessful. Accordingly, what we needed to do was to bring 
about a sense of crisis in the mind of the offender. Then, when he is in that state of mind, we would offer 
remedial measures in institutions such as the ones in Victoria, the ones in Minnesota, and the one at St. 
Louis which has had a successful record here in this province for a couple of years. 
 
Art’s contribution is not to be thought of as confined to any one of the items I have mentioned. In fact, 
he had a lively interest in the whole field of government and made an outstanding contribution to this 
legislature and, I know, to the community in which he lived. He was known throughout the entire 
constituency of Kinistino in a way which few of us will ever be known in our own constituencies, and 
was known in a wider area less well since he had an opportunity to represent the now city of Melfort and 
an area around there for a period following the 1971 election. 
 
Art Thibault was the sort of MLA whose service in this House makes this House a better House. His life 
was one of service to his constituency and to the community in which he lived. He was a member of a 
large family and a close family, as was clear from the funeral. His wife, Doris, and he had children who 
have continued to make their contributions. It is a better province because of people like Art Thibault 
and the Thibaults. 
 
I know that I would like to join with the Premier in offering my condolences to Mrs. Thibault and to 
other members of the family on the loss of their husband and father. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join with the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition to pay a tribute to the former member for Kinistino. I got to know Mr. Thibault in the early 
’70s, and I was impressed by the character of the man, his dedication to the performance of his duty as a 
public figure. I think all of us will have gained by the example that Art Thibault presented to this 
legislature. 
 
He served his constituents well. There was no problem too small for Art Thibault to attend to. I want to 
say that I served with him also from ’75, when I was elected, until Mr. Thibault retired in ’78. 
 
I want to say that besides those concerns that he had in respect to highway safety, throughout my 
association with him he always presented wisdom and guidance to younger MLAs in conducting the 
business of the House. 
 
He was a unique individual, as has been mentioned, in his method of communicating with constituents 
and the people of the province. He was not really tied to the formal method of communication that many 
of us followed: newsletters, publications and papers. His was a method of direct contact, and certainly 
with young people, as the Leader of the Opposition has indicated, he had a great, close association. 
 
I had the privilege of attending the Mass at Wakaw, and I want to repeat that the funeral, I think, 
indicated the respect that this man garnered in his community. I was told by many who were there that it 
was the largest funeral that Wakaw has had, and I think that perhaps the eulogy which was given by 
Father Boutin best summarizes to a large extent how Art Thibault was to be judged. Father Boutin 
indicated that Art Thibault was unselfish and that his efforts went beyond serving self-interest to serving 
his fellow man. His counsel was always wise and thoughtful, and certainly I think that Art leaves behind 
a legacy of example in public life that all of us can gain from. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2152 

And so I would like to extend to the Thibault family, Mrs. Thibault and the children, our condolences. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Mr. Speaker, as one of those on the government side who sat with Art from ’75 
until the ’78 election, and as a rookie in the House, and as his neighbouring MLA — he had the area 
directly next to me — Art and I got to know each other, as did the people across the floor. I must say of 
Art, as the former premier mentioned, that to watch him with his students when they came to visit the 
Assembly was to marvel at the painstaking patience he spent in explaining to them what had happened 
in the House and why it had happened. And as he used to herd them through — for lack of a better word 
— the line to have their dinner, or their milk, or whatever he was going to treat them to, he always 
seemed to have time to sit and chat with them longer than most MLAs, and he was concerned. 
 
Mr. Blakeney spoke about Art’s belief in seat belt legislation. I suppose more than any other member in 
this House at that time he believed in it — more than anybody — and fought harder for the betterment of 
it, and did a lot of research and study, as he was the Leg Secretary to the Minister of Highways in those 
days. 
 
I can remember a group of elected officials from Quebec that toured Saskatchewan, and I happened to 
have the privilege of being their tour guide that day. Art had arranged a function out at a small 
community, French-speaking, in his riding, and the hospitality and the warmth shown by Art and his 
people made us proud to say that we were fellow MLAs. 
 
You know, in the throne speech or the budget speech Art would get to his feet and give his speech. As 
the former premier said, he would chastise for our misbehaving and occasionally would chastise us out 
in the hall because we had got a little rowdy in the House. But he believed in the system of parliament, 
and he gave many years of his life to it. And I don’t think there is a more fitting tribute you can give to 
somebody who gives his life for the betterment of his friends than to say that this province, this country, 
and the citizens of same are better because he was here and did his part. I join in condolences to the 
family on the loss of its father and husband. Thank you. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to add to the members who have already 
spoken my condolences to the Thibault family, and especially to Doris. When I first got elected, I think I 
could have called Art my political godfather — someone who was generous with giving sound advice in 
how to deal with a constituency and constituency problems. He came along with many of the groups and 
delegations that met with me and sat in on meetings, and I really appreciated the effort he put out as far 
as a rookie member was concerned. 
 
I can remember well the day that the safety council presented Art with a little red automobile that he so 
proudly wore on his lapel and that signified his concern with highway traffic safety. And the committee 
work he did, I think, was second to none, as far as members are concerned in this House in the work we 
do on committees. 
 
I think a point that hasn’t been mentioned yet, Mr. Speaker, is Art’s graphic use of the English language. 
 
Several stories when the name Art Thibault is mentioned — two stories always come to my mind and I 
think I should mention both of them. He always used this illustration, many times he used this 
illustration — I am sure if he were involved in the crow debate 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2153 

today he’d say, “Don’t chop the dog’s tail off a little piece at a time.” He was very strong on that one. 
Another one he used to tell was about giving directions: “If you want to get there, you can’t start from 
here.” 
 
I think he was just a tremendous fellow. He had more concerns for his fellow man than he did for his 
own time and his personal interests. I feel that the amount of effort he put into being an MLA and the 
hard work he did even was detrimental to his own health. That kind of service is really highly regarded 
by all the people of Saskatchewan. I would like to add my condolences to his passing at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move, perhaps seconded by the member for 
Shaunavon: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcripts of oral tributes to the memory of the 
deceased, be communicated to the family on behalf of this Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

CROWN INVESTMENTS CORPORATION OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 

Vote 65 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would you introduce your officials please? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, on my right is Mr. Don Gracey, special adviser for the 
CIC. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just have a few questions, Mr. Minister, in respect to the crown investment 
corporation. I want some preliminary information. I would like you to give me a list of all persons that 
were fired or whose employment was terminated since May 8, 1982 by the present government. Is that 
clear enough? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, obviously the member is not familiar with the procedure 
on this particular subvote. This is a statutory vote, nothing to do with the review of the crown 
corporation, and the question he is asking would be better asked in crown corporations review. At that 
time I’d be happy to answer his questions. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — The question pertains to crown investments corporation so the question is in 
order. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I won’t question your ruling. However, I’d like to advise 
the Assembly that I’m unprepared to answer questions today relating to the operation of crown 
investment corporation. I’m prepared to answer questions on the vote under which we are here — not 
the vote but the statutory advance. My 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2154 

understanding is certainly and I believe there are precedents . . . As I say, I am not questioning your 
ruling. You’ve made the ruling. However, we had, as I recall when we were in the opposition, the 
problem of questioning Sedco in this Assembly. We couldn’t do it. However, as I say, I am not 
prepared, sir, to answer questions since I don’t have my officials with me to answer the kinds of 
questions that have already been asked, nor did I come prepared for it. That was not the understanding 
that I had of the questions to be asked. Those questions are better asked in crown corporations. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Chairman, I respect your decision, and that of course was my understanding in 
my preparation in asking questions relating to the crown investments corporation. We have an item to 
vote on and I wanted to delve into some of the areas. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, in light of the obvious problem that we’re having, I would 
move that we pull this estimate today and have it at a later date. I’ll come prepared, whatever is required 
of me at that time. My understanding was this was strictly a statutory or simple matter, and I move then 
that we pull this vote today and have it at a later date. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Agreed? Agreed. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if I could find out from the minister . . . On 
Friday, while questioning on estimates for Industry and Commerce, I had some questions relating to the 
loaning policy of Sedco. I wonder if he could prepared himself for that area as well, under that vote on 
Sedco, because I will be following that up at a later date when we come back onto this issue. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t want to get into a debate on this issue, but really, it 
would be the first time (that is, in my tenure in this Assembly) that we have moved crown corporations 
hearings — debates — into the Legislative Assembly. We have a vehicle by which we can do that. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Chairman, my point of order is this. There was a ruling made by the 
Chair not five minutes ago that this kind of debate would be allowed on CIC, and I assumed that it 
would mean on Sedco as well on another vote. I can’t quite see what the minister is debating. I think a 
decision has been made, agreed to by the Assembly. When we come back in another day when it’s 
called, I’m just alerting him that we will be questioning him on the lending policy of Sedco. I don’t see 
the need for a long debate. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t see the basic need for a debate. When the hon. 
member wishes to ask questions to the minister, it will be determined at that time whether or not the 
question is in order or not in order. I think it is senseless to proceed at this point. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

FINANCE 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 11 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I believe that the Leader of the Opposition is just obtaining his 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2155 

information, etc., and if we could just bear with it for a minute or two, we could then proceed at that 
point. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — We’re just waiting for the critic in the area of finance. The Leader of the 
Opposition, but maybe we could start out and carry on for a bit. They are pretty standard questions, and 
if the minister wants to introduce his staff who he has with him, that would be fine, and we’ll go from 
there. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The deputy minister of finance is presently in 
London, England, with regard to some borrowing activities. In his stead will be Mike Costello, associate 
deputy minister of finance, Don Rowlatt, tax and fiscal policy, Morley Meiklejohn, Lawrie McFarlane 
and Keith Mackrill. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Could the minister give me a list of his staff, the upper management in the 
department as well as their salaries? I’m sure that he can get that to me in writing. It’s probably just as 
easy as listing it out here. 
 
A question to the minister: I wonder if he could inform the Assembly of the number of employees in the 
department who have a CVA vehicle assigned to them? This wouldn’t mean in the car pool, but 
individual employees who would have an automobile assigned to them, if any. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — With regard to the upper management, they are basically the same as was 
there before. There have been no salary increases for those particular employees since my coming to 
office. In my own personal office, the minister’s office, I have two secretaries and one executive 
assistant. 
 
With regard to CVA automobiles, I believe the number of CVA automobiles is one less than it was 
when I took over the ministry. I believe Mr. Meiklejohn lost his car because he didn’t drive . . . Never 
had a car. 
 
The deputy has a car, and there is one in a car pool for the investments branch to track back and forth to 
the bank and that type of thing. There are two cards, plus one for the minister, which has 100,979 
kilometres on it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I have a fairly long series of questions that I 
would like to ask. They are really going to amount to things which the minister may or may not have on 
hand that I would like him to see whether he could provide me with. A couple of them may have been 
asked by my colleagues. 
 
Has there been a request for the names, positions and salaries of members of the minister’s staff? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There are three in number, two secretaries and one EA. I could get you the 
exact salaries of those three particular people. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I would like to ask the minister for the names of all employees being paid 
at a rate exceeding $2,000 a month who have been taken on staff by the department since May 1, 1982. I 
invite the minister to say if $2,000 is an inconvenient figure. If it should be $2,200 or something to 
exclude stenographic and clerical, by and large, then I would accept his suggestion along that line. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2156 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — What I’ll undertake to provide for you is the list of all people that we have 
taken on since we’ve taken office, if that would be satisfactory. Other than perhaps some in the 
comptroller’s office that I wouldn’t know exactly the salary of, and I’m sure you would care less about it 
either, I can send all the ones in the immediate finance staff and in the minister’s office staff that have 
been employed since April 26 and the salary that they have to you. I believe that they’re all OC 
appointments. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Would the minister also include people in other branches of the 
department where the salary exceeds $30,000 a year? Could the minister also provide me with the names 
of all persons having contracts of personal service entered into with the Department of Finance after, 
say, May 1 or May 8, 1983, under which payments at a rate exceeding $2,000 a month had been made, 
or are to be made? What are the names of your executive assistants? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I have one executive assistant. Her name is Jane Dempsey. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do you have any administrative assistants or people bearing similar 
titles? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — If you want to call them an administrative assistant; I call them my 
secretaries. I have two of them. As by way of not misleading, I did start out with three AAs and two of 
them moved on to different jobs as one tries to adjust to the office to find out just what type of staff 
components you need. So I did have two. I believe one moved early in December and the other one 
moved maybe in February. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could give us now a list 
of all borrowings by the Department of Finance where the term exceeds, say, three years and the 
principal sum borrowed exceeds $5 million, giving the amount, term, rate of interest, and any major 
special features — if they’re retractables or something of that nature? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Do you wish me to send that information over to you now? I think we have 
it. We can take, if you like, the borrowings for the entire year — we’ve pretty much completed the 
borrowing requirements. Just with the last, I think the last deal was a Canadian deal at 10.75. yes, a 
Euro-deal at 10.75 was the last one, and I think it ranges up from there up to . . . I forget the highest 
amount, but I certainly can send that information across to you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I would appreciate that. I’m not interested in the treasury bills. I don’t 
know, you may have some bank borrowings for up to three years. I’m not asking for that. I’m essentially 
asking for what might traditionally be called a bond issue. 
 
I would like to ask a number of questions on revenue. I will be looking at page 8 of the estimates and 
asking some questions on budgetary revenue. Starting at the top, with respect to corporation capital, I 
wonder if the minister would, for the record, tell me what the rates are. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — My understanding of the rates: it’s 0.3 per cent for the general tax rate; the 
tax rate for banks is 0.8 per cent; the tax rate for trust companies and loan companies is 0.8 per cent, and 
the exemption level is $10 million. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2157 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What is the estimated corporate capital available for taxation in each of 
the categories of general and banks and trust companies? What figures were used in arriving at the 
computation of $21.1 million? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We’ll have to provide that information. It’s not something that we have 
there, but we will undertake to provide that for you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Okay. What is the position of Sask Power? Is it a taxable corporation? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, in more ways than one, unfortunately. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Sask Tel? Yes. Could you give me the position of co-ops? Has there been 
a change in that area? Has there been any position with respect to CIS, with the Co-operative Insurance 
Services, or The Co-operators. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think in the budget, with the increase in the insurance premium tax that 
applied to the co-ops, but there was a corresponding decrease in the corporate capital tax — no, 
insurance company tax. 
 
Apparently the co-op insurance company was not taxed before. Now with the taking off of that tax, none 
of the insurance companies are taxable, so it’s now equal between the co-ops and the other insurance 
companies. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I understand the minister to say that none of the insurance companies are 
now paying the corporation capital tax. Just for the record, the minister says yes to that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, then you are not able to give me the calculation as to how you got the 
21.1 million, then? I’ll be asking this right down the list, so . . . 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We have some of the, but other ones we don’t have, and we’ll undertake to 
get them to you, but the exact calculation — that we don’t have. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I now turn to corporation income tax, $106,789,000. Am I right in 
believing that this tax is collected by the federal government? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That is correct. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Of the $106,789,000 provided for, for what period was that collected by 
the federal government? How would I phrase that? For what federal government tax year is that 
payable? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The component of that 106 million is as follows: the estimated federal tax 
between April ’82 and March ’83, 110,225,000, less $10 million for Saskatchewan royalty tax rebate, 
plus $6,000,564 for adjustment for underpayment by the federal government for prior taxation years. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The amount of 110 million, then, is an estimate of what the federal 
government will collect on our behalf between April ’82 and March ’83, this current fiscal year. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s for that taxation year, and they run a couple of months 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2158 

behind as you are aware; it’s for that period — of money earned during that period. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Less approximately $6 million in respect of oil royalty, plus 
approximately . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — 10 million for oil. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Plus 10 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . less 10 for oil royalties, plus 6 for 
previous underpayments. 
 
Are we able to say with ease how much of that derives from corporations operating all or primarily 
within Saskatchewan, and how much comes from corporations operating all across Canada? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Of that amount, and I can only give you this in ball-park figures, if that’s 
acceptable, approximately 30 per cent is from small businesses primarily operating in Saskatchewan and 
70 per cent from larger corporations that operate across the country. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to gasoline taxes of 15.7 million, how much of that is 
collections in respect of amounts sold prior to May 8, and how much is collected in respect of amounts 
sold after May 8? In effect, how much is it old tax at the . . . 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Of that 15,000,700, 10 million is gasoline and diesel fuel sold prior to May 
8; 4,000,800 is railway locomotive diesel fuel that still has a tax on it; and 900,000 is aviation fuel. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do CP Rail and CN Rail pay the tax? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — You’ve got it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Air Canada, PWA and CP? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Norcanair? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Why does Norcanair not pay? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Because it flies primarily in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do I take it that that same rule would apply to Athabaska Airways and 
other similar charter carriers and to private aircraft? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That’s correct. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Would the minister speculate as to whether or not the payment of this tax 
is one reason why CP Air pulled out of Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think CP Air is probably a small carrier relative to Air Canada, and 
the whole tax collected in the entire year was $900,000, and if that’s the 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2159 

reason they left then they’ve got pretty tough looking books. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Frontier Airlines, yes or no? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, they do pay it, and I understand that both Frontier and Pacific Western 
would like to expand further into Saskatchewan, and I tend to think that maybe they have their finger on 
the pulse of the province better than perhaps the CPR does. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The CPR doesn’t keep its finger on the pulse. It’s difficult when you’ve 
got the hand in the pocket. 
 
CP Express — do they pay, and their trucks? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I don’t believe there are any trucking firms that pay that tax. It’s too difficult 
to differentiate in that particular situation. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And Greyhound Bus Lines? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No. One of the reasons, of course, for that is that the railways and the 
airlines are taxed in a different way, as you are aware, compared to what you would refer to as an E&H 
tax, sales tax or road tax, whatever you want. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So that the situation is that if a CNR train is driving along a track parallel 
to a road, the train that goes along the track will be paying the gasoline tax, sometimes called the road 
tax, but the truck which is carrying similar freight to a similar destination beside it doesn’t pay the tax. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The first correction is that I don’t think many trains use gasoline. On the 
second point, you are correct. And I’m sure you’re not making a case for CPR and CNR. I wouldn’t 
understand that to be your case. The other one, as you know, would be somewhat tricky to administer, 
and we have opted not to do so. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — If I said gasoline, I was obviously not stating what I meant. Both the train 
and the truck will almost certainly be fuelled by diesel. The one will bear a tax, and the one will not bear 
a tax. The one on the rails will bear the tax, and the one on the road will not bear the tax. What is the rate 
to the present payers of the tax? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 2.9 cents per litre. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Turning now to individual income tax, $612 million — that tax, I take it, 
is collected by the federal government. What are the existing rates? It seems to be a simple question, but 
I know it isn’t. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 51 per cent. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What is the surcharge payable for . . . 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 12 per cent. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — That is 12 per cent of what? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That is provincial tax payable over $4,000. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2160 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Could you give us the credits applicable, or some of the major credits 
applicable, let’s put it that way? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There’s a low-income tax reduction equal to $160 plus $50 per dependent 
child, and a special $50 tax deduction for senior citizens. Then there is the mortgage tax reduction thing 
we did away with, but there is still some application to phase it out. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — For what period was this $612 million collected by the federal 
government? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — If I can go through it the same as I did before, from April 1982 to March 
1983: instalment payments, $602,694,000. The adjustments are as follows: plus Saskatchewan surtax of 
$5,500,000, less Saskatchewan tax reduction of $22 million, less 1981 Saskatchewan mortgage interest 
tax credit of $8,500,000, less 1981 capital gains tax rebate of $2 million, plus the adjustments for 
underpayments by the federal government in previous years, $36,400,000. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — $602 million plus $5.5 million Sask surtax, minus $22 million, minus 
$8.5 million approximately. What was that for? . . . 
 
Minus $2 million capital gains rebate, plus $36.4 previous underpayment. Does the minister have any 
reason to believe that as at the end of this year, we will be in an underpayment position or overpayment 
position with respect to the federal government? Is there any way to calculate that? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — In response to that, I can’t give you a definitive answer other than to say that 
traditionally they have underpaid. The only comment that we would say is that we wouldn’t anticipate it 
in this year to be a large number. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Would the minister be able to tell us whether this 36 on individual and 6 
on corporate — that’s 42 million underpayment — in respect to previous underpayments (that’s in this 
year’s budget), was a large figure — significantly larger figure — than normal? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s a lower amount than normal for corporate and about average for 
individual. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I turn now to the insurance tax. Can the minister advise us what the rates 
of insurance tax are? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That was 2. It was increased to 3 in the November budget. I think there were 
certain ones exempted down to the 2 that weren’t increased: sickness, accident, that type of thing, was 
not increased. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What insurance companies pay this if Co-ops don’t and if Pioneer 
doesn’t? And I’d like a little comment on . . . I’m not clear in my mind what the life companies pay, and 
what the sickness and accident pay, and what the fire and casualty pay. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — In the budget, what we increased was all insurance companies, 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2161 

other than sickness and accident and life insurance companies; they remained at 2 per cent. If you recall, 
that brought us in line with many other jurisdictions, particularly Ontario, who were at 3 per cent as well 
and where the bulk premiums would be established with regards to that. So we felt we should have our 
fair share of it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So no change was made in life insurance or sickness and accident, but he 
fire and casualty were raised to 3. What were the estimated premiums in each class to arrive at the 11.5 
million calculation? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We don’t have that broken down here. We can provide that information for 
you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you. I would like that provided. I turn now to the acreage tax, 
$3,750,000. Is this straight acreage tax or does it include any of these producing tract tax? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No, it does not include. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What is the rate per acre? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s 50 cents. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Fifty cents an acre is the acreage tax. So I take it then that this is collected 
on 7.5 million acres, or approximately. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That’s your numbers. It would be 50 cents divided into the given number of 
acres. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I turn now to sales tax $329.8 million. What estimate of retail sales for 
1982-83 is included in that estimate, and a breakdown of the non-taxable and taxable. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We can try to get that particular question answered for you. Other than the 
retail sales, the retail trade in 1982 is forecast for 8.7 per cent as the basis by which the projected tax is 
arrived at. But for more details, they are not here yet. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So that the calculation of $329.8 million is arrived at by assuming an 8.7 
per cent growth in the sale of taxable goods? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s approximately half-and-half. Retail trade provides approximately half of 
it and the other half is provided by the non-retail trade, the building materials, sale of machinery, 
equipment, that type of thing provides approximately the other half. The total details of that we don’t 
have available to us. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m not quite sure of the distinction here 
between retail and non-retail. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — What we would be talking about is the tax on buildings, the tax on utilities, 
the tax on farm machinery that would not normally be purchased at the traditional store or retail outlet 
that you would see. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Let me ask that question again. With respect to what you arrived at the 
$329 million, did you take the figure for the previous fiscal year ’81-82 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2162 

and increase it by 8.7 per cent, or did you arrive at it by some other method? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Apparently the way that number is actually arrived at is the Department of 
Revenue and Supply have a mechanism by which they can calculate in the specifics of each specific 
item, and project the growth of that particular item and then pass that information on to us. We don’t 
have that information available at this point in time but we can undertake to get it and deliver it to you at 
some future date. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Very well, I would ask that the minister provide me with a calculation of 
the sales tax figure, if you would. 
 
I turn now to tobacco tax and ask for the rates for cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco and cigarette tobacco. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — For cigarettes, a package of 25, 42 cents; for tobacco, per 25 grams, 17 
cents; and for cigars, anywhere from 4 cents to 22 cents, depending on how expensive you want to go — 
4 cents for White Owls and 22 cents for the better kind. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to that calculation of 36.4 million, I wonder if he can give 
me the calculations; what the projected sales are of dollars or units as the case may be, and apply the rate 
and give me the calculation. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We don’t have the brand and number on that and I think you will appreciate 
as well that it increased in November, so there is that calculation as well. We can undertake to get that 
for you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the calculation of “other, 5.9 million,” could the minister 
tell us what are the main headings under this heading of “other”? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There’s a series of them, as you appreciate. If I could give you the largest 
ones of those, the pari-mutuel tax is $2 million; motor vehicle insurance premium tax, $2 million; fire 
prevention tax, $1.4 million. Then there’s a whole host of other taxes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The fire prevention tax is in effect the tax on fire insurance premiums. 
Am I right? And the motor vehicle insurance tax is also a tax on insurance premiums? Why aren’t they 
up under the heading of insurance? I’m just asking that out of curiosity. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m not sure we’re going to accept it, but that’s a separate tax, the other one, 
and this one is sort of at a different rate and different type of calculation. So it was just simply blended 
in as always to the catchall at the bottom. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the pari-mutuel tax, approximately how much is that, 
shown in the . . . From the point of view of the government, is that a gross figure or a net figure? Is that 
what we get after we allow rebates to the tracks, or is it before we allow rebates to the tracks? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That would be the gross revenue, and then what we give back would come 
off of that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Can the minister indicate in what department of government the rebates 
would be? In the Department of Agriculture, or not? 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2163 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Paid out of agriculture. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Could the minister indicate on a net basis how much we would get, 
approximately, of that 2 million? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Virtually zero net. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I turn now to the heritage fund. I’ll come back to that, and skip it for a 
moment. The liquor board, 90 million. Approximately how much do we assume that will represent 
profits of the liquor board, and approximately how much will be a drawdown on an existing surplus? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The profit is about 93. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — For the year ended March ’83, it is expected the profit will be about $93 
million. 
 
With respect to the receipts from government enterprises and other funds, $6,800,000, what are the main 
components of that item? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The two largest ones there I can give you is the land titles insurance fund, 
1.1 — that’s a surplus; revenue and supply systems centre, and CVA advance accounts, 1.1. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the revenue and supply systems centre advance account, 
1.1 million, is that a profit on operations as one might say or is it a repayment of a previous advance? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Apparently it’s most likely a profit. It’s not a return of an advance, because 
it wouldn’t other wise show there. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Turning to the motor vehicles at 46,200,000, can the minister advise of 
the approximate number of vehicles that this covers? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We don’t know. We will try to get that for you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, can the minister advise how much of the 
increase over the actual for the previous year is accounted for by an increase in vehicles, and how much 
by an increase in the rate which was effective, as I recall it, a couple of months ago? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 70 per cent of it would be rates; 30 per cent of it would be vehicles. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, for my curiosity, does the minister have 
at hand an explanation of why the actual for ’81-’82 was significantly lower than the budgeted 47? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I am advised that the estimate you are talking about at 47, the actuals come 
in at 41 and I guess the only thing we could say is that the estimate was too high. Why it was too high, 
because I wasn’t there at that time, I wouldn’t know. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2164 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I move down, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, to the item under other 
own source revenue, other revenue, 21 million. Can the minister give us the main components of the 21 
million? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There are a great number of these. The two largest ones are $14 million 
from the public service superannuation board — employees’ contributions, superannuation; that’s from 
the old plan. The only other one of major size would be agriculture refund from previous years 
expenditures. I’m not sure any more than that, that’s the only information I have. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Moving down, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, to the Canada Assistance 
Plan, 114 million. Are the payments by the federal government substantially current in the sense that is 
that the amount which will be earned during the period 1982-83, or is there a lag? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I understand they’re very current. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Can the minister indicate the reason for this large increase in the refund 
under the Canada Assistance Plan? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — SAP expenditures. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Am I then to understand that because this figure has gone up by 
approximately $28 million the increases under the Saskatchewan Assistance Plan have gone up by $56 
million? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It is roughly in that proportion, although I think you will appreciate it’s not 
in complete correlation and some payments come from the assistance plan that apply to something else 
other than SAP and that type of thing. That it’s a rough correlation would be a fair statement. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — In view of the very large increases in SAP payments, in Saskatchewan 
Assistance Plan payments, under public assistance, has the Department of Finance or any other 
department of government got under way plans to provide significantly more employment so that there 
would be significantly less payments under SAP? $56 million in one year is a huge increase. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, clearly in the November budget, we earmarked $15 million, all of that 
being up-front money. The federal program, of course, I think contributed something like $11 million, of 
which a substantial smaller portion would be spent in this fiscal period. Any other plans that we have 
afoot I think will be announced in due course, and I’m sure the hon. member will wait to see what those 
are. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, the hon. member will not be the only one 
who is waiting. A good number of people have been waiting for quite awhile, and when we think of an 
extra in welfare payments of $56 million, that is indeed a pretty impressive figure, and one which none 
of us should be very proud of. 
 
I turn now to the Department of Regional Economic Expansion, the DREE money of $8 million. I won’t 
ask whether we think that that will tail off from DREE. I don’t know what DREE is called these days, 
but whatever that department is, is that in a sense a residual amount of money which is likely to be 
significantly less in the next budget? Or are there 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2165 

ongoing agreements, western Northlands, or whatever, which will continue to produce funds? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — If I could respond to the two questions, or the one question and the one 
comment: we are in the process of several new agreements and I suppose we are waiting as much as 
everyone else to see what direction the federal government will be taking. 
 
With regard to the question of social assistance payments going up, I’m sure everyone is concerned 
about that, and I think everyone is concerned probably across the free world with regard to 
unemployment. 
 
I can say that our record to date has been a good one relative to other provinces and certain other 
jurisdictions in the United States. Having said that, that doesn’t mean it’s good enough. I think though, 
by the same token, the hon. member has to recognize and to justify that our system of social assistance 
was put in place for the very types of situations we find ourselves in in a cyclical economy that always 
happens to exist. That is, when the less fortunate are without a job, or the less fortunate are without a 
family or a source of income, we have to have a system, a safety net if you like, to catch those people, to 
provide them with the bare necessities of life. I think that’s basically the system that we live in in this 
country. Granted, it’s perhaps not the best time for that type of a system; bear in mind that that’s what it 
is for, and bear in mind that we are clearly in an economic downturn here and every place else. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not always sure all your colleagues are 
fully aware of that, judging from their public pronouncements, but I’ll not say more on that. It’s not my 
purpose now to debate that. 
 
With respect to the DREE agreements (I don’t want to go into the details of them, but I just try to refresh 
my memory on which ones are left), are we in receipt of money (to make it perfectly proper) under that 
heading, under any Special ARDA agreements, western Northlands agreements, Qu’Appelle 
implementation agreements, and any other big ones? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We are in receipt under those that you have mentioned. I don’t think there 
are any large ones other than those. Northlands and Qu’Appelle are the two large ones. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Again, just for routing. With respect to western Northlands, most of the 
arrangements are made for that agreement by DNS or now DTRR, I suppose? And most of the ones for 
Qu’Appelle implementation by the Department of Environment? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, you’re correct with regard to DNS and highways, I believe, and the 
Qu’Appelle by urban affairs and environment. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And with respect to Special ARDA, who has that in your administration 
now? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Economic development. Industry and commerce, economic development. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The next item, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, is equalization 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2166 

payment minus 29 million. Is it anticipated that . . . Shall I phrase it this way: is this part of a pattern of 
payment back that we can anticipate in that we still have some to make up, or was it a one-year 
correction? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I believe if you go back to the budget statement of November, what was said 
is the overpayment was $100 million. The federal government has agreed to take it over an extended 
period of time, $29 million this year and 22 each of the next four years. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to EPF, established program financing, has there been any 
change in the year that we’re discussing, ‘82-83, in the method of calculating our EPF payments? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There hasn’t, no. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Could the minister give a brief outline of the headings under which we 
receive money under EPF? What I am trying to establish is that those are block-funding payments and 
do not include any tax points in that figure. But I am not recalling the method of calculation of the block 
funding now. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s the cash portion. Any of the points with regard to income tax would 
show up in income tax. The primary headings are post-secondary education, medicare and 
hospitalization, and compensation for loss of revenue guarantee in the formula. And then don’t try to 
have him explain the formula for you, please. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I will just waste the committee’s time for two minutes by saying that I 
think that that is a proper statement of what we’re getting from the federal government. And when I hear 
the federal ministers going about saying, “Look what we’re contributing for hospitalization and 
medicare and post-secondary education,” and they get a figure very much higher than that by working 
out their so-called backoff on tax points. And when I recall the origin of this, they are saying that they 
were fed up with collecting money that we spent and therefore we should raise our own money. They 
would give us the tax room and we would raise it, and we would take the political heat for it (when I say 
we, I mean the province of Saskatchewan). And when, after having taken the political heat for raising it, 
then to hear the Hon. Mr. Argue or someone else say, “Of course, this is money we gave you,” then it 
seems to me that that is a slight distortion of the history. And I am sure all hon. members will agree with 
me that I am merely making that point because I’ve heard it in the last few months once again. 
 
The end of that extraneous comment. 
 
With respect to other federal-provincial programs, could you give me the main headings under that 
figure? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — You have to appreciate there’s a whole host of these here. Legal aid, $1.08 
million; education, bilingualism (that’s the best I’ve got there), 1.85 million; energy and mines, 
renewable resources, for $1 million; heavy oil, fossil fuel agreement for $1 million; health, VRDPs, 
vocational training of some kind under health, and urban transit assistance for 2.5 million. That takes 
care of . . . 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Could I ask the minister to provide me at a later time the list of those 
figures? Thank you, Mr. Minister. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2167 

I turn back to the figure of Saskatchewan Heritage Fund, 710 million. And I turn to page 118 of the 
estimates, and we have a figure, Mr. Minister, of $10,171,000 for coal. I wonder if the minister can tell 
us what the royalty rate and the estimated tonnage would be that arrives at that figure? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The estimated tonnage would be 7,403,000 tonnes. The crown royalty 
would be 15 per cent of mine date value. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, has there been any change in the royalty rate during the 
year under review? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s exactly the same structure: no royalty rate increase or decrease. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I turn to natural gas and ask there the royalty rate. And I’m asking with 
respect to this particular calculation of 660,000 and what the anticipated volume is in Mcf of thousand 
cubic metres? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The rate was 2 cents per Mcf. As you are aware, that was changed effective 
February 1 to 10 cents per Mcf that will have very little impact on this revenue year. The total volume is 
367 Bcf. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The total volume again, Mr. Minister, if I may? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 36.7 Bcf. 36.7 billion cubic feet. Right. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And 36.7 billion cubic feet at 2 cents per 1,000 cubic feet — a royalty 
rate of $660,000, is that right? It doesn’t seem quite right but . . . 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s approximately right, only I think somewhat crown into freehold land 
varies, but 90 per cent of it is crown land. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to change in royalty rates, none other than the one that the 
minister has now advised? Turning now to oil, $710 million; I will not ask all the components of that, 
but I would like to ask about the five or six largest items. 
 
With respect to oil royalties, what sum of money is it anticipated will be collected of that $710 million 
out of what are oil royalties proper? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Crown oil royalty will be 315. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And road allowance? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think that is reflected in . . . We don’t have that part of it broken down. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do you have a figure for bonus bids? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes. Our estimates were reflecting at the time of the preparation of the 
budget at about 30. We have been, I suppose, pleasantly surprised and that number is probably going to 
show some increase for us, although the exact number we won’t know yet, but it should be stronger than 
30. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2168 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to oil well income tax, what figure is anticipated there? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 123. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Pardon? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 123. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to export tax flowback, what figure is anticipated under that 
heading? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Approximately 214. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — How much of that is in respect of the year under review, and how much 
of that is in respect of previous years? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I take it, you mean earned as opposed to where it is reflected? I think we’ve 
been in this debate before. The 104 would reflect this year and 109 from the previous allocations, which 
would then be offset with the equalization payments. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Turning, Mr. Speaker, now to potash, could the minister give me any 
breakdown as between royalty and base payment and graduated? Does the minister have any breakdown 
of the 60 million as between the potash royalty figure and the potash base payment figure, and the 
potash graduated payment figure? It doesn’t much matter if you don’t. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Of that 60, it would be 24 base payment, 25.8 graduated payment, and 10 
crown royalty. If I might add, those were our numbers as of November. The Department of Energy has 
announced, perhaps a month ago, that those numbers were probably coming in less than that in the sense 
that anticipated revenues by the potash industry, when they paid their money out early in the year, did 
not come to fruition. The last quarter, they did not have to pay as much tax. Therefore, it’s probably 
modified down, but . . . (inaudible) . . . could put some further pressure on it. The number used by the 
deputy minister of energy was down to 34 million from the 60 million, so we have a drop of 
approximately $24 million. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I will turn now, Mr. Minister. Picking up on what you have now said, I 
would like to review the various estimates again, in effect. With respect to $21.1 million from 
corporation capital, do you anticipate receiving substantially all or more than that? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — As I indicated on the potash, we show some weakening there. We have a bit 
of strength up on the oil from what we anticipated. We anticipate maybe a little more with regard to 
personal income tax than previous years, but most of it is, by and large, very close to where we are. In 
answer to the question, that specific one. I would tend to answer that, overall, as to where we are going, 
we look fairly close, other than the fact of potash being down further in that specific and with maybe a 
little more optimism in both oil and personal income tax. Otherwise the rest of them are pretty much 
according to the estimates we put in. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’ll take them one by one, 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2169 

simply for the record. So the corporation capital tax, you think, is about right? March 1, ’83 estimate, or 
today’s estimate for corporate income tax, at 106 million; about right? Gasoline tax at 15.7 million; 
approximately accurate? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The minister says yes. Individual income tax at 
612 million? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think that I indicated on that that we are modestly optimistic that we could 
have a little better number there. The exact amount of that I would not know at this time and tend to hold 
back any projection further than what we have. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Thank you Mr. Minister. Insurance tax of 11.5 million. Is that 
approximately right? Mineral acreage tax at 3.7 million; approximately right? . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . The minister says yes. Sales tax at 329.8 million. What is your current estimate? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That one is a hard one to call. We think we’re fairly close to it, give or take 
a little bit, though, on either side, and I hope you can appreciate that aspect. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Tobacco tax at 36.4 million. What is your current estimate? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister answer from his feet, please, so it’s recorded? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I answered: pretty close. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The “other” of 5.9 million. Is that approximately correct? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s approximately correct. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, I’ll come back to the heritage fund once again. The $90 
million from the liquor board: there is no reason to think you wouldn’t be taking that amount? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Correct. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Are you anticipating taking any more from the liquor board than the 90 
million? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the estimate of motor vehicles at 46.2 million: do you 
anticipate that to be approximately correct? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That is reasonably correct. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to all of the other items under that heading, our own source 
revenue, is there any reason to believe that there will be a substantial variance from the 138,400,000? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the item, receipts from other governments, Canada 
assistance plan, is the estimate of 114,400,000 approximately correct? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, it will be at least that. There could be some variation on 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2170 

that; those numbers aren’t in yet. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, with respect to established program funding and 
equalization payments, I take it the figure is fixed by agreement? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The answer to that is yes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — To establish program funding, is the figure of 297,600,000 approximately 
accurate as far as you can judge it? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, apparently it is tied in to income tax. It could be down a slight 
amount, just to take cognizance of the fact that income tax could be up a little bit, but otherwise, it’s 
pretty much right on. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, with respect to any other item in the total of 
438,983,000 under the heading, receipts from other governments, do you anticipate any substantial 
variation? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I turn to the heritage fund, on page 118. With respect to 
coal, the 10,171,000 — what is your present estimate? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The estimates will be pretty much consistent, other than for three items. 
Gas, we indicated earlier, would probably show some increase because of the increased royalty effective 
February and March of this fiscal year. Oil will show some modification up. We are not exactly sure of 
that number yet. Potash we probably see coming down, perhaps 25 million. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Does the minister have any estimate of the amount likely to show upward 
under oil? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Perhaps a few million, but still it’s a hard one to read out there, and I would 
hate to be tied to that figure. But we are optimistic that we could get a little bit more. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, with respect to potash, did I understand you to say that you 
anticipated a possible drop of 25 million or thereabouts? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, I believe the statement made earlier was that the number we had in 
them was at 60, and we are projecting, or the Department of Energy was projecting, 34 approximately a 
month ago. I’m not sure that it has varied much from there. That’s the number we’re tending to be 
looking at now. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, with respect to the total figure of 
$811,757,000, total non-renewable resource revenue for the heritage fund, subject to the comments 
already made with respect to natural gas’s modest increase, oil’s possible increase and potash’s possible 
decrease of perhaps 25 million, is the figure thought to be approximately correct? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would say in answer to that question: pretty much the way we see it. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2171 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I turn now, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, to the investment revenue 
under the heritage fund — dividend from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan, $50 million, and 
interest revenue of $26,070,000. Are each of those expected to be approximately those figures? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we have before us supplementary 
estimates of approximately $52 million. That may be partially offset by miscellaneous 
underexpenditures which are perhaps not fully identified yet. Could the minister advise whether or not it 
is reasonable to add the $52 million supplementary expenses to his deficit of 220 to get a budgetary 
deficit, likely of $270 million? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It would not be correct. We anticipate corresponding offsets in expenditures 
to cover the supplementary number that you talked about. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do you now think that the miscellaneous 
under expenditures, which always occur, will be as much as $52 million? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Very close. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, with respect to revenue, we have 
indicated some places where revenue will be up and revenue will be down. The biggest, I think, single 
figure which looks fairly firm is a drop of 25 million in the potash side of the heritage fund. If that 
should occur, my understanding is that it would not then be possible to transfer the full $710 million to 
the consolidated fund. Is that the government’s view? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — As I understand, the legal opinion on this question is the estimates are the 
numbers that relate to the transfers as opposed to the actuals. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — You are advising now that if the actual revenue is less than the amount 
projected then the provision in the statute limiting the amount of the transfer would not cut in because of 
a failure of actual, but would be governed by the estimates. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, what the act says is 80 per cent of the estimated revenue. So I suppose 
one would ask for a legal opinion on that. Reading that, we would interpret that as meaning what the 
estimated value was as opposed to having to readjust it on actuals. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — In summary then, with respect to the deficit estimated in November at 
$220 million, is the minister advising that he believes that the actual deficit for the year ended March 31 
next, one month from now, will be that figure, give or take $10 million? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would say yes to that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Turning, Mr. Minister, to the administration branch. There has obviously 
been a very, very large increase in the expenditures under the administration branch. Would the minister 
indicate what increased positions were provided for? I think a look at the estimates will indicate that the 
previous years had 11.4 person-years. The anticipated increase was perhaps two people to 13.3. We now 
have 19.3 which is an 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2172 

increase of six people — eight people really — eight people in the administration branch. Would the 
minister outline what people were on staff last year and what are on staff now? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think the largest item in that is the funding of the Wolff commission on the 
crown corporations. It’s under the Department of Finance; that’s approximately $600,000. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’ll start at the top line first, the personal services: 11.4 person-years and 
19.3 person-years — eight more people. Could the minister advise what people were on staff when he 
took office and what people are now on staff? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — In the blue book, would reflect the five or six positions with regard to 
government organization, government reorganization. That particular operation is now being wound 
down, but that would be the largest component, those five or six positions there. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — We in the opposition have wondered with some fascination where all of 
these transition team people were . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Pardon? Well, can you give me the 
names of the people who were . . . We knew who the transition people were, we just didn’t know where 
they were getting their cheques from. Can you tell me the names of the people who were on staff and the 
people who are now on staff? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay, this was government organization advisers. What you would 
commonly refer to as the transition team would not be seen there. The person involved in that was a Mr. 
Gil Johnson, who is now deputy minister of continuing education. He came into the government and 
worked various reorganizations that we were doing. Along with him was a Mr. Ed Evancio, and a Mr. 
Murray, and two or three secretaries in that group. I think they were dealing primarily . . . One of the 
main areas was northern Saskatchewan, but also would be overall reorganization of government, which 
is an ongoing operation and not what you would normally refer to as transition. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I wonder if I might persist and ask whether the minister can just run 
through the names of the people who were on staff and who are covered by this 19.3 in the year under 
review. Who were the 11.4 and who were the 19.3, to the extent that they were permanent people, or 
contract people? Full-time people is perhaps what I’m saying. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay, the positions are as follows, to add up to 19. Two executive assistants 
that were in place in November that I indicated that were no longer there. A minister’s secretary, 
assistant secretary to the minister — that’s in the minister’s office staff. That component was four. It is 
now three. The deputy minister’s office is the deputy minister, the assistant deputy minister, the assistant 
to the deputy minister, the deputy minister’s secretary, clerk-steno 3. Administration services — the 
director of administration, assistant to the director of administration, communications officer, clerk-
typist 3. And then the Gil Johnson group that I referred to earlier of the five people. And that adds up to 
the 19. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, could you give me the names of the 
people? I know a number of them and I will be able to relate better if I have the names. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2173 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay. The executive assistants who were on were Jack Upshall, who is now 
in highway traffic working there; Dawn Dobni, who was a lawyer working in my office, is now working 
with Sask Housing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Dobni. Diane Tremblay, who was the secretary there 
before; the new secretary is Dianne Mooney. The deputy minister is Rob Douglas; assistant deputy 
minister, Mike Costello; assistant to the deputy minister is Mr. McKenzie who is now on education 
leave; assistant to the deputy minister, Ron Davis; the deputy minister’s secretary is Margaret Allan; the 
clerk-typist 3, I don’t know who it is and I’m sure you don’t care. Director of administration, Keith 
Mackrill; assistant to the director of administration, Ehman; and communications officer is Jane 
Dempsey who is now the EA in my office. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — In respect to David, Mackrill, Ehman and Dempsey, when did they come 
on staff? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mackrill was there when I came. Ron David transferred September 1, 1982, 
from BMI over to that particular position. Jane Dempsey was hired on June 16, 1982. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — And Ehman? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Three years. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Turning now, Mr. Minister, to the other expenses, $940,470, could you 
give me a breakdown of all items of $50,000 or more? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The printing, binding and engraving is $50,000. The other miscellaneous 
expense was $750,000. The largest component of that was the Wolfgang Wolff commission and report 
with regard to crown corporations, handled out of our office. The other two were two people. One was 
called Robinson, from Sask Power Corporation, who was doing an internal study with regard to the 
workings of the Department of Finance, and one was Garnet Garven, who was formerly with the city of 
Regina. They came over here. They were contracted to Executive Council. We pay for their cost because 
they’re looking at the Department of Finance. 
 
Those are the three that exceed $50,000. If you want me to get into some of the smaller stuff — that’s 
pretty well got it. It’s X number of dollars for telephone and office paper and this type of thing. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — You have partly answered the next question: that is, what contractual 
employees are covered by that vote? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Just the two I referred to. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Paul Robinson and Garvin. What was the approximate total cost of the 
Wolfgang Wolff commission? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We had 600,000. It’s estimated to come in around 425, substantially less 
than 6. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would the minister give the view of the 
government as to the value to the government in future policy-making of the Wolfgang Wolff 
commission report? 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2174 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Would I? No, because I believe that matter has not been adequately dealt 
with at cabinet yet. I think it would be improper of me to comment until such time as it was. I think the 
statement will be coming forth on particular moves that we might have to address to crown corporations 
by way of organization and how we might do that. That’s going to be announced in due course. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Would the minister outline somewhat more fully regarding Mr. Paul 
Robinson and Mr. Garven and what their commission was when they were taken on contract? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think they were looking at the workings of the Department of Finance. 
Many of the places, virtually all of the people that were there before were left in place. I think it was an 
idea to ensure that we check with other jurisdictions independently to determine whether it was 
operating the right way or whether it should be working in different ways. That, by and large, was what 
they were doing and the advice that we sought from them. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What were Mr. Robinson’s qualifications to review the Department of 
Finance? What is his background and what qualifications would he have for that particular task? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I understand they both have masters degrees or equivalents in public 
administration. Garven was an employee of the city of Regina in a senior administration position, and 
Robinson was in a senior position with Sask Power. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, have they reported to the minister in a 
formal way? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — They have made some recommendations, but not a full final report. Any 
full, final report, as you can appreciate, is an internal management document. I suppose we would look 
to see if there’s going to be any reorganization or doing of things differently within the Department of 
Finance. I think that will become clear as time goes on. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, do I understand the minister to be taking 
the position that they are hired on contract to do an examination of the operations of the Department of 
Finance, that they will report to the minister and that that report will not be public or made available to 
anyone but the internal government persons? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Generally, I think what will happen is that they would be advising. We 
would tend to review and look at, and act on where we saw proper to and not act on where we didn’t see 
proper to. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m directing my attention to whether or 
not the report prepared by the outside consultants — in the case of Mr. Garven, not in any sense a 
government employee, and Mr. Robinson, an employee, I take it, of the Saskatchewan Power 
Corporation — notwithstanding the fact that they have been engaged as outside consultants and paid for 
pursuant to a contract, whether their findings will in no sense be available to anyone but the minister. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I don’t think that they’re going to be findings in the sense 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2175 

of a formal report like the Wolfgang commission report was, with a specific targeted deal. I think what 
they’re looking at tends to be able to advise the minister as well as tending to look at the overall way of 
doing things. And it’s not so much an internal report, as I suppose an internal report for the government. 
But there is not the formalization of the report, if I can, like the Wolfgang commission. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’d be interested if the minister would 
outline what sort of things he was contemplating with respect to the Department of Finance. Is it 
assumed it will take on much larger responsibilities or much smaller responsibilities? Is it assumed that 
parts of the Department of Revenue, Supply and Services will be decanted back to finance? 
 
The Minister of Revenue, Supply and Services indicated — I don’t think she asserted it, but indicated — 
that there might well be an amalgamation of the Department of Government Services and the 
Department of Revenue, Supply and Services. As I recall it, the Department of Revenue, Supply and 
Services was made up partly of functions taken over from the old Department of Public Works and 
functions taken over from the old Department of Finance. And I’m curious to know whether or not it is 
proposed that the Department of Finance will be assuming substantially larger functions if there is an 
amalgamation of departments. 
 
I’d be interested in knowing just what avenues these people were looking at. I’m sure anyone can look at 
the Department of Finance. But these two particular people have no . . . They wouldn’t have much to say 
about treasury and debt management or whatever, that function, and they wouldn’t have a great deal to 
say about the comptroller’s office, or perhaps they would, although I don’t know where their expertise 
would come from. They might, if they were looking at an overall review of the organization of 
government — they each come from relatively large organizations who are organized somewhat 
differently than the Government of Saskatchewan — they obviously might have something to 
contribute. I’d be interested if the minister would state a little more fully what was sought to be achieved 
by bringing in these people and asking them to review the Department of Finance. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I suppose what we would look at trying to achieve is: see what other 
jurisdictions, how other jurisdictions handle the budgeting process; see whether all the departments of 
the department fit, or whether some others could be transferred to other departments or amended or 
varied. I suppose that the other thing that we sought is maybe a way to prepare a budget that would tend 
to be such that it was more receptive to the people or more in tune with what people were saying. And 
was the system in fact right for that? Were there some amendments to that? 
 
I take it the hon. member would probably harken back to the last budget that his government advanced 
and I suppose would ask oneself. “Did we do everything the right way and were there changes that could 
be implemented to make it better, to make it more address the needs?” And I suppose we sought those 
types of things. And some of that being structural; some of it being other than structural. And where the 
problems were. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have no doubt in the world that some 
things should have been done differently, but I’m not sure I would have looked to the Department of 
Finance as the first place. I don’t think there was anything wrong with the way the numbers were put 
together. It was perhaps the numbers that were put together that might have been done differently, and I 
can hardly lay that at the 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2176 

door of the Department of Finance. 
 
Perhaps I can phrase the question this way: with respect to the other expenses item, it has multiplied by a 
very large figure — 141 to 940; 800,000 increase. Six hundred thousand of that is accounted for by the 
budget for the Wolfgang Wolff commission report, which I take it will not be an ongoing expense. The 
other 200,000 is accounted for partly by the Robinson and Garven study. I’m wondering whether there 
are any other items in this 940,000 which are likely to be ongoing, and therefore likely to be an expense 
which will continue into future years. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We would anticipate that most of that would drop back off next year. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


