






















































Hansard: November 28, 1983


265 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 28, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
ADDRESS IN REPLY (continued) 

 
MR. YOUNG: — I left off, Mr. Speaker, at 5 o’clock, explaining to the members opposite the virtues of our oil 
program as compared to their subsidy program, and the benefits that it has provided this province by way of 
jobs and economic well-being. I hope that the members opposite take heed and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, it’s a possibility. 
 
I’d like to point out some facts, Mr. Speaker, about our health care system as compared to how it was operated 
in the last 11 years of the Blakeney administration. We’re presently, Mr. Speaker, at an all-time high in health 
care spending. We spend in excess of $1,000 per man, woman, and child in this province on health care. We 
have, during our few months in office, spent more on nursing and special-care homes, Mr. Speaker, than the last 
seven years of the NDP combined. They, in their own words, and by their own documents, put a moratorium on 
construction of nursing homes. They put them on the back burner. And the member from Pelly noted in the 
House that he couldn’t see why further nursing homes should be built when they weren’t needed. I would point 
out, Mr. Speaker, that his statements just epitomize the attitude of the NDP towards health care in this province. 
The fact that they did virtually nothing by way of construction of nursing and special-care homes when they 
knew full well, Mr. Speaker, that the population was ageing and that, certainly, crown corporations and 
government itself were not the priorities that the people of this province wanted. The people wanted 
construction of nursing and special-care homes, but again, Mr. Speaker, they failed to listen, and in April of ’82 
they paid the price dearly for their failure to listen. 
 
With respect, Mr. Speaker, to government itself, our administration has reduced the size of government by 
1,500 people. During the Blakeney administration’s 11 years in office, they more, Mr. Speaker, than doubled 
the size of the provincial civil service. Big government is the name of their game. 
 
I listened, Mr. Speaker, with interest a week ago today when the Leader of the Opposition gave his reply to the 
throne speech. As always, he had on his gloom and doom face. He talked about A teams and B teams and C 
teams. I had mentioned earlier in my speech, before our break for supper, the result that his type of 
administration received with A and B and C teams, and certainly that is not the way that this government is 
conducting itself, and certainly for the betterment of members and betterment of the province as a whole. 
 
I would also like to just take a few moments, Mr. Speaker, to point out some facts for the people in TV land 
about liquor advertising. They’ve heard some fairly warped, factual set-ups presented by the member opposite, 
but I want people, Mr. Speaker, to realize that it was they, the members opposite and their government, that first 
allowed liquor advertising into this province. They had the ability to stop liquor advertising when it was coming 
in on the cable networks, and they failed to do so. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, it’s well known that they gave grants to malting companies to make beer. It was they and 
their party who received wads of donations from Seagrams and other liquor companies towards their 
campaigns. They were certainly a long ways from being out of bed with the liquor companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, a point that I don’t believe has been raised so far in the throne speech. It was they, Mr. 
Speaker, who reduced the drinking from 21 to 18, and then later to 19 years of age. So certainly, Mr. Speaker, I 
do not see how they can be speaking so sanctimoniously about liquor  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

266 
 

when, in fact, they reduced the drinking age from 21 down to the ages that it’s presently at. 
 
Despite the problems that the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, is obviously suffering within his own 
party, I feel that it is incumbent upon me to scold him for the very regressive position that he took on our labour 
situation. The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, is promoting militance in our labour force. Certainly I 
would suggest, Mr. Speaker, and I join with the Hon. Lorne McLaren in scolding him with respect to the 
position he has taken, he’s not putting himself first as a Canadian or a Saskatchewanian. He’s looking only to 
his own political future, trying to put himself at the head of the parade of the radicals on the labour legislation. I 
think that he should take a serious look at the position that he takes in promoting militance within the labour 
union. It certainly does not take this province or the country very far with attitudes such as his. And I hope, 
certainly, that he will not be leading this province into labour militance. It certainly is not something that we in 
this House want to see. 
 
I would like to also point out for the people of Saskatchewan, and certainly for the member from Gravelbourg 
who makes great bones about the subject, why we have today the problem with the Crow rate. I would suggest 
to him and to all members of this House, Mr. Speaker, that if it were not for him and his counterparts in Ottawa, 
the five Saskatchewan NDP MPs who, on an NDP motion by Bob Rae, the NDP member from Ontario, threw 
out, Mr. Speaker, threw out a western Canadian prime minister. They threw out a minister of transport from 
Vegreville, Alberta, Don Mazankowski. And I know, Mr. Speaker, that they know if Mazankowski were still 
the minister of transport and if Joe Clark were still the prime minister of this province, we would not have the 
problems that we are experiencing with the Crow today. I put it to you, Mr. speaker, and to the members 
opposite that Mazankowski would not have done to the Crow what Jean-Luc Pepin and the other eastern 
Liberals have done to our Crow change. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YOUNG: — Their philosophy, Mr. Speaker, is different throughout. I ask the members opposite: where 
was their party, where were their federal counterparts, on the Grenada issue? When that matter came up, Ed 
Broadbent jumped out, running off at the mouth, condemning our closest ally. He condemned the Americans for 
sending the troops into Grenada. 
 
It’s known, Mr. Speaker, that the Americans did not confer with Trudeau prior to sending troops into Grenada. 
They did so with other countries, and I ask why. I think that, although it’s never been said, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that possibly he was considered to be a security risk and, accordingly, was not advised of the American 
intentions in Grenada. 
 
I can imagine, Mr. Speaker, the phone hanging up and Trudeau immediately off to the overseas operator with a 
call to Castro, advising them, and as such, American lives could have been lost. If that were at all a possibility, I 
think he would be duly considered to be a security risk and, accordingly, not worthy of prior notice of the 
American’s intentions in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s known that in that country, rebels shot the Prime Minister and members of the cabinet, and 
then declared themselves to be law — set up martial law, curfews, etc. And I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if this sort 
of event would have happened in this country, what would have happened? Would we have wanted 
intervention? I think certainly that would be the case if something that heinous took place in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CBC sent in an army of reporters into that country. They combed the hills — I put it to you — 
trying to find one Grenadian who would speak against the American intervention. They came back empty 
handed. 
 
I recall Barbara Fromm from the CBC interviewing Grenadians living in Canada, attempting to find someone 
who could disagree. Again, she had no luck. She came up empty handed. When the dust settled, Mr. Speaker, 
the majority of Americans, who are quick to condemn themselves,  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

267 
 

democratic delegations, etc., overwhelmingly supported the U.S. action 
 
I would think, Mr. Speaker, that this is something where the New Democrats, through their federal counterparts, 
have demonstrated their trigger-happy approach. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, after 200 years in that country of 
virtually spotless decency and democracy, you would think that the NDP would give our closest ally the benefit 
of the doubting that situation. No, sir, they jump out immediately, condemning them before all the facts were in, 
and I think for that position the members across the room and the NDP in Ottawa should be severely scolded 
and condemned by the people of this country, who certainly were a little more patient in coming to conclusions 
on the righteousness of the American’s move. 
 
A party, Mr. Speaker, bankrupt of ideas, bankrupt of the knowledge of who’s who in the world. Mr. Speaker, in 
April of 1981, and I would ask the remaining three members or four members opposite who are in the House at 
this time to take note of my remarks in this regard . . . In April of 1981, the Leader of the Opposition, the then 
premier of the province, make a shadowy pilgrimage to Cuba and I wonder, Mr. Speaker, what he was talking 
about in the first weeks in April of 1981. What was he talking to Castro about? What was he telling them about 
he Canadians, who his supporters were? We don’t know, Mr. Speaker. He did not provide us with any reports of 
what he was doing in Cuba. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that at this time the polls show that if an election were called today, the NDP 
would be reduced to virtually a few stragglers on the Vancouver Island. I think that it only goes to show, Mr. 
Speaker, and certainly in light of their convention last week-end, that they failed to keep up with the times, that 
their norms and values do not change from day to day. They don’t try to represent the people, but they try to 
indoctrinate the people into their way of thinking, as opposed to trying it represent the going thought of the 
community and the country. They stick to their dogmatic, socialist ideals. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that there was 
no change this week-end at their convention. They had the same president. They had the same resolutions as last 
year. They have the same leader. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, that they are out of touch. They’re out of office and 
out of hope. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, from my remarks, it’s very obvious that I will be voting against their 
amendment and for the resolution. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIMAN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s again an honour and a privilege to be able to speak in this 
House, and I would like to thank the constituents of Fairview for allowing me to do so. Before I get into my 
speech proper though, there are a few comments that I would like to make. When we resumed sitting last week, 
a great portion of the debate had to do with the double standards — the so-called double standards — and I 
think we can fully appreciate now that the government side of the House as finally put to rest, during debate, 
this myth of double standard and put the onus on the shoulders where it is deserved. In totality, it is finally the 
people of the province that finally determine which ones are telling the truth and which are not. 
 
The last time I spoke in the House on throne debate, Mr. Speaker, I tried to appeal to the intelligence and the 
empathy of the opposition members now beside me, rather than opposite me, attempting to have them look at 
themselves internally, attempting to have them change their attitudes. It is with great regret that I report in the 
House this evening that I have failed. I made a New Year’s resolution, Mr. Speaker, a few months in advance, 
and I promise my constituents and the people of Saskatchewan that I shall not fail again. I shall never in this 
House appeal to their intelligence and their empathy. 
 
I suppose a lot of the feelings that they have, were brought about through that trauma, that culture shock, that 
they went through a year and a half ago, and they still haven’t gotten over that — the culture shock of losing the 
general election. They haven’t gotten over the idea that they professed to be a truism in their party, that they 
alone had the divine right to govern this province. Perhaps the fault lies in that they had to have endured with 
the type of leadership they  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

268 
 

had. The facts are, Mr. Speaker, we have Devine; they have the other leader. And that’s probably where their 
failure is, in part. I shall go on to explain some of their other failures. 
 
What I would like to discuss though, Mr. Speaker, this evening is the role of government in the province, 
focusing particularly on the terminology “responsible.” Responsible government. This is what the people asked 
for on April 26, ’82. And that, I believe, is what they have received. A responsible government is a two-way 
street. It is not only members of the government-elect who must act responsibly; it also is incumbent upon the 
opposition to act responsibly. 
 
I want to touch on a few instances, if I may. The PURC program — the public utilities review commission. 
Every time the PURC is brought up in the House, we hear howls of derision and laughter. The Premier spoke to 
it this afternoon. Why did we set up the PURC? Who are on PURC? 
 
The commission is made up of a cross-section of leaders in our community to ensure that any increases in utility 
rates are legitimate. What did we have in the past? Arbitrary setting of the rates. Arbitrary setting of the rates at 
times when it was convenient, politically, to do it, and no mention of rates when it was politically inconvenient. 
That’s what we did. To the people of Saskatchewan, you have to ask the question: who acted more responsibly? 
 
Another instance, Mr. Speaker, is the MIRP program — the mortgage interest reduction plan, an opportunity for 
the householders of this province. And it’s just a little while back when there was the real fear of losing their 
homes. We promised, and we delivered, that we would set the rates in such a way as to guarantee that they 
would not go any higher than 13.25 per cent. What was the response of the opposition, at that time the 
legitimate government? If I may quote to you, “We are not in a position to announce any new policies which 
will mitigate the effect of high interest rates” — the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, Allan Blakeney, in this 
House, 1980. He went on further to say, “Our position is that the first steps to be taken with respect to interest 
rates ought to be taken by the federal government.” Is that a responsible reply to the people of this province 
when, as I indicated earlier, there was that real fear of losing their houses, losing their households? To make 
matters worse, what type of program did they offer to try to help these people when the pressure was on before 
the writ came out? The response, quite simply: “Don’t worry about it. Don’t pay your interest rates.” Were they 
encouraging people to act irresponsible? Again, I ask the people of this province: who acted responsibly and 
who acted irresponsibly? 
 
Gas tax. There’s another one that will bring those cries up. “Oh, no, not the old story of the gas tax. Not the gas 
tax again. You always bring it up. You always bring it up. It’s the same old story.” Mr. Speaker, it’s not the 
same old story. It’s the same new story. Let’s put the gas tax in perspective. Twelve million dollars per month, 
$450,000 per day that is back into the pockets of the citizenry of this province — disposable income that they 
can use to buy those items that are needed in the households. And where are they spending it? They’re spending 
it in the stores, in the grocery stores, the small business men. They’re buying the shirts; they’re buying school 
supplies for their children, so much so that the private entrepreneurs had so much interest and so much 
encouragement by it that over 6,500 new businesses have come into effect since we took government — over 
6,500 since we have come into power. That’s what the gas tax means. That’s what it means — money in 
people’s pockets. But how do they interpret this? How do they interpret small business? How do they interpret 
free enterprise? 
 
Again, if I may quote a past member of this House, past member of this House from The Battlefords, David 
Miner. Quote Hansard, November ’81. Just a few short months before they went to the polls, November ’81, 
and I quote: “Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe in free enterprise.” End of quote. And those people out there who 
have that disposable income, who have the encouragement of free enterprise, said basically on April 26, “I don’t 
believe you.” That’s why they were turfed out. 



 
November 28, 1983 

 

269 
 

 
Another one that we hear in the House, in which the members of the government are castigated for, is the open 
for business programs. What were we endeavouring to do with our open for business policy? Is it irresponsible 
for us to try to create a climate in this province where there would be investor confidence, and did it work? Of 
course it worked — 6,500 new businesses. Is that irresponsible? Is it irresponsible to set royalty structures that 
encourage the risk and the initiatives that are necessary to bring about new development opportunities? That’s 
not irresponsible. 
 
We heard the Minister of Energy, just last week, announce the success story regarding that. Who is being 
responsible in this province? 
 
You know, you look at the Province of Saskatchewan, and it’s been said before, there is an analogy there, the 
analogy that of a supermarket. We have people within this rural society of ours that are crying, begging, for the 
resources and the goods that we have in this province. It’s like going into a supermarket where the shelves are 
all filled, and they want to come in and buy. They want to come in and purchase, but they’re hesitant. They’re 
very hesitant. They’re afraid. They’re looking at this supermarket door and they’re saying, “Do I go in and 
purchase something, pay a fair price, only to be met at the door and have my goods confiscated?” because that 
was the mentality and the message that were sent around North America, and indeed the world, by the past 
administration. You’ll pay a good price, a fair price, but if we don’t like it we’ll confiscate it. We’ll confiscate 
the potash and we’ll bring in laws retroactively to make sure that we do it. No wonder they’re a little hesitant. 
 
Would you not be a little hesitant, as my fellow colleague points out, from Melville, to come into this 
supermarket only to have your purchases redeemed for one dollar? A stated policy of the members opposite. 
Which is responsible, and which is irresponsible? To spread fear, not only fear and hesitancy to the people of 
your province, but to spread that malignancy throughout North America and then to berate our Premier or to 
berate our prime ministers, to have to go to different parts of the world to try to undo those doom stories, to 
undo that mentality. People of Saskatchewan, who is responsible and who is irresponsible? 
 
And if the message is not clear enough about how far you’re willing to go to keep that cancer alive, you have 
your own leader, at a time of restraint across this province and this country, at a time when fences are trying to 
be mended, when people are trying to pull together, you have your leader speak publicly and advocate militancy 
in the labour forces. Where is the responsible actions of the members opposite? As I stated before, the people of 
the province are the ones best to judge. 
 
I couldn’t let one comment go by from the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg. Maybe this will paint a 
picture clearer to the citizenry of this province. When you have a member in this House, whether a 
back-bencher, Legislative Secretary, member of the opposition, or a minister, stand up in this House and act in 
the name that is prescribed to all of us in this House, that being the hon. member. And that hon. member acts 
honourably by speaking the truth in this House, that being the hon. member. And that hon. member acts 
honourably by speaking the truth in this House. And the member from Saskatoon Centre, the hon. member from 
Saskatoon Centre, stands up and speaks a truism in this House regarding past reviews and reports on alcohol 
and legislation, and you have the gall to stand up in this House and say that anybody who speaks the truth is 
sleazy and slimy. They don’t understand the truth. It has to be sleazy and slimy. Well, I would be very much 
interested in your definition of truth, then, if you think hon. members’ definition of truth is sleazy and slimy. 
You do a disservice to the hon. members in this House and a disservice to your constituents. 
 
Another topic that I could not let go by. There have been some accusations, in fact not accusations, out and out 
baiting. “You people back there, you 14 back-benchers, aren’t you in a mood of dissension? Look at all the 
cabinet ministers. Look at all the Legislative Secretaries. They put you on the C team. Don’t you feel bad about 
it? Don’t you feel bad about it?” You know why they brought that topic up? Because they have no appreciation 
for what an MLA truly does,  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

270 
 

because they never ever did it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIMAN: — Before I decided to get into politics in the city of Saskatoon . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
I would love, Mr. Speaker, I would love to get into an intellectual debate with the member opposite, but it 
would be unfair. It would be unfair because he’s insufficiently armed — insufficiently armed . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I wouldn’t want to get into that debate with you. I would love to continue the discussion of the 
mental dexterity that you show. The only thing that keeps me back from it is I’m always a little frightful of 
dealing with people like that, who, when you say hello to them, are stuck for an answer. 
 
At any rate, I want to come back to my pride in having those 14 colleagues of mine in the back benches. When I 
went into politics, going through Saskatoon, there wasn’t a constituency office the people could go to. Oh, there 
was a little room in the Sturdy-Stone Centre. Part of responsibility is not only acting responsibly, but being 
responsible to your constituents. They have to be able to feel that you are accessible. They must be able to 
approach you with their problems. This is why they have no concept of what an MLA does. You did not 
continue on. You did not act responsibly when you were government, and that was another one of the reasons 
why you were sent out, why you were humiliated at the polls. 
 
On this point of accessibility, on this point of the type of mentality that was built up in this province that my 
colleagues are trying so hard to undo, I want to repeat a telephone conversation I had last week in my 
constituency. A lady phoned me up with a particular concern, a need. And I talked to her on the phone. (She 
didn’t complain about the 25 cents.) And I talked to her on the phone and I assured her that I would try my best. 
I may not be able to get her the answer that she would like; it may be the answer that she doesn’t like, but I 
would try my best. Before she hung up the phone, I could tell that there was a little bit of hesitancy in her voice. 
I says, “Everything all right, Ma’am? Be assured, I will work on your behalf.” She says, “Well, I’m a little . . . I 
don’t know how to say this to you, but you mean you really will help me?” 
 
I said, “Of course, ma’am, that’s what I got elected to do.” 
 
She said, “You’ll even help me if I tell you I was NDP?” 
 
A mentality that says that if you want help and you need assistance, the only way you could get it in the past 
was if you were part of the club. Forget all those Liberals out there. Forget all those Conservatives out there; all 
those WCCers or any other faction. The mentality that was impressed upon this woman’s mind was that if you 
wanted help or assistance from government, you had to be an NDP, and if you still were an NDP, no other 
person would help you. That’s what my colleagues are doing out there — working in their constituencies, 
following up on calls and assisting their clientele, where you failed in all three aspects, and that showed up in 
April 26, 1982. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIMAN: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot say enough about my colleagues. I am proud to be within the same 
room as they are. But as much as I am proud, as much as I am proud, member opposite, I also have to report to 
the House that I am grateful and thankful. I am grateful and thankful, Mr. Speaker, that the supporters of the 
members opposite cared enough to send their very best. Quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, myself, my colleagues, the 
people of this province, I don’t think, could long endure had they sent us their very worst. So I am grateful and 
thankful. 
 
Where do we hear the greatest hoots of derision in this House? The budget, the deficit. I want to talk about 
those for a moment or two. The first thing we hear is the ridicule of the restraint program. It’s already been 
brought up in this House that our restraint program is tame compared  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

271 
 

to the NDP restraint program in Manitoba. But you know, in that same newspaper clipping that was brought to 
the House’s attention, I think there was one aspect that was overlooked. The one aspect — and I may be 
corrected on this, but you may look it up in the Leader-Post or the Star Phoenix — was this: how caring are you 
for that poor wage-earner out there? Well, I’ll tell you how caring your colleague are. They have imposed a 1.5 
per cent employment tax. Let’s tax these workers further, that’s what you think of the hard workers, and yet you 
ridicule our restraint program. Which is more responsible? 
 
We came down with our first budget in response to the sorry condition that we found this province in when we 
came to power. 
 
The hon. minister, Robert Andrew, came down in the November budget, and what was the response of the 
opposition? The Leader of the Opposition holding a wad of bills in his hand, $10 bills and $1 bills, and saying, 
“This is what it means to you people; this is what it means to you.” But did you notice the absence — the 
absence — of the bogus billion dollar betrayal of the heritage fund in his other hand? I didn’t see him standing 
up there with a billion dollars worth of funny money — money that is not real, that did not exist. A betrayal to 
the people of this province? I didn’t see him standing doing that. No, the $10 bills, the $10 bills. 
 
They would have the people of this province believe that we should go out and act irresponsibly — build more 
capital buildings, put them up, increase this, increase this, increase this — but yet at the same time, say, “Don’t 
do it without a deficit. Don’t do it without increasing taxation.” I hope that the message that I hear from the 
opposition when they use that kind of logic does not lead me or you, the people of Saskatchewan, to believe that 
they believe that the populace of this province are mental midgets, because you can only spend what you have. 
 
You only have a few alternatives. You can increase taxation, but this isn’t the appropriate time — if ever there 
is an appropriate time. Or, you can borrow, and this is what we chose to do. This is what we chose to do. I am 
asking you: who acted responsibly, and who acted irresponsibly? 
 
And yet they say they have a better way. You can do this magic game of juggling dollars, dollars that don’t 
exist, and still do all the things that they profess that we should do that they didn’t do when they had the 
opportunity. And so what did the Minister of Finance . . . How did he respond to that? “If you guys are the 
brightest lights on the street, I invite you to sit down and join in with me in the budgetary process. Share your 
ideas with us. If it’s any way that we can alleviate the problems and the concerns of the population of 
Saskatchewan, share it with us. We’ll give you credit. We’ll give you . . . “No, didn’t want no part of it. This 
magic formula is still a better kept secret than the formula for Coca-Cola, and they are unwilling to share it. 
We’ll give you the credit for it. Who is acting responsibly and who is acting irresponsibly? 
 
Here’s but a few of many, many instances, and of course you will see more in the upcoming days. Now as a 
rational person, I go back to my constituents and they ask me, “Why are those nice people saying such bad 
things about you?” And I have to try to understand that and try to explain it to my constituents. And I can’t. It’s 
a chicken Little syndrome. Running around, the sky is falling on their head, and therefore they’re convinced it’s 
falling on everybody else’s head also. They just have not taken the time to look up and see that there really is a 
blue sky. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIMAN: — Let’s stop the charade. Let’s stop the charade . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The only time 
hon. member is . . . Just an aside about pink clouds, Mr. Speaker . . . is at sunset. That’s right. And you have met 
your sunset. 
 
But let’s stop this charade. I guess that if I were in the same position, I might be inclined, might be inclined, to 
react the same way . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You have convinced me. I definitely would not react in the 
same way. But what is this reaction to? It’s quite honestly and  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

272 
 

quite blatantly a reaction to fear — fear of their party’s fortunes. It’s also a fear, a fear to the inevitable. A fear 
of the inevitable. Now, is the fear justified? April 26, 1982 — total catastrophe, humiliation. Last weekend — 
Saskatoon convention — dissension within their own party ranks. Future date, not known yet — panic over the 
federal election. Is that fear justified? You better believe that fear is justified. 
 
There’s another fear. It’s a fear that’s a clamminess that paralyses. And that’s a fear to acknowledge your own 
kind, a fear to acknowledge your own kind — a fear of being found out. What is he talking about? What is he 
talking about? Mr. Speaker, never have I, never will I be afraid to acknowledge that I am a PC, or to 
acknowledge one of my PC colleagues. Never. Let me read: “The nearly famous Prairie Fire band went to North 
Battleford Wednesday, November 9.” They had some great entertainment. I suppose I may have gone there 
myself. Frankie Yankovic, Captain Candle — you have to go see Captain Candle. Western Senators. Some 
western senators you might want to go see, but you couldn’t miss this. 
 
How can I go? The price is reasonable; $7.50, lunch included. Where can I get a ticket? I want to go. I’m loyal. 
I love country music. Well, I can phone Wilkie. I can phone 843-2364. I can phone Spiritwood. Another good 
one, 883-2702. I can phone Meadow Lake, and on and on and on and on. I can phone and buy these tickets. You 
may not recognize the voice, but who is Wilkie? Please help me if I mispronounce this name, because I’ve had 
instances in the past where my name has been mispronounced. That sure I not Dwain. Delaine, that’s it — 
Delaine Scotton. Wilkie. Lloyd Johnson, past MLA for Turtleford; Dave Bridger, Dave Bridger, NDP candidate 
last election. And not be proud of your own people and to be able to say, “this is an NDP function.” Not being 
able to face your own kind, to stand up there and be proud and say, “I’m proud to be an NDPer.” You have to 
resort to subterfuge such as this, and you can’t face your own kind. Then you definitely do have a justification 
to be afraid. Definitely. 
 
This fear will eventually manifest itself. It will manifest itself with the eradication and extinction of the NDP 
party in this province. You will place yourself in a display case in the Saskatchewan Museum of Natural 
History between that of a dinosaur and the dodo. You will be gone. Your own people will determine that if you 
are afraid to acknowledge them. 
 
Why do I say the dinosaur? I think the dinosaur and the dodo is an apt parallel. We know the dinosaur has been 
gone. They ruled the earth for quite a long time. They’re gone now. Why? They failed to adapt. 
 
The dodo is an interesting comparison also. What is the dodo bird? A dodo bird is a squat-backed, little bird, 
with stubby little wings, and a big beak, that was hunted to extinction — hunted to extinction. And why? It got 
lazy and it forgot how to fly. That’s what happened to the dodo bird. It forgot how to fly. It was so busy with its 
head down saying, “The world is coming down, the world is coming down.” — the Chicken Little syndrome, 
the Chicken Little syndrome. 
 
And to the people of the province, I want to suggest, the members opposite not only have acted irresponsibly, 
because, in all selfishness, if they’d acted responsibly, they would make the government even act more 
responsible. And if we acted more responsible, the second coming wouldn’t let these people in. Not only have 
they acted irresponsibly, but they are bankrupt of ideas; they lack any kind of initiative, and, worst of all, they 
don’t take heed of the electorate. They don’t listen. 
 
As I’ve mentioned, unless, and I don’t like to beg, but I do beg you, unless you take heed, we will meet the 
similar fate of the dinosaur and the dodo bird. 
 
Now, one has to be fair. Have we, as government, been letter perfect? No, we haven’t. We haven’t been letter 
perfect. We’ve stumbled — we stumbled in our desire and eagerness to move this province forward. We’ve 
stumbled in that eagerness and desire to make this province  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

273 
 

a great province in this country to fulfil its full potential. Yes, we’ve stumbled. We’ve been tripped, too. We’ve 
been tripped. We’ve been tripped by those people who fear free thinking and openness. We were tripped by 
those people. Still got up. We still got up. 
 
We faced roadblocks — many, many roadblocks. I’ve mentioned the pit to you — the pit — the billion dollar 
heritage fund in it. Yes, we’ve had roadblocks. When we opened the books and there was nothing there for us to 
fulfil your dreams. Yes, we’ve done that. We had not been letter perfect, but we have no intention of giving up, 
no intention whatsoever. Saskatchewan is now finally on the move, the momentum is there, the momentum to 
build this province, and we shall obtain our rightful destiny in this country. We are not giving up. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WEIMAN: — What about fairness to the opposition? Obviously, they must have done something right in 
past administrations. I can’t think of one right now. They must have done something right in the last 
administration because they returned eight — they returned eight. 
 
I suppose that if I was really hard-pressed to come up with some of the great things they did in the last 
administration, I would have to quite literally count those good things on the fingers of my left hand, and there 
aren’t very many fingers on this left hand. 
 
As I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, we came to power because the people of the province believed us. They had 
high expectations of us. Those expectations came about because we had high expectations of ourselves. What I 
can say is, the job’s not finished. We are not going to close up now because we’ve only been here a year and a 
half. We’ve just begun. We are determined not only to meet those expectations, but to exceed them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in conscience, in loyalty to this province, in service to my constituency, I have no other alternative 
to be voting in favour of the motion and opposed to the amendment. Thank you. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to take part in this debate, Mr. Speaker, in respect to my 
response, my constituency’s response, the response of this opposition, to the third throne speech presented to us 
by the Conservative government. 
 
As I reviewed the throne speech itself, Mr. Speaker, as I have listened to the Conservative members in this 
debate, three things have become very obvious — three things, Mr. Speaker, painfully obvious. 
 
First, the throne speech itself was barren, and it was empty. It is a disappointment to all Saskatchewan people, 
and it is particularly an insult to northern people, an insult to northern Saskatchewan in particular. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, that throne speech was just the latest example of a Conservative government’s big 
business policy. Big business, double standard policy by this Tory government. 
 
And third, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, the Conservative members, the back-benchers, have become 
nervous and very defensive. They have become nervous, Mr. Speaker. They have become very defensive. The 
point here is that they are not talking about anything that relates at all to the throne speech. Nothing at all. They 
have nothing to present to the people of this province. They have absolutely nothing. They are attacking the 
individual opposition members of the House. They have a throne speech that is barren, that is empty, that has no 
promise, that has no future. So what do they do? They have obviously no reason for standing up and debating 
on the throne speech. Their only other option then is to attack the opposition members of this  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

274 
 

caucus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they know, as well, that the people of Saskatchewan are also beginning to ask questions about this 
Conservative government. They are asking questions, Mr. Speaker. They are asking questions about this 
Conservative government’s policy of restraint, and then they spend . . . This Conservative government preaches 
restraint and then they spend an extra $3 million a year on a huge cabinet expansion, a huge cabinet expansion. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Only missed 13. 
 
MR. YEW: — They missed 13, 14 back-benchers but they increased their cabinet. They increased their 
Legislative Secretary positions. They have increased . . . Another huge bureaucracy. They chastise the former 
administration for bureaucracy where they themselves have established a bureaucracy. They have established a 
bureaucracy of cabinet ministers that are not required, Legislative Secretaries that weren’t there with the former 
administration. 
 
How can they freeze, as well, the minimum wage? And then they turn around and provide an $11,000 a year 
pay increase to their political advisers. And still they preach restraint. 
 
People of this province are raising questions like: how can they totally ignore the issues and needs of northern 
people and then boast about their $100 million royalty gifts for the big oil companies? 
 
They preach restraint, Mr. Speaker. Right now, at the moment, the people of this province, the people that are 
unemployed, every man, woman, and child, every family in this province is paying $66 million per year interest 
to the banking companies that money was borrowed from by this government. It comes to $5.5 million a month, 
Mr. Speaker. I have statistics here that point those figures out very clearly. At this point in time we are spending 
$1.3 million a week. That money, Mr. Speaker, could be well used to create jobs for the unemployed in this 
province. 
 
Royalty breaks for the big companies, Mr. Speaker: $100 million per year. And then they turn around and put a 
freeze on the minimum wage. I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and the people of this province ask: is that fair? Is that a 
government which is fair, or is that a government which is so arrogant with its huge majority that it is 
determined to play double standard politics? And it is those questions, Mr. Speaker, which are making the 
government members very nervous these days — very nervous and defensive. 
 
Across the North, Mr. Speaker, ordinary men and women now feel betrayed by the Devine Conservatives of this 
province. People in this province are feeling ignored, particularly the people of the North. They are feeling and 
they are feeling betrayed by this Conservative government. 
 
They may search, the people of the North may search through 12 pages of the throne speech, search through its 
12 long, dull pages, and, Mr. Speaker, they will find not one single reference to northern Saskatchewan — not 
one single reference, not one single acknowledgement of the special conditions and problems that exist in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The unemployment rate in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has risen with this Conservative government’s 
administration — doubled. From October 1981 to October of 1983, it has increased by 43 per cent. And they 
talk about jobs coming out of the big oil companies. 
 
The member for P.A.-Duck Lake mentioned some jobs that have sprung out of this big business philosophy of 
theirs, and I see that there has been an increase of 21 per cent unemployment in Prince Albert . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Boy, if you want some numbers, the member for Regina whatever, I’ll tell you. In October of 
1981 we had 1,103 people on the unemployment roll; today we have almost 2,000. We have 1,923 people, an 
increase of 43 per cent in the area of La Ronge. That’s a huge increase and yet your Conservative government 
boast of new jobs, new  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

275 
 

job options, new opportunities, and the selling out of Saskatchewan resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that there was not one single acknowledgement of the special conditions and 
problems of northern Saskatchewan. The high unemployment rates I have mentioned, and they are existent. The 
unemployment rates in the North are anywhere from 80 per cent to 95 per cent. The welfare case-loads, which 
are increasing as well, have doubled. The training programs which are required for northern residents have 
never been acknowledged or supported or encouraged from this throne speech or any other budget presentation 
presented and introduced by this Conservative government. 
 
Northern people in communities across northern Saskatchewan look at that throne speech, and they ask: doesn’t 
the Devine government understand that our communities are different, with special opportunities and special 
problems? Doesn’t it understand that northern people are proud, proud of their communities, proud of their 
achievements of the 1970s? 
 
The Devine Conservatives have no sensitivity whatsoever toward many people in this province. And let there be 
no mistake, Mr. Speaker, during the last 11 years of the Blakeney government, more was accomplished for the 
people of northern Saskatchewan, and by the people of northern Saskatchewan, than in any comparable period 
of any other place in Canada. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Or the world. 
 
MR. YEW: — Or the world. I thank my colleague from Athabasca for pointing that out. 
 
No northern resident, however, will claim that the record was perfect. No one will deny that there was much left 
to do, but they will all agree, Mr. Speaker, that the special problems were recognized, that noble, genuine efforts 
were made, and that great achievements were made. 
 
The former administration, the former government, brought about dramatic changes in northern Saskatchewan. 
Major infrastructures were built. We had new schools. We had new programs, new hospital and health services. 
We have improved transportation services. We have, as well, provided for new sewer and water facilities in 
many of the major communities. 
 
We look closely at this throne speech, Mr. Speaker. We look closely at this Conservative government’s budget. 
We look closely at their policies and programs for ordinary residents of the North. What we find is that this 
Conservative government has only one policy, and that is big business policy. The Conservative government 
has only one agenda, and that’s their big business agenda. 
 
They have no policy, no sensitivity at all for the working man and woman, as well as those people who are on 
the unemployment list, the people that are handicapped, the poor and the helpless. 
 
They forget to acknowledge and recognize the hardships, as well, of northern people. They had talked about 
bringing about new policy, new programs. They had talked about bringing about an economic self-sufficiency 
package. But where is that economic self-sufficiency program that they talked about? To date, they have not 
initiated any major economic program. They have absolutely no policy for northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. This Conservative government has only one approach, the double standard approach, and one standard 
for ordinary people — trappers, fishermen, teachers, nurses, or miners — and a very different standard, a richer 
standard, for the big business friends of the Tories. 
 
What the people elected this government to do, Mr. Speaker, was to govern our province, and to govern it in the 
interest of all. What they need, Mr. Speaker, what they called for is a positive vision of Saskatchewan — not the 
shallow slogans of the advertising man, but a positive vision, a sound plan, and a concrete proposal for 
Saskatchewan. 



 
November 28, 1983 
 

276 
 

 
My constituent seat, Mr. Speaker, is some recognition by this government of the real needs of northern 
Saskatchewan. Where is this plan for developing employment in the North? Where in the throne speech, or in 
the budget, where is the plan for jobs for northern people? Where is its plan for training? Where is its concrete, 
positive proposals for ensuring that Northerners are able to become trained for the work-force, training that is 
required for us as Northerners to become productive and to contribute to the economic opportunities of our 
province? 
 
And what about the Conservatives’ economic development plan for northern people? Concrete positive 
proposals: where are those proposals? 
 
The Conservatives are eager to sit down with the big natural gas producers and consult about ways to raise their 
price of natural gas. They are eager to consult with the big oil companies, Mr. Speaker, about plans to provide 
$100 million a year in oil royalty breaks. They are eager to consult with developers, planning how to destroy the 
Department of Environment. Why, then, will this government not begin some honest consultation with honest 
planning, to begin some honest consultation, some honest planning with northern communities and their 
residents for positive economic development? The answer, Mr. Speaker, is all too simple: because economic 
development and jobs for northern people are not on the big business agenda of the Devine government. 
 
The comparisons are truly striking, Mr. Speaker. Number one, $95,000 a year in salary for a part-time job to a 
recent Tory appointee as chairman of the Labour Relations Board. But, as my colleague pointed out the other 
day, there are, at present, no doctors to staff the La Loche hospital. 
 
Another example, they spent more than $3 million a year to pay for additional cabinet ministers and legislative 
secretaries to expand another huge bureaucracy, but, instead, they have cancelled the proposed, the approved 
projects, the hospital and the nursing care home that was proposed for La Ronge. They cancelled that totally just 
to expand their government and their cabinet members and their legislative secretaries — to expand their 
bureaucracy. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, is their policies of restraint, and a double standard policy of this Conservative 
government. They spend an additional $250,000 in new luxury cars for cabinet ministers and Conservative 
advisers. But they place less emphasis on the severe financial pressures of the education and health care services 
for the people of this province. 
 
A hundred million dollars in royalty breaks for the big oil companies each year, Mr. Speaker, but no political 
will and no resources to enforce the Key Lake surface lease agreement. 
 
At the moment, Mr. Speaker, the people of northern Saskatchewan have many hard times. They have hard times 
in terms of employment. They have had opportunities by the former government to be recognized in major 
projects such as Key Lake. But at the present time we have had little or no support or encouragement by this 
government in terms of the training, in terms of employment options. We have no encouragement or support or 
information or incentives coming from this government with respect to the Key Lake project. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as we review the Conservatives’ throne speech, as we review this throne speech debate, 
let all members of this Assembly take a close look at the government’s words, and at its performance. 
 
Let us look for some evidence that it does understand the needs and aspirations of Saskatchewan people. Let us 
look for some evidence that even Conservatives can recognize the pride, the dignity, and community traditions 
of northern people and the people of this province. 
 
Let us look for some evidence that the Devine government has a sensitive, positive vision of the  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

277 
 

North — a vision of a better future for them, working co-operatively in their communities. A better future, Mr. 
Speaker. A future of employment or productive contribution to their communities and their province. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan are fair. I believe that when they examine the 
promises which have been made by this government, the promises which have been broken, I believe that when 
they review the Devine government’s words and match them to its deeds, and I believe that as they review these 
promises, these words, those deeds, in fairness, they will reach one overwhelming conclusion: that the 
Conservatives have betrayed the people of this province, the people of Saskatchewan. They are betraying the 
people still. They have betrayed, ignored and insulted the people of the North in particular, Mr. Speaker, and the 
people of this province, the people of Saskatchewan, are forming their judgement. 
 
With the performance of this throne speech, the content of the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, I therefore cannot 
support the motion. Thank you very much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased, and indeed 
very proud, to be entering the throne speech debate tonight. It’s the first time in about two and a half years that I 
have done so. The last time was in 1981 in the reply to the budget speech in this House, and I will come back to 
that one in a few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t intend to be very long this evening, and I hadn’t really wanted to enter this debate tonight. But I have 
been listening to some of the speeches, and I have heard some of my colleagues on this side, I’ve heard some of 
my colleagues in the opposition, and I can’t resist the opportunity and the temptation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are four areas I want to cover tonight. The four areas are: the speeches that I just referred to a minute ago; 
I want to talk about the attitude of the members opposite, to my left; I would like to set the record straight in a 
coupe of instances, Mr. Speaker,; and then I would also like to discuss our accomplishments, or, better still, 
some of our accomplishments, Mr. Speaker, because if I talked about all of them, I’d have to run the clock out. 
 
I want to congratulate, Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of the Assembly, those members who entered the 
debate, for the very positive manner and way in which they replied and in which they spoke. It is encouraging to 
listen to the speeches and to the members. They have a vision, and it’s evident from listening to their speeches. 
They have a vision, Mr. Speaker, of the future of Saskatchewan. It’s evident in their speeches, Mr. Speaker, that 
they are proud of their province. They are proud of their government. They are proud of their leader. They are 
proud of the Premier of this province, and they are proud to be a member of this Assembly. And that was very 
evident. And I’m proud to be associated with those members. 
 
But I do want to speak about the attitude of the members opposite. In listening to their attacks, listening to their 
cynicism, listening to their remarks, in every instance, from the Leader of the Opposition down to the last 
member who just spoke and sat down, their reply to the throne speech, Mr. Speaker, has been an attack, an 
attack on the government — and that is fair enough, that’s fair enough. I accept that. You’re in the opposition, 
and I accept that. But when you lay that attack on the people of this province, or when you lay that attack on the 
province itself or on its economic development, then you go one step too far. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in their replies, to a man they’re attacked a business community, they’ve attacked farmers, they’ve 
attacked the civil servants. In short, Mr. Speaker, they’ve attacked the people of Saskatchewan, and I can’t 
accept hat. I can accept the attacks on the members of the government, the MLAs elected on this side. I can 
understand their bitterness in the defeat that they experienced a year and half ago, April 26, 1982. I understand 
that. But they forget, they  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

278 
 

forget, Mr. Speaker, that they were elected, the same as the members on this side were elected — were elected 
to do a job. They were elected in their case to be in the opposition. And they have to accept the responsibility 
that they have in being a member of the opposition, and that responsibility they have not yet accepted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the role of the opposition, very simply, is to be the auditors of the record of government. I haven’t 
heard very much from them in that respect. There is a role of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, to be the 
voice of the conscience of government. And it is the role of the official opposition to constructively criticize the 
workings of government. I’ll add to that as well; the role of the opposition is to offer some alternatives, offer 
some alternatives to the government if they don’t like what we are introducing, and what we are suggesting, 
what we are legislating. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, a few minutes ago I indicated that I would come back to a speech I made in 
this Assembly in 12981. And that was exactly what I did at that time. It was in reply to the budget speech, and 
at that time, rather than criticize and attack the Minister of Finance at the time for his speech, I laid out for the 
opposition — when we were in the opposition — a 31-point program that I suggested to the government of the 
day. Well, this budget speech had already gone by, it was too late to do anything about it that year. But one 
short year later, Mr. Speaker, those suggestions that I had put into that were introduced in the following budget 
speech. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the attitude taken by the members opposite has been a discredit — a discredit to the system, 
a discredit to this House, discredit to the province, a discredit to the people of Saskatchewan, and, Mr. Speaker, 
a discredit to their own party. We’ve said for a number of years they were bankrupt of ideas, and they still are. 
They are not taking their responsibilities seriously, and, frankly, I don’t think they know how. 
 
I want to say to the members opposite, that you have no faith in our province, from the remarks that you have 
made. You have no faith in the province; you are not proud of Saskatchewan. You are not proud of the people 
that live here. Frankly, I don’t think you want to see people coming back — those people that you drove away. 
 
The only concern that I can believe from the members opposite, that they have, is for their own party. Not the 
province, but your party. Not the people, but your own party. 
 
And I think that was evidenced, Mr. Speaker, by one former member and one former chief executive officer of a 
crown corporation that worked for the government opposite, when, instead of believing in their province, took it 
upon themselves to travel the world to compete against Saskatchewan. 
 
A man, David Dombowsky, who was paid $150,000 by those members opposite — and I will come back to that 
later on — who went travelling across the world, trying to sell Manitoba potash, not Saskatchewan. Competing 
against his own province. 
 
And if that isn’t bad enough — if that isn’t bad enough, Mr. Speaker — they have a previous cabinet minister 
who did exactly the same thing, a cabinet minister who stood in this Assembly, who sat in this chair, and 
hypocritically, hypocritically expounded the virtues of this province. 
 
As soon as he leaves the legislature, as soon as he leaves the party, what do they do? Go out and sell, not our 
province, but Manitoba. And you know why? The only reason why, of course, is because in Manitoba there is 
an NDP party. When I say the members opposite are more concerned for their party than they are for the 
government, or their province, that is what I mean, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, I could go on and on and on about their attitude, Mr. Speaker, but I hope — and I sincerely  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

279 
 

mean this — I hope you get the message. Gentlemen, you are only eight, and you took a shellacking. You took 
a beating last year, but you’ll take a worse one if you continue with the attitude that you have. 
 
I am proud of Saskatchewan. I was not born in this province; this is my adopted province. And I believe in the 
future of this province, and I believe in the people of this province, and what you are doing to it is degrading 
this province. Mr. Speaker, I can’t accept that. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to set the record straight. I would like to set the record 
straight on a couple of issues. And I know my colleague, the Attorney General, indicated or responded to their 
vicious attack in this Assembly last Thursday, but I want to repeat it. 
 
I was accused by the members opposite of having known about the closure of Intercontinental Packers before 
when we sold it — in Regina, the closure of the plant in Regina. And I want to . . . Again, I know this has been 
introduced in the House before, and I know it has been tabled, and I only regret, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of 
the Opposition is not in the assembly this evening. But the letter I received from the chairman of the board and 
the chief executive officer of Intercontinental Packers sets out the truth about Intercontinental Packers. Let me 
read it to you: 
 

I have enclosed a copy of I.P.L, Directors’ Minutes from November 4, 1981 and June 10, 1982 (you 
were just in office a few weeks) which indicate the former government directors agreed to the closing of 
the Regina plant, as shown in the June Minutes. As well, they funded, through Industry and Commerce, 
$56,000 of a $75,000 study completed on October 31, 1981, by Knud Simonsen Engineering which 
recommended closing the Regina plant (Study excerpts re closing Regina, plus consultant’s letter to 
Saskatchewan Industry and Commerce attached). 
 

And he carries on, and I just want to read this one more paragraph, Mr. Speaker: 
 

For your information, I personally informed Mr. Blakeney in his office in the fall of 1981 that we would 
close the Regina plant in 1983, and he concurred it was a right decision. 
 

There is hypocrisy, Mr. Speaker, and there is hypocrisy. For the members to take the attitude that they took with 
the closure of that plant is, again, inexcusable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about . . . I want to touch on that for a second. They talk about he double standards of the 
wages paid to senior civil servants. In fact some of their ads indicate, Mr. Speaker, that we have given raises to 
500 senior bureaucrats. They’ve said it in this Assembly; they’ve said it on various news media and talk shows. 
 
Well, the first thing I would like to indicate to the members opposite, number one, is that out of the 500 that 
they refer to, 450 of them were the bureaucrats that they hired. They were their bureaucrats. So what are they 
telling us? Are they saying that we shouldn’t give those people a raise — the people that they hired — are they 
saying that those civil servants are undeserving of a raise? And let’s keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, what those 
raises amounted to. In the cases, for example, of deputy ministers, 4 per cent since we’ve been government — 
since we’ve been government — that’s over a year and a half ago. 
 
Four hundred and fifty of the bureaucrats that they are talking about, the civil servants that they are talking 
about, that they are attacking, that they are criticizing, were the very same civil servants that they hired, that 
worked for them. Now they are saying we shouldn’t give them any raises. Well, when we fire some of these 
people, Mr. Speaker, they raise Cain. When we give them a raise, they raise Cain. Which way do you want it? 
Which way do you want it? 



 
November 28, 1983 
 

280 
 

 
Unfortunately, there are only two members left on the other side tonight, so I’m not really perhaps going to get 
through to what I am trying to tell them. 
 
We talk about salaries paid. It’s unbelievable that they could criticize. First of all, they wouldn’t tell anyone 
what they were paying their chief executive officers in crown corporations. I tried for four years to get the 
information from them. They wouldn’t give it to us. They would not tell us what those people made. Mr. 
Speaker, they were paying a David Dombowsky, for example, $150,000 a year plus — plus — all the perks that 
he received, and they were many. They paid some of the vice-presidents of CIC — and this hasn’t come out yet 
— as high as $135,000 plus the benefits. And I don’t know where we are paying that kind of money. I haven’t 
heard you talking about those salaries, because we’re not. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they talk about double standards. But when they do talk about those wages, they conveniently 
forget to tell about the wage, they were paying — conveniently. And, of course, the double standard of liquor 
advertising — and I’m not going to get into that one tonight, because I could be here for another half an hour 
just on that one subject alone — on that one subject alone. Mr. Speaker, when the Attorney General last week 
laid it out for you gentlemen what one Don Fairs, who was making the noises today, who’s criticizing today, 
who was a member of your government at one time, and the position he took on liquor advertising in 1972 and 
’73, frankly, you should be ashamed of yourselves. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I said there were four areas I wanted to cover and I did. I’ve covered three of them so far. 
The last, certainly not the least important — in my opinion, the most important — I want to talk about the 
accomplishments of the government that sits in this Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I suppose if we have made a mistake as a government, one very serious mistake that we may have 
made is in not having told the people of Saskatchewan what we’ve accomplished. We could have taken a page 
out of their book and spent $10 million in advertising, as they did when they advertised the family of crown 
corporations. Now, we could have spent $10 million to tell the people — that’s per year by the way — $10 
million a year in advertising the family of crown corporations. We could have done that to tell them how 
wonderful we are. And I would have said, then, that that was irresponsible. Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that we 
should spend that kind of money to tell the people what we’ve done, but I believe that we should use this forum 
to tell the people what we’re doing. Again, I will only highlight some of those accomplishments because, if I 
were to itemize them all, I’d be here for a long time. 
 
And before I do, there’s one little time that I forgot, and I want to bring to the attention of the members 
opposite. They are always so concerned about the people of Saskatchewan. They always indicate that they are 
concerned about their social needs, and their health care, and their education, and so on. I want to remind the 
members opposite of a meeting that was held on November 19, a week ago last Saturday, at City Hall. All 
members opposite were invited. And it was to discuss the housing needs of the disabled. 
 
It took them 11 years to introduce in this Assembly a bill for accessibility standards for the disabled, and they 
only did so after I introduced one. I beat them to it. Well, Mr. Speaker, they had an opportunity to meet with 
150 handicapped people, disabled people, at City Hall a week ago last Saturday. And every member, every 
member of this government, this caucus, and their caucus was invited. Not one of the members opposite showed 
up. And that’s shameful. Not one of those members showed up to indicate the concerns that they have for the 
disabled of Saskatchewan. And that, Mr. Speaker, again is inexcusable. 
 
I was there. I can name a couple of other cabinet ministers that were there if the member is concerned about it. 
But I can tell you that you should have been there, particularly the member for Regina Centre, particularly the 
member for Regina Elphinstone should have been there, and they were not there. And it started at 8 o’clock in 
the morning and went on until 4 o’clock in the afternoon. So they had all the time in the world to get there, but 
they didn’t show up . . .  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

281 
 

(inaudible interjection) . . . It’s exactly the truth. And that, Mr. Speaker, is exactly the truth if he’s concerned 
about my telling the truth. 
 
I indicated I wanted to talk about our accomplishments, and that’s . . . going to highlight again what those 
accomplishments were. When we came to government, one of the first things we did was, we froze utility rates 
for one year. We removed the tax on gasoline. To date, Mr. Speaker, that has saved the people of Saskatchewan, 
from their pockets, some $200 million, but it’s also done a little more than that. 
 
We always think of that gas tax as being 20 per cent of the price and going into the coffers and being part of the 
consolidated fund, but, you know, there is one area that hasn’t been talked about. I want to talk about it a little 
bit tonight because it involves me. Twenty per cent of that money went to SGI as a subsidy to subsidize the 
insurance on the vehicles that they drive. 
 
Now I have listened to the members opposite attack me and criticize me for a 3 per cent increase in the rates this 
year. Annualized, it works out to 1.5 per cent. And since we’ve been government, if you take it back to that 
time, it would work out to less than 1 per cent over that period of time. Now let’s compare it to, Mr. Speaker, 
the last three years of their government, when they had a 55 per cent increase and receiving 20 per cent of that 
gas tax, which amounted to some $50 per motorist. Well, when you consider that that motorist received that 
money and put it back in his pocket, we’ve had a significant decrease in the cost of insurance on automobiles — 
a significant decrease in the cost of insurance for automobiles in this province. Mr. Speaker, it works out to 
close to somewhere in the neighbourhood of 17 per cent decrease in the cost of insurance on automobiles. 
 
Now, I’m proud of that accomplishment, Mr. Speaker. I am very proud of that, because in spite of that loss of 
revenue that SGI suffered in the compulsory insurance side of the insurance, we will be in the black. First time. 
They don’t understand what that means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the major programs of this government has been the mortgage interest rebate program, a 
program intended to save millions of dollars to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, a program intended to save an 
individual’s home where he might have lost it. And let’s compare that, Mr. Speaker, to the anaemic 
home-owners’ program that they introduced in 1981. No comparison. There was nothing in that program for the 
home-owner, absolutely nothing. We put a ceiling on interest rates, and we rebated, and to date, Mr. Speaker, 
some $43 million has been rebated to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I wish my predecessor in this department were here tonight, because I would like to congratulate her on the fine 
accomplishment of putting that program together when she was the Minister of Revenue. It was the most 
well-managed program that’s ever been introduced by any government anywhere. It went smoothly. The people 
received their rebates on time, and in short, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were able to save their 
homes from that program. 
 
The farm purchase program. Well, the Minister of Agriculture touched on that not long ago — $350,000 
mortgages at 8 per cent for the first five years. Significant program. Something the members opposite couldn’t 
understand and wouldn’t know how to put together. 
 
We lowered the taxes on oil royalties. Well, Mr. Speaker, just today in the Leader-Post . . . I want to quote, 
because coming from the particular reporter who is known for his political leanings, and John Twigg I’m 
referring to. And I want to thank John Twigg, and I want to congratulate him for this particular article. But just 
to quote from his article, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The dramatic turnaround in Saskatchewan’s oil and gas industry is one of the most interesting and 
important stories in the provincial economy, and perhaps the leading accomplishment of Premier Grant 
Devine’s young government. 



 
November 28, 1983 
 

282 
 

 
Well, he understands economic development, obviously. “The numbers tell some of it. The numbers (and this is 
John Twigg, for the member who just walked in): 1,537 wells have been drilled here as of November 16,” 
which easily passes the previous record set in 1980, Mr. Speaker. Now, I was pleased to see that happen today, 
just in today’s newspaper. 
 
Well, let’s take a look at some of the other accomplishments of our government, and I won’t be too much longer 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, the member from Quill Lakes has just woke up. No, he’s just 
arrived, sorry. Just arrived. Unfortunately, I wish he had been here earlier because some of my . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I hope you do. I hope you’ll be able to read it in Hansard. I believe you could take heart with 
some of the words I’ve said this evening. 
 
The sale of Crown owned land to farmers, land bank, and again I don’t have the figures that were passed on. 
One hundred and fifty years, as I recall, was the number of farms that were sold by the previous government in 
11 years; and over 1,500 in the first 12 months that we’ve been government, that we have sold, putting the farm 
back in the hands of the individual, and not the state. We don’t believe in state ownership of farms or 
businesses, Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite do. 
 
We introduced a Build-A-Home program, and 6,000 people participated, for $18 million. Mr. Speaker, we had 
the best record in Canada for housing starts this year. In addition to that, an upgrader; announcement of the 
building of an upgrader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the short period of time that we’ve been government, approximately 20,000 new jobs have been 
created through various programs: 3,800 through the Saskatchewan Jobs program; 4,200 through Opportunities 
’83; 3,500 through a $5,000 tax credit for small business programs, and, Mr. Speaker, all, all of these programs, 
all of these job creation programs, all of these tax rebate programs during a recession — one of the most severe 
recessions known in the history of North America, second only to the Great Depression. And all of these 
programs, Mr. Speaker, to provide jobs for the people of Saskatchewan, to provide a better economic 
development and economic climate for this province. 
 
The natural gas program — rural gas distribution. To date over 3,000 farmers have received natural gas, thanks 
to a program implemented and introduced by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ended the monopoly of government sale of telephones and telecommunication equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, implementation of a major procurement policy to remove the requirement to offer ownership of 
resources to the government — a significant deterrent to the private sector investing in Saskatchewan, because 
why would they? Why would anyone in his right mind want to invest and risk millions of dollars for 
development of resources when, in the end, they would have to give half of that ownership to the government. 
They’d take the risk ;the private sector had to take the risk. The members opposite, when they were 
government, did not take that risk. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would love to carry on with many other achievements. I think I’ve highlighted some of the 
important ones. I could carry on. The total would run me well on. But I am responsible for two major areas: one 
is Revenue, and one is SGI. 
 
I’d just like to take a minute or two, but, before I do, I want to get back to one point that I missed, and I want to 
make it now, and that is, when we talk economic development, when we talk open for business, they, again, 
spent the last year criticizing the open for business theme. And they don’t understand, obviously, what open for 
business means. That’s one of the things that is understandable, being what they are. They don’t understand 
what open for business means, because when they were the government, one of the things that they didn’t 
believe in that was supporting and encouraging local and Saskatchewan business. If any lucrative contract came 
up  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

283 
 

by the government, it went to an outside. . . and mostly out of, not only out of province, but out of country. 
 
I’d just like to cite a few, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to start with the major ones. Saskatchewan Forest 
Products Corporation, and this is in 1981, the year 1981: installation of a Konus-Kessel wood-waste energy 
system at Hudson Bays plywood plant. Mr. Speaker, a $1.8 million contract went to a British Columbia firm. 
 
Here is one — an odour-processing marketing support system went to a firm in Toronto for $1.2 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple here . . . Here we are. To perform — now listen to this — to perform engineering 
environmental studies for two potential coal mines at Rockglen and Fife Lake, an engineering study, 
environmental study, commissioned by the members opposite when they were government for the cost of $3.6 
million. Mr. Speaker, guess where it went? It went to a Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania firm. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s another one, another $3.7 million contract to perform engineering environmental feasibility 
studies for potential coal-fired electrical generation stations. Guess again. Shawinigan Engineering Consultants 
from Calgary. 
 
But in this list of contracts that I’m referring to, there are no Saskatchewan firms, and I could go on with that, 
and that is what they thought of economic development in this province. That’s how they encouraged 
Saskatchewan business. That’s what they thought of their own businesses in Saskatchewan. They didn’t want 
them around, and they gave the business to someone else. 
 
Well, as I indicated, Mr. Speaker, in the one and a half years that we’ve been government and I have been the 
minister responsible for SGI, I want to just take a few brief minutes to speak about its accomplishments . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And we won’t bring Mr. Collver into it tonight. We won’t bring that subject into it, 
but we’ll just talk about what’s happened there. 
 
Well, in 1982 when I became the minister, we took a badly faltering organization. We set it on its feet again, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We got it moving towards a set of objectives that made sense, and gave it the leadership it 
needs to become a profitable business. I’m proud of those people that are managing that corporation today. We 
found a corporation with an excellent group of professionals, and I have no intentions of criticizing them, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact, I can only praise their accomplishments, considering how they were handicapped by the NDP 
administration. 
 
Now let’s look at what we’ve achieved there. We reduced the bureaucracy, the duplication of effort and 
services. We’ve created a very lean organization. It meant lay-offs and a lot of sacrifice, and no one regrets that 
more than I, but we had to take drastic action, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that there would be a future for SGI. We 
strengthened insurance-related services like claims and underwriting. We de-emphasized non-related areas. We 
ended the wild proposals about building body shops and about entering the life insurance business. We ended 
those proposals completely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve examined SGI’s products, and we’ve gone a long way towards establishing a fundamentally 
profitable product line — a product line which did not have a single profitable product when we became the 
government. We’ve put a rational accounting system in place that recognizes the difference between SGI and 
the government program that it administers — a distinction that the members opposite ignored when it was 
convenient. 
 
We discovered the full magnitude of NDP dealings in the world of reinsurance. We accounted for it properly, 
despite the size of the loss we were forced to recognize. And because of proper management, the auto insurance 
fund will be totally out of the red for the first time since 1979, despite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the smallest rate 
increase in four years. In fact, as I indicated earlier,  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

284 
 

in fact, despite the fact that we reduced, we actually reduced the cost of insurance to the individuals in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a record of accomplishment that all SGI employees and the people of Saskatchewan can take 
pride in. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — We’ve launched our come-back. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — You’ve lost your come-back. That was very indicative from the convention that 
you left this week-end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was going to . . . Here we are. I wanted to just touch on the Department of Revenue for a minute, 
because again I want to congratulate and indicate to the people how much we appreciate the people who are in 
that department. What a fine job that they doing, from the deputy minister down to all the people within that 
department. I want to congratulate them for their dedication to the service of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the accomplishments of that department in a very short period of time, and I am just only 
going to highlight what they are, without detailing them. But in that department, they handled the elimination of 
the gas tax, and given one day’s notice to do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was that department that introduced the mortgage interest rebate program. They changed . . . 
Legislation was amended for the fuel tax act. They introduced E&H tax amendments. Tobacco tax amendments 
were introduced in this legislature last year, Mr. Speaker, with strength and enforcement provisions for purposes 
of facilitating investigations of tobacco smuggling, and increasing the penalties associated with the organized 
smuggling activities. 
 
You know, that was something. And we recall (and the member opposite smiles) the criticism that was directed 
to their government when we were in the opposition. They did nothing bout it. It didn’t take us long. When we 
became government, we introduced it and plugged those loopholes: corporation capital tax amendments, the 
insurance premium tax amendments, the capital gains tax rebate, actuals tracking system, and education and 
health tax reporting frequency. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, breaking it down to departments, it would take me another few minutes to do that. I don’t 
intend to because I think I’m going to give someone else the opportunity to speak, debate this throne speech. 
 
I want to thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank the members of the legislature for the attentive audience. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I am proud again, as I said earlier, of the members that have spoken in this Assembly for the 
throne speech. I warn the members opposite to change their attitude toward their province, toward the people of 
this province, toward the civil servants, and stop attacking them. Stop their direct attack on those individuals. 
Stick to the members of the legislature. Do your job, understand your role of government, and perhaps we might 
get some better question periods, we might get some better speeches from you, but understand it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d be very proud to support the motion, and I certainly cannot support the amendment to 
the motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I won’t be doing what I usually do tonight, and that is 
taking my time and going over the opposition’s record. There’s a reason for that. Their record is rather short and 
not all that imaginative. 
 
I just want to be very quick, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s a number of things I want to say, and I  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

285 
 

want to say that, you know, the members here on this side of the House and, of course, our members on the 
other side of the House as well are lining up to speak and so eager to get into this debate that it just reminds me 
of a major international airport where the jumbo jets are just backed up waiting to take off. Our guys are waiting 
to take off, and the NDP, it would seem you’re pretty well backed up against the wall, and you’re down and out, 
and you’re against the ropes and all those things. It brings to mind an old saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker: “Why 
kick an old dog?” and maybe, “Leave sleeping dogs lie.” There’s a few of them sleeping, so I don’t really think 
I want to get into that. 
 
But what I would like to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to congratulate the mover of the Speech from the Throne, 
the member from Melville. The member from Melville is always entertaining and very witty and very quick to 
cut the NDP down whenever they raise their so-called ugly head, as the saying quite often goes in this House. 
 
I would, as well, like to say congratulations to the member for Saskatoon Nutana, yes, who was the seconder of 
the Speech from the Throne. And I’d like to say, as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that she did a very fine job in 
seconding that Speech from the Throne. 
 
While I am in this congratulatory mood, I would like to, as well, express my congratulations and my best wishes 
to, of course, our new cabinet ministers, which not too much has been said about, at least not from our side of 
the House. I see that the NDP in opposition are making some bones about it, that it’s too many in the Cabinet, 
or something like that, and I can appreciate their comments in that regard. I might get around to that in a few 
moments, but they should be lucky if I don’t have time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to do which I most often do, and that is to centre my comments primarily on the 
Leader of the Opposition, because really, in fact, the other members don’t really mean that much. What they 
have to say is really not all that important. 
 
I think that the convection over the past week-end that the NDP had in Saskatoon has confirmed, at least 
temporarily, the current leader’s position — the member for Regina Elphinstone. Therefore, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if I could just leave some of my comments with regards to the convention to later on, and just maybe 
bring to the attention of the members in the Assembly some of the contradictions that are so evident in the 
things that the Leader of the Opposition has been saying. And he talks, you know, of small business. What are 
we doing to help small business? And I think to myself, “Well, that’s certainly ironic.” Because I take some 
quotes that I just happened to put together that are rather interesting. And here is a quote from the member from 
Regina Elphinstone. It’s Hansard, page 39, November 18, 1983. He says, “You people should go about and talk 
to some small business men.” Now he’s telling us we should do this? Conservatives should go and talk to small 
business men? We’re being told that by the Leader of the Opposition, who for 11 years in office did absolutely 
nothing for small business, except almost drive them out of business? 
 
I want to make a comment as it respects the member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster’s speech. And I think he 
summed it up rather well when he said that in s small business is big business. Because the NDP in opposition 
try to make the argument that for some reason or another that the Conservatives are for big business. And so I 
thought that was very well capsulized when he said that small business is big business. Very well put by the 
member for Cut Knife-Lloydminster. 
 
So let’s talk about just for a moment what the NDP record is. When the NDP talks about small business that is 
exactly what it amounts to. It’s just talk; it’s window-dressing. And if you take a look at the real NDP policy on 
small business and free enterprise, what do you come up with? Well I want to enter into the record a quote by a 
former member of this House. It was a member for Saskatoon. His name was Paul Mostoway. He was an NDP 
member. It was back on March 9 of ’81. And he says: 



 
November 28, 1983 
 

286 
 

 
The gentleman talks about free enterprise. That’s a myth. There is no such thing as free enterprise in this 
country. 
 

And that came from an NDP member of this Assembly not so long ago. And yet, even today, we have the NDP 
Leader of the Opposition talking about, you know, what we’re doing to assist small business. And really, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that doesn’t make a whole lot of sense to this Assembly. 
 
Let’s use another quote from another former member of the legislature, David Miner. He says, “Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t believe in free enterprise.” That’s what he said. David Miner. He said, “I don’t believe in free enterprise.” 
Well, at least there was a member that was speaking the truth on behalf of the party, because they don’t believe 
in free enterprise. 
 
Now if we take a look at our own record as it relates to small business or large business, the Department of 
Tourism and Small business has taken a number of new initiatives. There’s been over 6,582 new businesses 
since our government took office. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How many? 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — 6,582. The small business employment program has resulted in the creation of 3,613 
full-time jobs, and remember, the NDP talk about small business, but they don’t believe in it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — They were against that program too. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — That’s right. They have been against that program. It goes on and on. I think that it bears 
a moment’s time in the legislature to mention as well the NDP record as it relates to their attention to the water 
problems in this province. 
 
The member for Regina Elphinstone, the current leader of the NDP, at least, just as I said, temporarily, took the 
government to task about the water policy on page 53 of Hansard, November 21, 1983, and he said, what was 
the record of the NDP with respect to water? “We certainly are not accepting any responsibility for water 
treatment,” was his comment. 
 
“The urban municipalities have that responsibility, and the city of Regina recognizes it has a responsibility to 
treat and deliver to its citizens a water supply. That’s the responsibility of the urban municipality itself.” Now 
who said that? Who said that? Ted Bowerman, NDP minister, in reply to a question from the proposed pipeline 
to Lake Diefenbaker, and that’s what he said. 
 
Now what have we done? Compare that now to the PC record. We have created a water corporation act to 
provide Saskatchewan with a comprehensive water management plan for the future. At least we have acted. We 
have done something, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as opposed to talk. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the theme, I would say, in our throne speech, was pretty much on the creation of 
jobs. It centred on jobs, and I really believe, Mr. Deputy speaker, that it’s worth mentioning what we have been 
able to do in terms of the creation of jobs. I want to, if I could just bring to the attention of the House the 
presentation, “Challenges and Opportunities, the Saskatchewan Perspective,” by the hon. Minister of Finance, 
November, 1983, a submission to the Royal Commission on Economic Unity and Development Prospects for 
Canada. You know, a paragraph or two. What does it say there as it respects jobs? 
 

I would like to set the stage for our discussion by describing some of the recent economic developments 
in Saskatchewan. It is important that you understand our immediate economic concerns and the 
approaches we have taken to solve some of these problems. My overriding interest is to get the economy 
moving again, to create  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

287 
 

more jobs and opportunities for investment and productive activity, and to keep the economy thriving. 
 

That’s all that needs to be said on that. The Minister of Finance: 
 

This government recognizes the desperate need in this province at all times to create jobs and 
opportunities for the people of this province. 
 

And we are doing that, as I’ve already indicated. Our members are hard at work all the time. If I could just . . . 
for the information of the House, again, I took the opportunity to go through one of our member’s own 
brochures that he sent out. It’s the member for Saskatoon Eastview, and it’s done up, I might add, in a rather 
nice colour — our own colours, and it’s been well put together, and it provides a lot of information, as well, as 
respects jobs and opportunities. 
 
What does it say? (Sometimes I wonder if maybe we shouldn’t send these to the members in the opposition so 
they’d be better informed and we might have better question periods than we had today.) It says that since 
January, 1983, the number of jobs in Saskatchewan has increased by 10,000 from 415,000 to 425,000 — the 
best winter record ever in Saskatchewan history. 
 
What else does it say? It says that Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment of major Canadian cities. And 
capital projects. A $1.7 billion capital construction program will create approximately 11,000 person-years of 
employment through the construction of highways, education facilities, nursing homes, and other projects. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here we have one of our members on this side of the House, as he said so eloquently 
today, a member of the A-team, getting the information out to the people of Saskatchewan about what this 
government is doing as it relates to job creation. Good information. 
 
Furthermore, I see the NDP in opposition were even impressed with our little folder that went out to the people 
in this province to again highlight what we are doing in the area of job creation. Keeping in touch. Yes, a 
picture of a rather attractive individual on the front page, none other than our Premier, Grant Devine. 
 
And what does it say? Job creation: in our last budget we allocated $8 million for the continuation of the 
Saskatchewan Jobs program, and Opportunities ’83 pays 4,200 students during the summer months, a $5,000 
tax credit program to create new jobs. To date, as I said, 3,500 jobs created through that program. 
 
There is rounds of information, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the disposal of all members and at the disposal, quite 
frankly, of all the people of this province as to what we’re doing in terms of jobs. And I’m not going to go 
through it all as it’s not, you know, as I said, an opportunity this evening when I have a whole lot of time. 
 
You know, I think we should look at some bottom lines. And what has that done? What has a Conservative 
government done for the province of Saskatchewan? Through concentration and job creation, what we have 
been able to do is, through April 1982 to October of ’83, we have been able to move into an area of about a 6 
per cent growth rate compared with quite less than 4 per cent, about 3.75 per cent growth rate for the rest of the 
country. As our Premier has said many times before, while the rest of the country is struggling and many parts 
of the country going back, the province of Saskatchewan is going upstream, going against the trend and going 
ahead. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly we, as a government, would like to take all the credit for that, but that’s not 
possible, because all we have been doing is what should have been done for many years. We have created a 
climate in this province whereby free-thinking individuals in this  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

288 
 

province can, in fact, progress. So I say as a government, no, we’re not going to stand here and say we’re the 
greatest thing that there ever was, no. What we have been able to do, though, is go out and, as the Premier said, 
keep in touch. We have been listening, and we’ve been putting together programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are 
in tune with the wishes of the people of this province. And that has resulted in sound economic policies, sound 
policies as it relates to job creation, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I’m sorry — an 
economy in this province that is second to none in this country. 
 
Now, I can say just a bit more as it relates to job creation. I believe earlier in the session the Premier identified 
the Conference Board of Canada and its prediction that the economic growth in Saskatchewan will again 
outstrip the rest of the nation. And this is a highly regarded non-government board, and it forecasted 
Saskatchewan will exceed the national growth rate again in 1983 and ’84. 
 
So those are pretty good indications, and we really like to hear that, you know, someone other than ourselves 
are being able to lay out the facts about the progress of this province and through its government, and through 
the government listening to the people and putting together the kinds of programs that they want to hear. Job 
creation will continue to be a top priority. That is the theme of the throne speech. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to draw to the attention of the House now, after having made the point that, in 
fact, job creation is the focal point of the throne speech, you will note that very few of the speeches coming 
from the NDP benches are talking about job creation. Are they offering any solutions? Are they talking about 
what we’re doing? No, they don’t want to talk about that. Rather, they want to talk about salaries, or some 
friend of theirs that got fired, or some issue that really has absolutely nothing to do with the major centre-piece, 
the corner-stone of the throne speech, and that’s job creation. And that’s what the people of Saskatchewan are 
concerned about — job creation and agriculture. And those are the two things you’ll note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that our members on both sides of the House have been talking about. And we have been constructive. 
 
Now, if you go back again to some of the comments I made earlier. But I don’t want to take the time of this 
House kicking a dead duck. What I would rather do is just what I’ve been doing, and that is to set out some of 
the very positive and constructive things that we have been doing as a government because, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we don’t have anything to defend. We don’t have to defend our policies here. The NDP aren’t 
mounting any attack. And I might add, that’s contrary to . . . 
 
You know, I was rather excited this year about the House opening, because I heard these comments about the 
NDP telling the media that they were ready to get this session open; they want to get in there and thrash those 
Tories and just tear that Tory government apart limb by limb. And you know we’ve been in here, I believe 
today is the seventh day, almost a day a member for the NDP and there hasn’t been one of us got thrashed yet –
not one of us. 
 
In fact one of the NDP members today, I guess, felt that, you know, that speaking in the legislature wasn’t 
effective, and he was willing to go and give his, outside. You know, I suggested to him that he shouldn’t do that 
because, well, he’ll be out of this legislature soon enough. He wouldn’t want to go now. 
 
In any event, let me talk about, just briefly now, I’ll be very quick about it, just point form on the health issues. 
Health issues — I can be very quick about that. This government has set an all-time Saskatchewan record in 
health spending — all-time Saskatchewan health record. A billion dollars on health care. And that’s $1,000 per 
man, woman and child, $1,000. Now what more do you want out of a government, than to do that? That, I 
might add, represents one-third of our provincial government budget. One-third of our budget! Now I think that 
that’s pretty good. 



 
November 28, 1983 

 

289 
 

 
Now I could go into great detail, but I’m not going to. The only thing I’m going to say, that falls under the 
Department of Health, is special care homes. It’s something that I’ve had a very special interest in, and for 11 
years in my riding alone, we never got one bed, not one bed. So I said to my people, “If I’m only able to get 
one, in one term in government, that would be 100 per cent improvement over what the NDP were able to do.” 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as it turned out, in 17 months — in fact, in reality in the first seven months — the 
plans were put in place for the creation of more special care home beds than the NDP administration were able 
to place in this province in seven years, in seven years. 
 
Now when you get a government that can do more in seven months than an NDP administration can, as it 
relates to special care homes for our seniors, in seven years, well, I’ll tell you, you wouldn’t want to turn back. 
You wouldn’t want to go back to what you had before. And yet they still have the audacity to stand in the 
House and criticize us for not having, you know, made enough provisions in budgets for special care homes, 
when in fact we’ve just outstripped their record and made their record just look terrible. Absolutely dismal. So 
need we say anything more about health care, really? There’s no point in flogging these issues. We said . . . I 
know I recall the leader of our party at that time saying, “We’ll make health care number one.” Well we’re 
government, he’s the Premier, and health care in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is number one in Canada. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Now, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP might like to get into those little goodies that they like to 
get into about, “Well, what about extra billing?” Extra billing in this province is not a problem. We’re under 3 
per cent, and well under 3 per cent in the province of Saskatchewan. What about user fees? What about those 
user fees? Our Minister of Health has said many times, as long as he’s the Minister of Health there will be no 
user fees in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — And he’ll be there a long, long time. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — That’s right. The members say, “He’ll be there a long, long time.” And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s pretty close to the truth. He’s going to be there a long time. So I can understand why the members in 
opposition get a little squirmy on these issues, because they really have nothing left to go on. 
 
Potash. I have what I guess is the best potash mine in the world in my constituency. It has the potential to be the 
greatest mine anywhere, if it isn’t now. When we took office . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, when we took 
office . . . Now the member for Regina Centre is saying, “Oh yeah, and it used to make money.” Yes it used to 
make money. It used to make money, Mr. Speaker, when markets were so buoyant you could screw up in that 
industry and still break even. And that’s what they were doing. Now, Mr. Speaker, what happened, what 
happened, very simply, was that the market started to be depressed on an international scale due to global 
economic matters, and the sales dropped, and these people weren’t wise enough to scale their schedules and 
their employment numbers in the mines to the markets that were there. They couldn’t do that. They didn’t want 
to lay anybody off because it was just before an election. 
 
Well, we took over. We had the bins jammed clean to the roof with potash, and we had to lay off a great number 
of employees. We had to do that right in my riding, right on my doorstep. Well, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I took a 
little flak for that. They wanted to know what was happening. Well, you know what, Mr. Member for Regina 
Centre. I told them the truth. I told them exactly what the previous administration had done. And you know, 
they were really upset about that. But, never mind all of that, that’s gone under the bridge. Never mind the 
negativism which the NDP seem to dwell on. What did we do about that terrible situation? Well, I’ll tell you 
what we did. We got the Premier out of Canada. He went out there and trotted around the world, and he went to 
Brazil, he went to China. He drummed up markets outside of the United States market. 



 
November 28, 1983 
 

290 
 

 
Now, you have to understand that 60 per cent of our potash goes to the United States market. Now the PIK 
program in place is one where farmers are being paid not to grow grain. People don’t tend to fertilize 
summerfallow, therefore it got a little tight down there in terms of sales. So our Premier was able to go out, and 
we did. We made sales to Brazil. We’re confident in terms of building up sales into China. You know, I’m very 
optimistic about what may come next. What has been the result of that, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you the result of 
that. The storage bins are empty now, we’ve recalled 65 employees, we’ve even moved from a three to a four 
shift system at the mine for work schedule. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is this: that while the NDP had the potash 
industry to deal with in buoyant times — made very little money; we inherited it during tough economic times 
and have been able to stabilize the industry. And that’s the bottom line. So we have a stable economy, stable in 
job creation, stable in the mining industry. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pretty proud, obviously, of the record of this government. Now then, where do we come to 
now? One other issue as it relates to this province’s great resources, and I want to talk about energy just for a 
moment. Energy down in the south-eastern part of the province where oil wells were producing at the best, at 
the very best, 35 per cent of their capacity. After we took office, and very shortly after we took office, because 
of some very simple little changes that we made, regulatory changes, decreased the royalty structure a little, 
bang? Boom like that they got the oil industry moving, and it’s producing at 100 per cent now. At 100 per cent 
capacity in those same oilfields. 
 
And what do we hear the members opposite calling about? Oh, these terrible giveaways of money to these 
multinationals. Well, I’m going to remind you that 100 per cent of nothing is still 100 per cent of nothing and 
that’s zero, absolute zero. Now, what we’re able to do is to get that whole oil industry moving. The minister was 
proud to stand in the House . . . I’m sure he must have been proud. I would have been proud to stand in the 
House and indicate that we have now made, you know, a record number of oil wells and gas wells drilled. I 
believe the figure is 1,537. Is it? Something like that. Well, he says it’s gone over 1,600 now, so it’s just on the 
rise. So again, the oil industry has been levelled out. The potash industry has been levelled out, everything 
stabilized, and everything’s fine during tough economic times. 
 
So the NDP, recognizing this, that the Tory government has done an excellent job, what do they do? Well, 
they’ve got to create a diversion, so they moved today into discussions, and heavy discussions, the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, on the question of these beer ads and all of these things about the government, now 
that we’ve lifted the ban on liquor advertising. 
 
Well, there’s been a lot said about hat, and there are members in this Assembly on our side of the House that 
want to make a lot of comments on that issue. But I’m only going to read into the record for the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg from the Swift Current Sun: “Antiquated Laws.” Now the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would want to listen to this: 
 

The protest that’s greeted the provincial government’s decision to allow liquor advertising on television 
is confusing. In case those hollering the loudest haven’t noticed, liquor advertising isn’t some new 
concoction cooked up by Devine and his open for business cronies. Instead, liquor advertising pervades 
every median our society. It’s on cable television, in magazines, and on billboards. It’s even on the 
T-shirts we’re all so fond of wearing. And yes folks, liquor has been around a lot longer than the 
fashionable trend to protest. 
 
Opponents of the new legislation forwarded a number of arguments why Saskatchewan, which already 
holds the distinction of having some of the most  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

291 
 

antiquated censorship laws in the country, shouldn’t allow its residents to see liquor advertising on the 
tube. They say the advertising of alcohol will lead to increased consumption, which, although a valid 
point, can certainly be argued many ways. Free will and determination must certainly be more important 
than dictates from government and lobby groups. It would certainly not be our argument that all people 
can control the influences of advertising. But, if liquor advertising is banned for this reason, should we 
also not ban food commercials because there are compulsive overeaters. By further extension, should we 
not also disallow advertising of items such as skate boards, because they can cause injuries if not used 
responsibly. To say advertising itself is a sin cannot be a blanket statement. 
 
Advocates of the ban tell us liquor commercials are offensive. But are they anymore offensive than 
commercials that praise the virtues of a certain tampon or sanitary napkin? The commercials we’re 
plagued to sit through evening after evening. 
 
Do liquor ads offend one’s sensibility more so than a 30 second spiel on constipation cures, or the 
sermons on sure-fire remedies for hemorrhoids? Why haven’t those guardians of the public good raised 
a whisper about these? No, the government must stand firm and not give in to the censors who would 
dictate that you or I are mature enough or responsible enough to watch. 
 

That’s from the Swift Current Sun, and I just say for the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, a little more food 
for thought, that the issue is not quite so clearly cut as you might like it to be. 
 
Now then, I happen to be, Mr. Speaker, moving on fairly quickly because I want to say just where does this 
bring us to? Well, it brings you to a great number of things, and I’m not going to go through them. The Premier 
identified a number of them, and he listed at our convention, and I want to bring right down now as I’ve got 
seven minutes, and it won’t take any more than that to make my point. But we had a fantastic convention. We 
had a fantastic convention in the city of Saskatoon. Just a great, great convention. And you know, Mr. Speaker 
— now look at Mr. Member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, I’ve only got six minutes and I don’t want you using 
up any, because this is really good stuff and you want to hear it. All right, you really do. 
 
Our Premier, our Premier, the leader of our party at our convention in the same city, Saskatoon — all right — 
gave a very good speech, and he listed off. Now I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I recall if I might now . . . Oh yes, well, 
okay. That’s fine. Maybe I won’t recall . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, that’s right. All right. He listed 35 
things and I’m not going to list them tonight because there’s something even better than I want to talk about. 
 
But I’m going to recommend that maybe some of our members that are lining up on the little strip ready to take 
off to the NDP might like to take a look at those 35 points that our Premier raised at our convention . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, I’ve got something better for you. I’ve got something better for you and I want 
to leave this to one of our more well-armed, or I don’t know how to put it quite frankly — our more respectable 
members. 
 
We’ll leave this. All I know, Mr. Speaker, all I know is that our party has enough good sense not to hold a 
convention when the Grey Cup is being played. In any event. Now then if the member . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, I tell you I’d hate to have the division you boys got in your party, and I’m going to talk 
about that division, and now I’ve got five minutes. 
 
You know, I just wonder if you’ve got enough courage to keep your mouth kind of closed a little. You know, 
and just so that it doesn’t make big noises, just so that you could hear this. I wonder if you’ve got the courage to 
do that. Have you all got the . . . I know that the member for Pelly has that courage. 
 
On the week-end, on the week-end, now listen to this, Mr. Speaker. All of this discussion that we  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

292 
 

hear on the reports on the radio, the TV, the newspapers about war, about a nuclear bomb, “The Day After” 
program — peoples emotions are up. There are people in this country that have a lot against communist nations 
around the world. There’s a lot of friction. Our Prime Minister is out, Prime Minister of this country is out 
around the world now on a peace mission. I will refrain from making too many comments about that. We could 
be at war soon, you know. 
 
But I was just reading the paper, and I had the Star-Phoenix, the paper and here it is. It’s the Star-Phoenix — 
Friday’s. what does it say? We’ve got to get to what it says: 
 

Condemnation of U.S. among NDP resolutions. A condemnation of the United States over the Soviet 
downing of Korean airline flight 007, and a demand to withdraw Canada from NATO, are among the 
226 resolutions to be discussed by the New Democrats. 
 
The resolution dealing with the Korean passenger flight shot down by Soviet interceptors holds the 
United States partially responsible, claiming there is strong evidence it was being used as a spy plane for 
the US military. 
 

Then, what does it say, Mr. Speaker? It accesses the U.S. government of manipulating the incident to increase 
its defence budget, and it rejects the action of the federal NDP — rejects the actions of the federal NDP — 
introducing a motion condemning the Soviet Union. 
 
Now, here we have a situation where you people are at odds with your federal counterparts. All right. You’ve 
been at odds with them now over peace, over whether or not we should condemn the Soviets or not. You’ve 
been at odds with them over that. Odds with them over the energy issue. You’ve been at odds with the federal 
counterparts over the constitution. The only thing you are ever with them on was the ousting of the Joe Clark 
government. The only thing. 
 
Now then, Mr. Speaker, I can only say this to the people of this province: if that isn’t enough to turn you off the 
NDP for the next 20 years, that these people are . . . And I raised this with people at home, and you know what 
they said? “Well, what are they? Communist sympathizers” And I said, “Well, I don’t know, but you’d have to 
think so.” You know, communist sympathizers. I don’t know. What else is it? What else is it when you 
condemn the best neighbour we’ve got, right on our borders — the very best neighbour we have, Mr. Speaker, 
the only protection we have in this time of trouble. And what are these people doing? Condemning them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to conclude, I suppose I could only say that the next time I fly commercial airlines, you know, 
I not only have to watch out for MIG fighters out the window, but I may have to watch out for the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, because, as I understand, he has a plane too, you know, and I could be flying 
American airlines. 
 
In any event, Mr. Speaker, it’s a terrible thing, and I’ve heard, and I know that we’ve been faced with a terrible 
situation because we have a NDP party . . . I see the Leader of the Opposition is now in. It’s a shame you 
missed it because I wanted to get around . . . Well, you know, really it is a shame because I know that the NDP 
don’t like watching football, but I’m not too sure about the Leader of the Opposition, because I’m convinced he 
must be watching the Ottawa Rough Riders a lot, because he’s thinking of going federal, because he’s acting 
like George Brancant — he’s eating a lot of ice cubes lately. So I would say that maybe he’s been watching a 
bit of football. 
 
In any event, the serious stuff really is, as I wind up and conclude, any party that sympathizes with the Soviet 
Union in terms of the downing of the 007 Korean airliner, and I’m sure that they’re likely in agreement with . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order. It’s my duty under rule 13.3 to interrupt the debate at this point in time and to put 
all questions to dispose of the amendment to the main motion. 



 
November 28, 1983 

 

293 
 

 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

YEAS — 7 
 

Blakeney Koskie Shillington 
Thompson  Lusney Yew 
Engel   
 

NAYS — 42 
 

Devine Dutchak Myers 
Muller Embury Rybchuk 
Birkbeck Dirks Caswell 
McLeod Maxwell Hampton 
Andrew Young Gerich 
Rousseau Domotor Boutin 
Katzman Folk Schmidt 
Pickering Muirhead Meagher 
Hardy Petersen Sauder 
Smith (Swift Current) Bacon Zazelenchuk 
Baker Sveinson Martens 
Schoenhals Hodgins Weiman 
Currie Smith (Moose Jaw South) Sutor 
Klein Hopfner Morin 
 
 
MR. MARTENS: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I want to begin this evening by talking about some of the things 
that I think are good things in the throne speech. I want to first of all . . . 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MARTENS: — I hope they are going to appreciate all of what I am going to say as enthusiastically as I 
go through. 
 
I want to first of all congratulate the new ministers. I know that to take the province from what it was, to what 
it’s going to be, is going to take all 25 of them, and I know that they are going to do a lot of work to get it going, 
and they’re already done it, as I am going to prove as I go along. I think the Premier had a good deal of 
foresight in choosing them. I also want to congratulate the Lieutenant Governor on his speech. I want to 
congratulate him on his first one, and I hoe that he has many more in the future. 
 
The Morse constituency is a constituency that is basically rural. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Who did you defeat in the election? 
 
MR. MARTENS: — Good question. I heard a comment here about who won the last election in Morse 
constituency, and I also want to know who . . . or they would like to probably know who lost the election in the 
presidential race for the NDP, but I don’t want to go into any gross discussion of that. 
 
I want to congratulate the mover. It’s an honour to be chosen by the Premier to address the  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

294 
 

throne speech on the basis of being a mover, and also a seconder. I want to congratulate the member for 
Melville, and the member for Saskatoon Nutana, who did an excellent job on dealing with the views of the 
throne speech. 
 
We’ve heard a considerable amount of discussion here today, and in the past few days, about the part about the 
A, B, and C team in this government. Well, I’d like to tell a story about that. You know, the government is 
typical of an orchestra, for example. The conductor of a large symphony orchestra in the United States was 
asked a question after he had made a great presentation on a symphony. He was asked, “Sir, what do you 
assume to be the most difficult instrument to play?” And he thought a while and he said, “I’ll tell you what it is. 
It’s playing second fiddle.” And I’ll tell you, the members of this government, and the members in the 
government, and the Legislative Secretaries, and those that are supporting us are truly capable of demonstrating 
that they are one with us. And I think they’ve done that throughout the throne speech debate here, and I know 
that they’re going to continue to do that, because we playing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you. 
 
We’re going to demonstrate to this government, not only in dealing with the things that we’ve got going 
presently in job creation and energy development, but we’re going to demonstrate it in many more things to 
come. And you just wait and see. 
 
Job creation — the first thing I have on my list as a positive thing this government has done: 4,200 jobs in 
summer employment for students. An excellent opportunity for young kids to learn what the people of the 
province do for a living. It’s an excellent opportunity for those kids to go get some dollars to go to school. And I 
think it was an excellent amount of foresight on the part of our government that initiated that program. 
 
The next thing I want to talk about is the $5,000 tax credit. And I want to congratulate the ministers who were 
responsible for that. The member from Meadow Lake was the individual who initiated that, and I think it was an 
excellent opportunity. I had people in my seat, a rural seat with small towns, some hired two people, some hired 
one, and I think that that’s an excellent opportunity for these small businesses to being to establish a number of 
things. And one of the things that I noticed, Mr. Speaker, about the responsibility that they were given was they 
started to do bookkeeping for those small businesses. They hired bookkeepers who they’ve neglected, or an area 
of work that they have neglected for years. They’ve had to do it on their own, and these small businesses, farm 
implement dealerships, have finally got somebody who cared about what they were doing. And they provided a 
way that these people could afford to develop on the job training. 
 
Another thing I want to compliment the government about is the $3,000 grant Build-A-Home program — 4,100 
new homes and 7,000 new jobs. I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s an excellent vision of what we need to do, and 
continue to d, in this province. For years the former government would isolate themselves from the federal 
situation, and we, in the province of Saskatchewan, were doing that all the time. We would not utilize the 
federal government funding and initiative programs to develop something on our own. And now we took a 
provincial program, matched it with a federal, and we started to move in the home building. And it was an 
excellent opportunity for us to expand our labour force, and it was an excellent opportunity for us to develop an 
industry. 
 
These kind of things are typical of some of the problems that we had with dealing with water. And I’m going to 
touch on that later on. The PFRA in Canada have always wanted to develop water in Saskatchewan, but the 
initiative from the provincial government was never there. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a pleasure for me to 
work together to try and develop a utility that’s going to do that for us. And I’ll enlarge on that at a later time. 
 
I want to talk also about the growth factor in jobs as it relates to Canada. Saskatchewan had a growth factor of 6 
per cent in its work-force, while all of Canada had less than a 4. Now, that’s  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

295 
 

figures on growth on the work-force. If you’d have taken Saskatchewan figures out of that, you probably would 
have had less than a 3 in the Canadian. And we’ve contributed an excellent portion of our fiscal planning to the 
development of employment for the people of Saskatchewan. And I think that’s credible. It shows up on our 
figures of people moving back into Saskatchewan. And I think that’s commendable. They’re coming home. 
 
And an interesting thing, in my responsibility to the Minister of Energy we went to visit some irrigation 
developments in southern Alberta. And I visited with quite a few of those people and when they found out I was 
from Saskatchewan they were convinced that they should perhaps think of moving back. Because they had 
grown up here. And I talked to one individual specifically who is the manger of the St. Mary’s irrigation 
district, probably the largest one. In 1972, when the former administration took office, he moved out of here, 
because he couldn’t see where they were going to develop any more irrigation. And it’s been stalemated ever 
since. And look what’s happened to the growth in Alberta. And he told me when he moved in there his first job 
was to negotiate a grant from the Alberta government and who was sitting across from him? It was the same 
people that had worked for the conservation development branch in Saskatchewan. Many, many people moved 
into the province of Alberta simply because the philosophy that they had didn’t correspond with what these 
people had here. And we’re, Mr. Speaker, going to change that, and we’re working together with the various 
branches of government to initiate that. 
 
I believe in every society, as it relates to jobs, you have to have stability — stability in the work-force. You 
have to have stability on the part of the economic development. And when I heard the Leader of the Opposition 
say that we needed more militancy, I was a little appalled. Does he want work, does he want production, or do 
we want stability? Does he want irrationality, militancy? And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that it’s time that we, 
together with, as government and as the economic community, that we work together, and I think we have. 
They wanted to have that, and I think we’re doing that. 
 
Our universities have been a part of getting the people in positions where they can be more accountable, and I 
commend the minister of continuing ed for his excellent job in dealing with those problems. We have high 
enrolment in the province in universities and technical schools, and I think that’s only beginning to what we can 
have in the future. And I think that those things are important. 
 
I want to touch just briefly on some things in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, and one of the things is the farm 
purchase program. I think it’s been an excellent opportunity for the people of the province to take advantage of 
a program without a whole lot of restrictions, without a whole lot of red tape, and I want to commend the 
Minister of Agriculture and the former minister of agriculture, the member from Souris-Cannington, on their 
work in developing the program. Over 1,800 and almost 1,900 people have enrolled in that program. Over $200 
million has been put into that program, and I think, Mr. Speaker, it is a worthwhile exercise, and I’m proud to 
be a part of it. 
 
We heard quite a bit about the Crow. I want to talk a little bit about what’s in the throne speech about the feeder 
program. This government has recognized that there is a problem there. And we visited with people from 
Alberta, we visited with people from Saskatchewan, just to see where we can begin to work. And I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s we’re going to be coming down with some things that are going to be an encouragement to the 
feeding of livestock in the province. We had a negative attitude to contend with because it was initiated by the 
former administration. The former minister of agriculture said there was only one agricultural product that we 
need to worry about, and that’s wheat. But I want to tell the members of the legislature, and the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, we have a diversive agricultural in this province, and we have to work to maintain it. 
Even though we have commitments by other jurisdictions in this country, we have a responsibility, and we’re 
going to see that we develop that. 
 
The throne speech talked about the feeder associations guarantee act and I think that that’s a  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

296 
 

beginning step to a number of programs that the minister is likely to put before this House. And I want to 
compliment him on the work and the research that he has done into it. 
 
I also want to take the time to talk a little bit about the kinds of things that a check-off can do. We’ve indicated 
that we’re proposing a check-off to the industries that want it, and I think the concept needs to be clearly 
identified as to, if the people want it, let them have it. And so many times in the past, we’ve had, “You’re going 
to take it, like it or lump it.” And that’s not what this government does. I’m proud to be a part of that 
government. We say, “Here’s the options, you go do it,” and they’re doing it and they’re going to do it well. 
They’re going to do it far better than any government could, and I think that’s an indication of the capacity of 
agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Crow is probably a major issue. There’s other people that have discussed it, so I won’t do it at this time. 
But I know that the way it’s set up that people from Moose Jaw and a line Moose Jaw North to Medicine Hat 
are going to have to start feed in their feed grains from now on. And that’s why, when we talk about a feeder 
program in the province of Saskatchewan, feed grains are going to have to be a part of the program and the 
development of agriculture as an intricate part of development in Saskatchewan. It’s going to have to be there. 
 
So many times, Mr. Speaker, we have been told that Conservatives are going to get rid of health care, they are 
going to get rid of the health carte as the people of Saskatchewan have grown accustomed to having it. And so 
many times the opposition has talked about it. I get rather ill when I hear them talking about it, and I remember 
a certain former leader of an administration shaking his finger at me and telling me they were going to take it 
away in one election. And that bothered me. 
 
I grew up in an area where, from the first day that I went to school, medical care insurance was an integral part 
of the involvement that we had through the health care program. Swift Current health region was number one. 
But here’s something that many people don’t understand. It was not only the government of the day that put it 
in; it was the doctors and the municipalities that were also instrumental in putting it in. We’ve heard so terribly 
much about, “Oh it was the government,” but we never hear about how the people, the doctors, and the 
municipal people put that program in. 
 
I want to tell you something: how the NDP government in 1977 decided to put their thumbs down on health 
region number one. And what did they do? They wouldn’t renew the contract to develop health care in Swift 
Current. Number one. They didn’t want to have health care in the Swift Current any more like it had been done. 
And so what they did is, they forced the health region, Mr. Speaker, to put up $400,000 of their money into the 
government that was taxed from the area. They forced the people there to give it back to the health region, or to 
the government. And it came out of the pockets of the people from the south-west part of Saskatchewan. And I 
think, Mr. Speaker, that was almost criminal. And it reminds me of one of their resolutions about taking back all 
of the stuff that is sold now, taking it back for a dollar. They expropriate. It’s just a part of their philosophy. 
 
And I’m proud of our Minister of Health who has demonstrated by his work and his diligence to have an 
expanded health budget — a budget that puts the dollars in, and it makes the people of Saskatchewan proud to 
be a part of the country, and also proud to be a part of a government that cares for the people of Saskatchewan. 
The health needs are met. I think it’s important. 
 
I want to deal a little bit about energy. There was an article in the Calgary Sun, October, deals with 
Saskatchewan’s in the Money”: 
 

Saskatchewan’s golden age is dawning at last, and the petroleum industry, as usual, is in the vanguard of 
ushering in the present in Canada to this perennial tomorrow province. Oil companies collectively 
dropped almost 29 million last week in the lap  



 
November 28, 1983 

 

297 
 

of a provincial government that was expecting a good show, but nothing like what happened. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this goes through the whole list of the things that happened to make the oil energy situation in the 
province of Saskatchewan turn around. And I know that it’s impacted in my constituency, and it’s going to 
impact in a lot of others. In the days of doom and gloom I could remember those oil well service companies — 
and they’re small business. This guy drives a truck, and he’s got two guys hired — they haul water. And the 
NDP never did like them. They forced the multinationals to come in and do that service because these guys 
were going bankrupt. And then they put $40 million in to save them. And all they did was pour it down dry 
holes. And these people, these people who are Saskatchewan people, people working, they had to go to find 
work other places. And you know what the one fellow had to do? He had to water the ground to put up 
irrigation systems. That was all the work he could find. There was nothing in the oil patch. But you go today, 
and there he is working. And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s an excellent opportunity for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to just make one reference to a resolution in the NDP convention. And it really upsets me. There isn’t 
anything as negative to the agriculture community as estate taxes. There isn’t any one thing that is more down 
on estate taxes. And I am told that I should maybe talk about this to some extent, and I will just briefly. It says 
here, “Be it resolved that we support the removal of, or support the development of legislation to have estate 
taxes.” Mr. Speaker, I wonder, I wonder in this discussion whether any of these ever thought about the 
consequences that it would have. Why don’t you ask somebody that dealt with it? I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
when it affected my family, it was costly. And what it cost us is, we had six children in the family, and it was 
just like putting a seventh one right beside you, because they gout just as much as any one of us did. And my 
father worked from sundown till sunset and sometimes through the night to accumulate that, and he put it down 
there, he paid tax on it, he paid tax on every dollar of that. And then when he passed away, we, as a part of that 
family farm, we had to cough up a whole bunch . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Cash dollars, and it was interest 
charged on six months after we were forced to pay. And they think it’s good. 
 
They’ve got other resolutions that indicate the same thing. They talk about a school trustees not being 
competent. And I think that those things are ridiculous. The whole thing is really poor. 
 
Take NATO for example. Get rid of NATO. I think it hinges on being foolish. 
 
For the record’s sale, also, Mr. Speaker. I want to say one thing before we close this evening, and that has to do 
with a report that wasn’t read here earlier this afternoon, and it’s the Don Faris report on the final report of the 
special committee on the review of liquor regulations in Saskatchewan, and the speaker from 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg read all of it except one paragraph, and I think that’s key to the discussion that we have 
here today, and we’ve had from the opposition. And it goes like this, and this is signed by Don Faris. This is 
what he has reservations about. The speaker from Assiniboia read them, but he didn’t read the paragraph that he 
should have, and it says this: 
 

The report contains important recommendations in regard to rehabilitation, and in regard to education, 
and in regard to drinking and driving (and here’s the key thing), but the pricing policy to cut back on 
overall consumption is the most important idea. 
 

That’s what Mr. Faris says in 1973. It’s the most important idea. Which province in western Canada has one of 
the highest prices in their liquor? We’ve had four price increases since we took office — five I’m told — and 
that’s what we think is a part of a controlling policy — plus education — but if you don’t take and put the price 
of it up, you’re going to have lot’s of it sold, whether you advertise, or whether you don’t advertise. 
 
And you take a look at some of the things that Maclean’s said about alcohol. It was the price  



 
November 28, 1983 
 

298 
 

related to the no money in the country that has made the decline in the volume consumed in this country go 
down. And that’s a part of the message that Don Faris had in the report that he gave, and I think that that needs 
to be identified. 
 
I’ve a lot more things to discuss, Mr. Speaker, and I think that I probably will allow other people the 
opportunity, but I would like to beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 


