






















































Hansard: March 29, 1983


385 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
March 29, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 
TABLING OF ESTIMATES 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I have a message for His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The message from His Honour the Lieutenant-Governor, C. Irwin McIntosh: 
 

The Lieutenant-Governor transmits estimates of certain sums required for the service of the 
province for the 12 months ending March 31st, 1984, and recommends the same to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by my seat-mate, Mr. Taylor: 
 

That His Honour’s message and the estimates be referred to the committee of finance. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to begin this evening by welcoming viewers from 
across the province to the Legislative Assembly. At a time of economic challenge and rapid economic 
change, with difficult choices to be made, I think it’s important that the tax-paying public have an 
opportunity to follow and to influence the budget-making process. In January of this year I began a 
pre-budget consultation, with meetings with community leaders in Regina, Saskatoon and Prince Albert. 
Their advice helped us in making the decisions needed to prepare this budget and this evening I would 
like to thank those people. 
 
Before I set out the details of the government’s 1982-83 spending estimates, let me comment on the state 
of the Canadian and Saskatchewan economy. The Saskatchewan economy, the Canadian economy is 
only now beginning to emerge from the hardest economic times since the Great Depression. Over the 
past three years policies designed to squeeze out inflation through high interest rates have resulted in 
falling output, rising unemployment in virtually every western industrialized nation. While inflation has 
been dramatically reduced, the price paid has been excessive. From mid-1981, when the Canadian 
economy entered fully into the recession, to the present, the cost has been $50 billion in lost economic 
output, 30 per cent of the industrial capacity has been left idle and 1.5 Canadians are without a job. This 
has been the cost of short-sighted economic policies that have stumbled from opportunistic stimulation 
to, to severe deflation. 



 
March 29, 1983 
 

 
386 

While the current level of unemployment is unacceptably high, the Saskatchewan economy has 
undeniably performed better than the rest of the Canadian economy. With seasonally . . . seasonably 
adjusted unemployment rate at 7.6 per cent for February, Saskatchewan remains the only province with 
single-digit unemployment rate. In February there were 3,000 people . . . 3,000 more people employed 
in Saskatchewan than a year earlier. In contrast 275,000 people lost their jobs in the rest of the country. 
 
Inflation has come down dramatically. Nationally the inflation rate has declined by over 4 per cent in 
one year and the gains have even been greater in Saskatchewan. In February Saskatoon had the lowest 
inflation rate in Canada, just under 6 per cent. Regina’s rate was only slightly higher. The more rapid 
decline in the Saskatchewan inflation rate is largely a result of direct measures that we as a government 
have taken to ease the burden on the people of Saskatchewan. We eliminated the road tax on gasoline 
and reduced the pressures on the cost of living. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The mortgage interest reduction program protected homeowners and reversed 
the free fall of housing starts and sales that occurred prior to April of 1982. Changes in the oil royalty 
structure put an industry back to work and the farm purchase program made more affordable the 
Saskatchewan tradition of an independent family farm. These programs continue to turn back more than 
$150 million per year to the people of Saskatchewan. We continue to be committed to those programs 
and we continue to be very proud of those programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The economic courses that the government has charted since taking office, a 
course that we have been following in the preparation of this budget, is one calculated from a thorough 
assessment of our options. We are following an approach to economic development that we believe will 
work, and is working. This government believes that the private sector is vital to an economic plan. We 
believe that one of the most important tasks we face is to show individual investors in Saskatchewan and 
those in the rest of Canada, that this province is heading for a period of high, sustained growth and that 
they should be part of that growth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If we want diversification, there is no substitute for the imagination, the energy, 
the capital of thousands of individuals with the lifetime of experience in business, or in their trade, who 
are constantly seeking of new ways to beat the competition. But I also said in my November, 1982 
budget address, that we will build on any, any strategy or combinations of strategies that produce results, 
and that still is my view. 
 
In our economic strategy the public sector is also indispensable. We intend to use the public sector, not 
in isolation and not exclusively, but as one element of a balanced mixed economy. The challenges that 
we face now, and those that lie ahead, are too complex to be met by simplistic solutions. Canadians have 
learned that there, there is no quick fixes. There is no simply formula. There is no tape and bale wire 
repairs that can disguise the fact that our national and provincial economies are going through  



 
March 29, 1983 

 

 
387 

fundamental structural changes. Jobs and even whole industries are changing as the Canadian economy 
adjusts to international competition and quickening waves of technological innovation. 
 
We can control some elements of the recessionary inflation, but we can’t control them all. Our resources 
in agriculture sectors in particular are threatened by the current instability of international markets. 
International oil markets are in a state of chaos. The OPEC producers who once formed the most 
disciplined and effective commodity cartel in history are now struggling to prevent an international oil 
price war. This is no spectator sport for the province of Saskatchewan. Falling oil prices will largely 
wipe out the oil export revenues and cause serious uncertainty to investors in the oil industry. 
 
Most of the oil produced in Saskatchewan has been sold for years in Canada at prices well below the 
world price. As international oil prices rose rapidly, western Canadian oil prices fell further and further 
behind that international price, steadily increasing the gap between what oil was worth on the 
international market and what oil was worth in Canada. The availability of under-priced western oil has 
created a very large subsidy for consumers and their governments throughout Canada. The 
Canada-Saskatchewan energy agreement struck a compromise between the interests of the consuming 
and the producing provinces. We agreed to continue to subsidize consumers, but at an acceptable level. 
But there was no agreement to absorb any or all losses, thereby reducing the revenues and damaging our 
industries. Saskatchewan did not agree to lose going up and coming down. 
 
With the recent decline in the world oil prices our old oil is still priced well below world levels. We 
resent any suggestion that the price of old oil should fall and we will resist the pressures to increase the 
subsidy at the expense of our producers, at the expense of our revenues, and at the expense of essential 
programs that depend on those revenues. Those who suggest that the Canadian oil price should fall, 
point to the fact that the gasoline prices in Canada are now higher than they are in United States. Indeed 
this is true, but only in those provinces that have high taxes on gasoline. In effect, those governments 
have appropriated the benefit of under-priced western crude instead of passing that benefit on to their 
consumers. As a result, only the producing provinces with no gasoline tax are we price competitive with 
United States. That, in reality, is the made-in-Canada energy policy. The producing provinces cannot be 
expected to provide cheaper oil so that other provinces can increase their already high tax on gasoline. 
 
Potash markets are also depressed partly because of the offshore price-cutting competition, but more 
because the world grain surpluses and a drop in farm income have meant the deferral of fertilizer 
purchases by U.S. farmers. As a result, sales have fallen, lay-offs have taken place, and government 
revenues have been lost. 
 
Last year’s record level grain harvest made a major contribution to our economy. Agriculture has been, 
and must remain, a vital source of strength in our economy. Regrettably, well enough is not being left 
alone by the federal government. The Canadian economy benefits enormously from the export of the 
Saskatchewan grain harvest. With the Pepin plan, we have a quarterback tackling his own team-mates. If 
Ottawa proposal to rescind the Crow rate are not themselves rescinded, international grain markets that 
have been built up over three generations will be jeopardized. Our farmers are already squeezed by 
lower prices and higher interest rate and input costs. This new burden, imposed by their own federal 
government, will undermine their  



 
March 29, 1983 
 

 
388 

competitiveness. We must succeed in our campaign to show the federal government that the Pepin 
proposal to change the freight rates will prove catastrophic for Saskatchewan, but also for the rest of 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As a result of these actual and potential threats to the provincial economy, I have 
to deal with weakening government revenues, pressure to increase expenditures, and a need to stimulate 
the economy. The choices are not easy, as many of the people that we met in our pre-budget 
consultations will attest to. 
 
To reduce and maintain control over a deficit, we could increase taxes. But I believe that any general tax 
increase at this time would be harmful to any economic recovery. Again, to avoid a deficit, we could 
slice expenditures and eliminate program. I believe that we have an obligation to make efficient use of 
the public purse. But this government believes there is never a right time to cut essential services, and 
we will defend those services in good times as well as bad times. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Same time, there is a need to, for economic stimulation. But how much? And 
what type of stimulation? The possible benefits of massive injection of government funds into the 
economy must be balanced off against the costs. Short-term give-away programs will do very little to 
redirect the economy towards the proper future. 
 
The main factors we face, then, are these: there is good reason to hope that the national economy is 
about to recover, or already has started to recover. Saskatchewan has not been as, affected as deeply by 
the recession as many other provinces, but there has been an increase in unemployment, and a fall off in 
resource prices has damaged the government’s revenue position. Confidence in our economy, I believe, 
remains strong. Our credit rating is still high, and despite a slow-down, the private sector investment and 
job creation activity is still taking place. In short, we believe that to maintain stability and confidence in 
our economy we have to avoid significant tax increases and support social protection programs, even if 
that means a larger deficit. 
 
The budget I am presenting tonight responds directly to the needs and the aspirations of our population. 
Let me highlight our program for 1983. Tonight I will be announcing a nine-point program to expand 
job opportunities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Two, a significant expansion of a province’s skilled trained capabilities. 
 
Three, a redirection of the heritage fund to recognize the basic importance of agriculture to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — An improved and strengthened health care system in the  



 
March 29, 1983 

 

 
389 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — A new initiative to foster research and development in the province of 
Saskatchewan and a more streamlined government organization able to serve the public in a more 
efficient and effective way. 
 
Let me turn to the specific actions to be taken, starting with economic development. This government 
does not agree that more and more government spending through directionless programs can solve all of 
our problems; our approach is different. Saskatchewan people want permanent jobs created in our 
province for themselves and their children. 
 
Tonight I am pleased to announce the nine-point program aimed at making more jobs available now and 
in the years ahead. First, we will extend the Build-A-Home program to August 1, 1983. This program, 
which provides a $3,000 grant to the purchase of a new home, purchasers of a new home, has been a 
tremendous success. Over 1,500 applications have already been received from home-owners. We expect 
approximately 1,500 additional units will be constructed under this extended program. In total this 
program will help create 4,500 jobs in the housing industry, and I . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — . . . and I have asked the federal Minister of Finance to make a similar extension 
of the federal housing grant program. 
 
Two, second, I am pleased to announce a new five-year, $32 million program for the construction and 
renovation of a culture and recreation facility in Saskatchewan. In 1983 we are allocating $5 million to 
these capital projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Third, this budget doubles, doubles the amount of youth employment funding — 
$2.7 million will be provided for Opportunities ’83 program to assist all sectors of the economy in hiring 
young people over the summer months — up to 30,000 weeks of work will be created. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Fourth, I am pleased to announce a $20 million tax reduction for small 
businesses targeted directly at job creation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — For each permanent, full-time employee that an existing small business adds to 
its work-force up to the end of August of 1983, the province will rebate $5,000 to that business, to a 
maximum of 10 employees and, therefore, a maximum of $50,000 to that small business. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — For a new small business setting up shop in Saskatchewan, this  



 
March 29, 1983 
 

 
390 

program will provide $5,000 for one out of every three new employees, again to a maximum of $50,000. 
This program will apply for jobs that are created for not just a few months. We will insist upon a 
completion of a 12-month period to establish the fact that a permanent new job has been created. This 
incentive will help create up to 4,000 jobs in our vital small business sector of our economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Fifth, the budget will provide $8 million in funding for the continuation of the 
Saskatchewan Jobs Program. This program, in conjunction with the federal job creation program, will 
finance 3,500 jobs in 1983. 
 
Sixth, we will allocate $2 million for economic development program for treaty Indians. This program 
will be implemented on reserves, and is aimed at promoting local economic self-sufficiency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The program will provide support for job creation in two ways: directly, through 
support for economic ventures employing Indian people; and indirectly, through improvement of 
services required to promote further economic initiatives. 
 
Seventh, I am pleased to announce the government’s intention to create a $30 million special projects 
fund to help finance future productive investments in the Saskatchewan public sector. I am particularly 
pleased to explain the source of this $30 million. Through careful management . . . (inaudible) . . . 
expenditures proposed in our November budget, we estimate departments and agencies will be able to 
return and turn back to the treasury a further $30 million in 1982-83. This is over and above the 
significant administrative economies already built into that November budget. Thirty million dollars . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Thirty million dollars generated by a government becoming more and more 
productive, now available to be turned back to the economy for productive investment. 
 
Eighth, eighth, an ongoing capital program of government and crown corporations will continue to play 
an important role in the provincial economy. Over $1.5 billion will be spent on numerous capital 
projects next year, supporting approximately 11,000 person-years of construction employment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Our capital construction program will support such projects as diverse as the 
geological sciences building in Saskatoon, the Nipawin power project, and the extension of rural gas 
distribution system. 
 
I see the members opposite are not happy with our job creation program. 
 
Ninth, ninth in total, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to announce that our government’s  



 
March 29, 1983 

 

 
391 

intention to proceed in 1983 with the establishment of a provincial crown utility to service the growing 
water requirements of the province of Saskatchewan. The creation of this water distribution utility will 
be after the . . . Saskatchewan’s successful experience with utilities of natural gas, electricity, and 
telephones. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — This government’s program to expand employment opportunities in 
Saskatchewan shows a genuine effort to use whatever mechanisms we have available to us to create jobs 
within the limits of what is reasonable and what we can afford. I call on all sectors of the economy to 
join with us to keep Saskatchewan’s employment picture the brightest in all of Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — But more is needed if recovery is to be sustained. We, as a province, have to be 
equipped to face a more competitive and dynamic economic future. The people of Saskatchewan need to 
have marketable skills to face the challenge squarely. 
 
The department of advanced education and manpower will give new direction to post-secondary 
education and training in this province, ensure that programs are directly linked to the present and future 
demands of the labour market. As the economy recovers and expands, there will be a strong demand for 
more highly trained workers. Yet, when we took office, over 50 per cent of the applications to technical 
schools were turned away because there wasn’t enough spaces. This is no way, Mr. Speaker, this is no 
way to keep our young people in the province of Saskatchewan. This government believes there is no 
better investment than providing sound technical training for young people of this province who want to 
stay and work here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Accordingly, it gives me pleasure this evening to announce a major expansion of 
our technical training system. Over the next four years, we will spend $120 million to finance a 60 per 
cent increase in the number of training spaces available in Saskatchewan for our young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In this first year, 1,200 new training spaces will be provided at a cost of $7 
million. Of those new spaces, 800 will be in our existing institutes in Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose 
Jaw. However, we must also respond to the needs of those people in the smaller communities, such as 
Yorkton, Melfort, or La Ronge, who cannot leave their, their homes and their families or their jobs to 
receive training or retraining. To meet the needs of these people, I am pleased to announce the new 
Saskatchewan Skills Extension Program. This program will provide 400 new training spaces in 
communities across Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In addition to providing new training spaces, the government will expand the 
type of training available. New courses in high-technology and service occupations will be developed 
and delivered. This is the means of providing job-related  



 
March 29, 1983 
 

 
392 

training, at the same time creating the skilled labour pool who will attract industries to this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As well, we will make major, a major effort with regard to the fundamental basis 
of our education system, the elementary and the high school system. This budget contains 25 new school 
projects for both rural and urban Saskatchewan as well as the first-year funding of two new high schools 
in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would now like to turn to the heritage fund. One of the original purposes of the 
heritage fund was to act as a revenue stabilizer. In good times, money could be paid into the fund. In bad 
times, money could be withdrawn to offset falling revenues. That, at any rate, was the intention. But as 
the previous government allowed the crown corporations to grow and expand, the fund became their 
creature. It was transformed into a cash cow for the crowns. As fast as the revenues grew, they were 
consumed. Today, as presently structured, the fund no longer is capable of performing its revenue 
stabilizing role. To the extent possible, we propose to change this. 
 
I will remove the . . . we will be removing the present rule which restricts the annual transfer to the 
consolidated fund to 80 per cent of the heritage fund revenues. 
 
In addition to the changing of the rules governing the flow of heritage fund revenues, we intend to 
redirect the use of the heritage fund assets. Instead of being a bottomless pit for crown corporations, we 
believe that the heritage revenues and funds should be used for a positive vehicle to encourage private 
sector development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As a result, I am pleased to announce the establishment of two new divisions of 
the heritage fund, which will directly support key components of our economic development strategy. 
To strength our investment in Saskatchewan’s future, a clear commitment must be made to enhance our 
competitive position. This can only be assured by undertaking major new initiatives in research and 
development activities and by ensuring that the latest technologies are developed by Saskatchewan 
firms. As well, overall growth potential will be raised tremendously if we are able to attract some of the 
high-technology industries into this province. 
 
Accordingly I am pleased to announce the establishment of a research and development division of the 
heritage fund. Our initial contribution will be to designate $50 million of securities held in the heritage 
fund for this new division. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Secondly, secondly Mr. Speaker, we will establish the agriculture division of the 
heritage fund which will initially be used to fund the farm purchase program. In the future the heritage 
fund will support significant initiatives that will have lasting impact on the growth and the structure of 
our primary industry, agriculture. 



 
March 29, 1983 

 

 
393 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With the creation of this division, existing land bank assets will be transferred 
into the heritage fund. This will enable us to translate an asset base with a potential value of over $500 
million into a major funding source for the farm purchase program and other initiatives. In 1983 the 
farm purchase program will finance the subsidy on loans totalling $200 million to Saskatchewan farmers 
at interest rates of 8 per cent for the next five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In the first two years of that program we will assist 2,800 farmers with advances 
of up to $350 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The Saskatchewan business community is proud of its accomplishments and of 
its independence. Its representatives have made it clear to me that they want government assistance 
limited to only those activities that they can’t realistically undertake themselves. To provide this help we 
will be working with Saskatchewan business in various trade development activities. We will increase 
funding to, to trade development by $1 million in 1983-84. This money will be used to identify and 
pursue export opportunities of Saskatchewan goods and services, both in Canada and around the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — To this end, we will assist Saskatchewan business to compete for contracts with 
larger firms, crown corporations and the government. We will be opening a new trade office in United 
States. We will be encouraging Saskatchewan buys to purchase more goods and services from 
Saskatchewan. And we will be participating in trade fairs and missions, and promoting Saskatchewan 
business and promoting the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I am also pleased to announce the funding of over $2 million to encourage 
investment to locate in the province of Saskatchewan. This government places a high priority on 
attracting new businesses and new jobs to the province of Saskatchewan. Part of this program will 
involve a investor information service, technical and project development assistance to new businesses, 
and a new Saskatchewan Ambassador Award. And what this will do is for a resident or a former resident 
of Saskatchewan instrumental in attracting a new business into the province of Saskatchewan, we will 
make a commitment to that person of $5,000. But that money will be used, not by the individual, but he 
will allocate it to a educational institution in the province of Saskatchewan on behalf of his contribution 
by way of a bursary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — And this government believes that the drive to increase productivity must begin 
here, with the government. This government has an obligation to set an example by using its own 
resources efficiently. For 1983-84 we adopt a three- 



 
March 29, 1983 
 

 
394 

part strategy to control spending and increase productivity. 
 
Number one, as announced, we will be setting up and organizing and reorganizing the departments of 
government. 
 
Secondly, this strategy will deal with costs. When you look at the, at the costs we face as a government, 
over 50 per cent of our costs are, are salary costs. 
 
In August, our Premier announced a, an economic recovery program. Public sector wage guidelines 
were an important part and a central part of that program. Those guidelines which we believe to be fair, 
and have been accepted without the kind of difficulties that have been experienced by many other 
jurisdictions across the province. Since the inception of that program, we have had settlements with over 
30,000 workers in the province of Saskatchewan in accordance with those guidelines. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Finally, we have carried out an exhaustive scrutiny of every tax dollar spent by 
this government. As a result of this comprehensive review and restructuring of government programs, I 
am pleased to inform, inform the House that the rate of increase in spending for 1983-84 is just under 7 
per cent. This is the target the Premier set for the government last summer, and I am pleased to say that 
we have met that target. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — But that is not the whole story. We said that when we were elected that we 
would, we would strengthen those programs that provide essential services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. This is no easy task when you consider that health, education, and social services account 
for two-thirds of the total budget. Nevertheless, I am pleased tonight to announce the combined budget 
increases for health, education, and social services will not be 7 per cent, but nearly 10 per cent. This 
amounts to an enrichment of nearly $50 million over the 7 per cent level, and I am pleased to say that 
every penny of this has been provided without exceeding our 7 per cent guideline. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Health and social services are fundamentally important to any society. 
Saskatchewan . . . in Saskatchewan, this government takes special pride in the improvement that we are 
implementing in this budget and are planning for in the future. In 1983-84, we will provide $978 million 
for the maintenance and improvement of a health care system. That is $1,000 for every man, woman, 
and child in this province, and represents a full 30 per cent of our entire budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Included in this is a 25 per cent increase in the construction and upgrading of 
hospitals across the province, and I, I make mention of only a, a few of those: the, the continuation of 
the, of the multi-year renovation program at the University Hospital, as well as the Regina hospital 
regeneration program; funds will be  



 
March 29, 1983 

 

 
395 

made available for the provincial rehabilitation centre in the city of Regina. 
 
During the recent Kinsmen Telemiracle, my, my colleague and friend, the Minister of Health, 
announced the government’s intention to participate in the construction of a new Kinsmen children 
rehabilitation centre in Saskatoon. This budget contains funds for that commitment. 
 
Tonight I am pleased to announce a five-year package totalling $17 million for the upgrading of cancer 
services in the province. This includes . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — This includes $10 million for the construction of a cancer clinic in Saskatoon, as 
well as other enrichments in our strength, to strengthen their fight against cancer. 
 
Our commitment to an improved health care system extends beyond that. We will provide 120 new 
nursing home beds, 120 new nursing positions throughout the province. As well, a new four-bed 
pediatric intensive care unit will be built in University Hospital in Saskatoon. Cardiac services at Regina 
Plains Centre in Regina will be enhanced. 
 
As recently announced, the continuing care division of the Department of Social Services was 
transferred to the Department of Health. This transfer will help effect a rationalization of hospital and 
nursing home beds and promote the maintenance of high standards of nursing care. 
 
To provide for the operation of nursing homes in 1983-84, there will be a 19 per cent increase in 
funding. This will fund 97 new nursing home beds in 1983 and provide more staff at selected nursing 
homes. 
 
We will increase funding to the home care program by nearly 37 per cent in 1983-84. In short, we are 
continuing to improve and upgrade our health care system at every opportunity. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Recent unemployment statistics for Saskatchewan have been more encouraging, 
but it’s still realistic to assume that high levels of temporary income support will be needed for all or 
part of 1983-84. I am therefore allocating an additional $26 million to the Saskatchewan Assistance 
Plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — As well, the cost of living increases has been included in the family income plan, 
which provides support for low-income mothers and their children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The November budget set out a revenue and expenditure plan that would yield a 
combined deficit of $220 million. Since that time, there has been a modest decline in revenues largely as 
a consequence of lower potash revenues. As I  



 
March 29, 1983 
 

 
396 

mentioned earlier, we have also set aside $30 million into a special projects fund. Nevertheless, through 
careful management of our expenditures, I am pleased to report that the combined deficit for 1982-83 
will be at the level I announced last November. The dominant . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — The dominant factor in 1983-84 fiscal position is a virtual disappearance of the 
revenue from export charges on oil. In 1982-83 we budgeted for, and will receive, about $215 million 
from oil export tax. For 1983-84 we now expect to receive only $24 million from oil export charges, a 
decline of $190 million. As a consequence of this decline in oil revenues, our combined revenue 
increase will increase at only 3.8 per cent to a level of $2.808 billion. With combined expenditures 
increasing at 6.8 per cent to a level of $3.125 billion, the combined deficit for 1983-84 is anticipated to 
be 317 million. 
 
This budget faces up to the reality of world oil markets and the impact of oil revenues, and it presents a 
responsible and carefully constructed expenditure plan. It is the case, however, that an increase in the 
deficit could have been avoided by an increase in taxation. As an example, by increasing our sales tax 
from 5 points to 7 points, we could have raised $100 million in additional revenues. But this budget will 
not impose such a significant tax increase since such policies would endanger any kind of economic 
recovery. 
 
We have chosen what we consider to be a reasonable solution. We have implemented . . . We will 
implement modest tax increases. We will present a responsible increase in spending of 6.8 per cent, and 
we anticipate a manageable increase in our combined deficit. In the present economic circumstance, we 
are persuaded that it should be carried. That deficit should be carried by the government, as opposed to 
being passed on to the citizens by way of tax increases. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — In my November, my November budget address, I referred to this government’s 
commitment to establish a tax system which provides a competitive environment for our business 
community, and to reduce the burden on individuals. We still hold to this commitment and will continue 
to work improvements in our tax system. 
 
As I have mentioned before, current economic conditions, and especially uncertainty surrounding the oil 
price, has led to a weakening in our revenue position. While we are confident that the provincial 
economy is strong and will continue to outperform the national economy in the long run, it is 
appropriate to implement several tax measures to strengthen the government’s current revenue situation. 
 
First, effective April 1st, the tax applied on diesel fuel used in railway locomotives will increase from 
1.9 per cent per litre to 5.6 cents a litre. This increase is expected to yield $7.6 million in 1983-84. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Secondly, effective midnight, effective midnight tonight, the tax on cigarettes 
will be increased from 42 cents to 52 cents a pack of 25, and the tax on cut . . . on other tobacco and 
cigars will also be increased. And in spite of the representations made by  



 
March 29, 1983 

 

 
397 

my good friend, the Premier, we are also going to increase the price of snoose. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It is expected that these higher taxes on tobacco and cigarettes will yield 
approximately $9.5 million in 1983-84. 
 
For the year 1983-84, the capital financing requirements of the government and crown corporations will 
total $1,467,500.00. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, nationally and provincially there is a debate over the direction of our economic 
policy as we approach what many believe, and all hope will be, a period of recovery. Is this the time to 
opt for stimulation and hope that a massive injection of government money and government spending 
into the economy will catapult us out recession? 
 
As much as some might to want to open the floodgates and direct the flow of dollars into the economy, I 
have reached the conclusion that for the moment we must choose moderation, not drastic measures. 
While it is still too early to eliminate all the effects of recession, it is not too late to permanently derail 
our progress to recovery by ruthless action. 
 
We have continued measures to cut the cost of living for the people of Saskatchewan. We have found 
more money for health care, more money for educational training, and more money for jobs. There is no 
major tax increases. Spending has been kept to within 7 per cent guidelines. An increase in the deficit is 
seldom desirable, but we believe that the current moderate increase is fully justifiable in terms of the 
programs it will finance and the overall economic stance it will allow us to take. 
 
A budget must satisfy many goals and difficult choices must be made by, between competing priorities 
and conflicting strategies. I am confident that the course that we have set before the Assembly this 
evening will guide us through the economic turbulence that still remains, and bring us soon into the 
calmer waters of recovery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I move the traditional motion, let me say that perhaps the greatest, the greatest thing 
one can give, or a government can give the economy is a man like our Premier, Grant Devine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Young, dynamic and exciting. A man who always carries with him, and this is 
very important, always carries with him a positive attitude and a caring heart, and I think that contributes 
as much as many of the budgetary measures that you can put in a budget today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It is my pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to move and seconded by my seat-mate and good 
friend, the member for Indian Head-Wolseley: 
 

That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the committee of finance. 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
March 29, 1983 
 

 
398 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to reply to the speech by the Minister of Finance. I first wish 
to thank him for giving me a copy of the speech before he commenced his remarks, and that was helpful. 
I extend to him my congratulations and my sympathy. 
 
My congratulations because he has done his best to instil a note of accomplishment and promise into his 
speech. My sympathy because the harsh facts revealed by the figures so clearly expose the bones that are 
covered by the garment of his honeyed words. No, no, no minister of finance in recent memory has had 
to tell such a sombre story — a story of huge deficits, of cuts in programs which will be revealed when 
we see the estimates, a story of hopes that have been dashed. 
 
Last March and April, a year ago now, Conservative candidates made a large number of campaign 
promises to the people of Saskatchewan — a very large number. And as they listed all their campaign 
promises they made two basic commitments to the people of Saskatchewan. The first was that the good 
things they promised would be in addition to the major programs and services already offered by the 
provincial government; that is, that the delivery of the Conservative campaign promises would not be at 
the expense of any of the basic programs — certainly not in health and social services, and highways, 
and the rest. The second basic commitment was that all these campaign promises were fiscally 
responsible; that there was money in the bank, virtually, to pay for them all. Conservatives promised 
over and again, over and again, that there would be no deficits. Two basic commitments made a year 
ago, no program slashing, no deficits. And the document is proof in black and white and Tory blue that 
the Conservatives misled the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — I, I say to the people of Saskatchewan tonight, the Conservatives have misled 
you. Now why do I say that? For this reason: that this is the second Conservative budget. Much of the 
Conservative Party’s election platform awaits implementation. Many of the campaign promises have not 
been acted upon, some of the most expensive ones, the repeal of the sales tax, a 10 per cent cut in 
personal income tax. But in spite of that, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the fact that many of the expensive 
campaign promises have not been acted upon, we see a budget which is noteworthy primarily for the 
size of its deficit. 
 
We see a budget which follows the largest budget deficit in the history of Saskatchewan and a budget 
which contains program cuts and an even larger deficit. That’s why I say that the Conservative Party has 
misled the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s turn for a moment to some of the promises they have made. They made promises that they would 
accomplish substantial changes in this province without budget deficits. They made the promises and 
they are now delivering the bill. 
 
We are going to pay for those promises in the form of lost services and in the form of a mortgage of our 
future and our children’s future and the future of our children’s children. That’s what this budget deficit 
means. 
 
A year ago, according to the audited reports for the financial year ended March 31, 1982, the province 
had a surplus of $140 million — and I hope that nobody denies that. But all this has changed. The first 
Progressive Conservative budget had a deficit of  



 
March 29, 1983 

 

 
399 

$220 million, the largest in the history of Saskatchewan, indeed, more than the combined deficits since 
1905. 
 
This year’s, this year’s budget maintains the same dismal record. It, too, is our largest in history and it, 
too, is more than the combined deficits run up since 1905, even including last year’s record of $220 
million. They’re certainly taking in some money, but they’re spending a lot more money than they’re 
taking in. And what they can’t pay for, they’re putting on the charge account, on the credit card of you 
and me. 
 
How much is $317 million put on the charge account? How much does that mean to the government 
opposite? Well, it means that all of the ministers that I’m about to name are being paid for and their 
programs are being paid for on the charge account and not out of revenues taken in by this government. 
The Minister of Agriculture — his budget is 100 per cent out of the deficit, as is the Minister of Rural 
Affairs, as is the Minister of Co-ops, as is the Minister of Consumer Affairs, as is the Minister of the 
Environment, as is the Minister of Labour, as is the Minister of Culture and Youth, as is the Minister of 
Industry and Commerce. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Don’t leave me out. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — The Minister of Health, the Minister of Health admittedly cannot pay his 
budget out of the, out of the deficit, but all the others that I named can — including, including, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Minerals Resources, the Premier. All of the budgets of those departments would 
fit quite nicely into the $317 million deficit. That’s where, that’s what is being paid for on the 
credit-card basis. The figures are truly staggering. In two short years, the deficit exceeds a half a billion 
dollars — more than the total provincial budget 11 years ago, more than the provincial budget 11 years 
ago. 
 
Let’s look at it another way. Members opposite are fond of quoting Mr. Reagan, and one of his . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not any more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — One of, one of, one of his favourite, one of his favourite ploys is to illustrate 
just how large a deficit is by bringing it down to terms which he hopes other people can understand. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have here a stack of bills . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I have a stack of 
ten-dollar bills; I have 50 ten-dollar bills. Do you know, Mr. Speaker, how many stacks of bills like that 
it would take to make up their accumulated deficit of $500 million? Well, I will tell you, Mr. Speaker: 
one million stacks like that, one million stacks of bills. 
 
If I took one of those bills and laid it at the, on the highway at Vancouver and kept laying bills one by 
one by one, the . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . The string of ten-dollar bills would go into the Atlantic 
Ocean — 4,700 miles of bills. Well, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . If I piled on stacks of 
bills on stack like this, the, the stack of bills making up their deficit would be how high? 4,200 feet high 
— not quite a mile high of ten-dollar bills. That’s what they are offering the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Let me put it another way, Mr. Speaker. Let me put it another way. The last interest rate that they used 
when they borrowed on the Canadian market was 12.67 per cent — the  



 
March 29, 1983 
 

 
400 

last one I saw. If, if we had to pay interest at that rate, and we have to pay back the deficit of $500 
million — and it’s more than that; it’s more than that — we will have to pay, if we pay it back over 40 
years, interest of $2.3 billion and, of course, you have to pay back the $500 million. That will cost us 
$70 million a year, every year, for 40 years. That’s more than we pay in grants to all of the cities and 
towns and villages in Saskatchewan under our present grant formula. We are going to pay that! If we 
didn’t have this deficit, we could double those grants, but we have the deficit and this only two years. If 
they keep this up, I could, I could draw even more alarming pictures of what we will have to pay in 
interest and sinking fund and what we will not have for government services. 
 
This huge deficit clearly has to be paid by you and I and our children, and I regret to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that that is going to put a dead hand on what we will be able to do as a government for many, many 
years to come. And anybody who thinks it is not true, anyone who thinks it is not true, should look at 
what has happened in other provinces who have gone down this route — what I have called the Trudeau 
trail in the past, and we are going down that route, notwithstanding the assurances from the Minister of 
Finance that we would have balanced budgets over a four-year cycle. 
 
I don’t know whether he still stands by that, but I hope so, so that we will know that we will not be 
saddled with the dead weight of deficits which are facing a good number of other governments in this 
country. But, Mr. Speaker, the huge deficit is not our only problem. Nor are the budget cuts. I haven’t 
had an opportunity to examine the estimates, but it’s clear from his level of expenditure that there must 
be substantial budget cuts. 
 
He proudly says that he is going to keep expenditure on education and health up to the level of 10 per 
cent. Keep in mind that the increase in the Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan last year was 16 per 
cent or more; that the medical care plan got more than that; the drug plan got more than that. The 
universities got an increase of 17 per cent. And anyone under their budget — I’m not talking about ours, 
but their budget . . . And they are now saying 10 per cent will be lots — 10 per cent will be lots. When 
we have an opportunity to examine those figures, I think we will find that 10 per cent is going to be very 
miserly, indeed, to deal with some of the issues and problems being faced, particularly by the 
universities and by the, by the hospitals. 
 
Now, why do we have such a huge deficit? And why do we have cuts in services? Is it because the 
budget provides for lower taxes? Far from it. No, every major tax that you and I pay, we are going to 
pay more. Income tax is up from 612 million to 708 million. Sales tax up from 329 to 359. Tobacco tax 
from 36 to 50. Liquor from 90 to 125 million. All of the sales taxes, the income taxes, are up. Even if 
you took into account the cut in, in gasoline taxes, we are still paying higher taxes than we were 12 
months ago. Keep that in mind. 
 
And in spite of the fact that we’re all going to pay more, there are going to be program cuts. You’ll say, 
perhaps the federal government is sending us less money. Not true. Look at the budget. Last year we got 
431 million, and this year we’re going to get over 480 million from the federal government. 
 
Then what has gone wrong? Well, I’ll tell you what has gone wrong. The promises of last April are 
coming home to roost. We are getting far less money from oil. We are getting far less money from 
potash. We are indeed getting far less money from resources all round. Resources will, I venture to 
think, provide a smaller percentage of the budget than of any budget for the last several years. 



 
March 29, 1983 

 

 
401 

Well, how can this be? We are told that the oil industry is booming. We were told that a year ago it’s in 
the doldrums; oil was not being pumped. Now the oil industry is booming. We ought to be getting a lot 
more money but we’re not. Well, it is alleged, of course . . . It is alleged . . . It is alleged . . . It is alleged 
that this is because of the oil export tax. As we all know, the oil export tax would go down when the 
price went up, and that was absolutely inevitable. But what we got, what we lost on the oil export tax, 
we picked up on royalties. Or we should have, had they not slashed oil royalties in order to reward those 
people who supported them at the polls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Let’s . . . The last NDP estimate, and it may have been wrong, obviously . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — . . . was $796 million. And you corrected that, and you corrected that to $710 
million. And I hope you’re not saying that was wrong, because it’s your figure. Now you’re going to 
bring in not $710 million but $538 million. When the impact of your royalty cuts takes its full bite, we 
lose $175 million and that is why we are going to have program cuts. That is why we’re going to have 
program cuts. 
 
Let’s . . . let’s . . . let’s look at potash. There is nothing in the budget, and I don’t think I’ll find it in the 
estimates, about $50 million from the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan but if it is, it isn’t coming 
from earnings. It is coming from accumulated surplus. And there isn’t any earnings, there isn’t any 
earnings because the government opposite has decided to give large hunks of the potash industry to their 
friends in the private sector and that company, and that company is going to make a lot less money this 
year. There is no question that our market share, PCS’s market share, has dropped, and it has dropped 
because of the conscious decision of your government. And that has lost us money, very clearly. You 
can’t drop market share of several, several per cent — and in the case of offshore sales, 15 per cent or 20 
per cent — without suffering a drastic loss in earnings. We have suffered that; we are not going to get a 
dividend. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we see the pattern. More money from ordinary taxpayers. Even if the gas tax cuts are 
taken into account, ordinary citizens are being asked to pay more than they were a year ago. Let’s be 
clear on that, there’s no question about it. We are taking more from ordinary citizens. We are taking 
much less from resources. That cannot be denied. The figures speak for themselves. We are indeed now 
going to take all of the heritage money into ordinary revenue and notwithstanding the fact that we’re 
dealing with a fast depleting resource in conventional oil, we are going to spend all the money and lay 
nothing aside. 
 
We heard the stringent, not to say the strident, criticisms of members opposite saying that the money we 
set aside we shouldn’t have invested in potash. They will not have that problem. They have decided to 
set no money aside and accordingly they will have no decisions as to what to do with heritage fund 
money. They are going to remove the ceiling which says they can only take 80 per cent into revenue and 
are going to take 100 per cent into ordinary revenue. And that will mean that there will be nothing out of 
that fast depleting resource for the generation yet to come. 
 
Well those, Mr. Speaker, are some of the directions. Clearly we will want to examine  



 
March 29, 1983 
 

 
402 

with some care the proposals for programs. We look with a sense, or listen with a sense of déjà vu when 
the Minister of Finance talked about our cultural and recreational facilities grant program, which was in 
the budget of a, of a year ago, delivered by my colleague, Mr. Tchorzewski. There was a goodly number 
of other — the geological services building — that was in that budget. We are, we are now having to 
repeat that because we have had one year of inaction by members opposite, who had an opportunity to 
act during 1982 and did not on either of those. 
 
So that we are, we are rather clearly going to have to examine with some care what is in the address and 
what are in the estimates. In order that I may do that, in order that I may, therefore, put my views 
succinctly and I hope as, as helpfully to members opposite as I can, I ask, Mr. Speaker, for leave to 
adjourn the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by Mr. Taylor from Indian Head-Wolseley, by 
leave of the Legislative Assembly: 
 

That the debate on the motion ‘That this Assembly do now resolve itself into the committee of 
finance be resumed on Thursday, March 31, 1983. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Before I put the question on the motion of the Minister of Finance, I have an 
announcement for all assembled. 
 
I’m pleased to announce that coffee and dainties will be served in Room 218 immediately following the 
proceedings in the Chamber. You’re all cordially invited to attend. Room 218. It’s just to the left as you 
exit down the hall. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 8:08 p.m. 
 


	EVENING SESSION

