






















































Hansard: April 11, 1983


743 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 11, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Estimates 
 
The Clerk: — Mr. Sutor, from the standing committee on estimates, presents the second report of the 
said committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee considered and adopted the following resolutions respecting interim supply. 
 
1. Resolved, that a sum not exceeding $237,060 be granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 
months ending March 31, 1984. 

 
2. Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
sums, expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, ’84, the sum of 
$237,060 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 

 
3. Resolved, that this committee recommends that upon concurrence in the committee’s report 
the sums as reported and approved shall be included in the appropriation bill for consideration by 
the Legislative Assembly. 

 
Mr. Sutor: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the hon. member from Saltcoats: 
 

That the second report of the standing committee on estimates be now concurred in. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Community Switchboard 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. Over the weekend it 
came to light that a group known as community Switchboard, in Regina, had had their funding cut. I 
wonder if the minister would confirm or deny this report for the Assembly and for the people of the 
province — whether or not in fact funding to this group in Regina has been eliminated? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, funding to this particular group, as a whole, has been done away 
with. But some of the services, particularly the switchboard service, which is a service to the deaf people 
of this province, has been continued. And in Regina that will be taken up by mobile crisis centre, and in 
Saskatoon, crisis intervention and SHIP (Saskatchewan Hearing Impaired Program) will share the  



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
744 

delivery of that service to the deaf people. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the minister. As the minister will know, about 12 
people were involved in Community Switchboard, I believe six permanent and six part time. Can you 
tell me how much the budget of mobile crisis has been increased — that community group — to allow 
for the hiring of that kind of staff to take place of the cancellation of a program which last year, by your 
own numbers that you sent to me, got $110,000 to provide a telewriter line for the Regina deaf 
community? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have the specific figures with me today and I’ll have to take 
notice of the question for the member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the Minister of Social Services. And 
my question is: what is it that is being carried on by the other agencies that you referred to? Is that just 
the service for the deaf, or is it all of the services which Community Switchboard provided? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The Community Switchboard basically offered a service of information referral 
and the switchboard. The switchboard is going to be picked up by the agencies that I said to the previous 
question. Those agencies also have information and referral services, and when we did the overall 
review of the NGO (non-governmental organizations) sector, the whole question of duplication was a 
priority to be answered, and we felt that given the restraint, the period that we’re in, that this was one 
way of maintaining a very vital, essential, direct service, without watering down that aspect of it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is the minister suggesting that the referral service is going to be carried on by the 
other agencies, or are you admitting that that service will simply not be available to the people who use 
the private social service agencies? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what the member from Regina Centre means 
when he says the whole issue of referral of service. Many of our community agencies do referral. 
There’s many numbers out there to telephone, and I’m the first to admit that often there are so many that 
it becomes confusing to the user. But, nevertheless, the question has to be answered: what is uppermost 
in maintaining a service in a period of restraint? And we have elected to go the matter of the 
switchboard, the service for the deaf. It’s a direct service and it is an essential service; there is no other 
service. And I might add, to date that service is only available for Regina and Saskatoon and not for any 
of our citizens who are deaf and living in rural areas or other centres of this province. 
 
To come back to the issue of the referral, we have a provincial inquiry centre. Many of the referrals that 
come in, the questions for information, often do with government programs. There is also a human 
service directory that is there for the public to utilize. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Are you suggesting that the Provincial Inquiry Centre 
will have information about private social agencies to the same extent as Community Switchboard did? 
Are you suggesting that that is what my constituents are supposed to do: to call the Provincial Inquiry 
Centre when they want information on private social agencies? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — No, Mr. Speaker, I did not suggest that that is all they would do. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
745 

What I said is there is a network already in place. Many people that phone community agencies often 
phone on government programs. We have a provincial inquiry centre for that. Certainly they will be 
phoning for other community agencies, but there’s also a telephone book with many of them listed. The 
sexual assault lines are publicized very widely. The issue of transition houses are often publicized. And 
if it’s a crisis situation that you’re in, the telephone number for Regina is right there — mobile crisis 
intervention. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe the minister is so isolated from her 
clientele that she believes that between the Provincial Inquiry Centre and the Regina telephone book that 
my constituents are going to make do. The problem, Madam Minister, is that many of these people have 
a problem, they know there’s someone to help, and they just don’t know who to go to or where to ask. I 
am asking you: who do my constituents call who have a problem but they don’t know who to go to? 
Who do they call? They used to call the Community Switchboard. What’s the number now that they 
call? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps at this point in time if the member 
thinks I am isolated that they call him, their MLA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Saskatchewan Association of Non-Governmental Social Service Agencies 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Social Services. In a previous answer, 
she mentioned that she had done a study and review of the non-governmental organizations and had 
come up with a list or some rearrangement of governmental groups in making these decisions, and if so, 
which groups were involved, and if it was a study, whether or not a copy of that can be made available 
to the people of the province who ultimately paid for it? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that we ever said we conducted a study on the NGO 
sector. I did say that we had reviewed and studied. To study is quite different than to commission a 
study to be done. We reviewed it over the past year, and I think I’ve stated many times in this House 
before that it wasn’t an easy task. Nobody ever admitted that it was going to be, but it had to be done, 
given the period of time that we are in, and that is one of restraint and slow recovery, and it is going to 
be slow. It’s not going to be fast. Realistically, we have stood up and we said, ‘We admit this; we know 
this, so how are we going to deal best in order to maintain a safety net out there for the people that need 
it most? How are we going to deliver a system so that it is a direct delivery system as opposed to 
perhaps the advocacy and the co-ordinating of administration network?’ We elected to go the direct 
service. 
 
Now, in the review, we came up with direct essential service, and that was not done in isolation of the 
NGO sector. And when I say the NGO sector, I do not mean just SANGSSA (Saskatchewan Association 
of Non-Governmental Social Service Agencies), and if the member would like to come to my office, 
we’ll sit down and we’ll go over my calendar for the past year: the number of people, community 
agencies, community boards, town councils, United Way people form the volunteer sector, at the grass 
roots community, who have had a great difficult time in trying to set some priorities for themselves, too. 
Their problems that they are facing are no different than what my  



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
746 

department has had to face this year, and we have sat down, and we have talked about that together, and 
we have agreed it is essential that the direct essential safety net of services be there for the people. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the minister. Of course the groups are having a 
great deal of difficulty making a go of it because you won’t give them any money. Your problem is that 
you can’t get money out of finance minister . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. The member rose to his feet and asked for a supplementary, and he is 
making a statement. I would ask the member to come directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a follow-up question. In light of the fact that the minister failed 
totally to answer the previous question asked, what I was asking is who you consulted in this decision to 
cut a great number of community groups. You have said that you met with and spoke to a good number 
of people. What I want is a list of the groups who you consulted on these cut-backs and what their 
opinions were. You’re making it sound like they agreed with it, and if that’s true I would like a list of 
those groups you consulted and spoke to who helped you make this decision. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I’m not sure what the question was. I prefer them more direct. You’re quite 
welcome to my calendar over the past year as to the number of groups that I have met with. The issues 
were discussed, and if at any time you’re wondering, did I say to them (and let’s use the fair deal tax 
service as an example) . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s correct, they haven’t. But in my previous 
meetings with that particular group where they were involved, I had indicated to them at that time that 
there was going to be some very difficult, painful, hard decisions that were going to have to be made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the chatter form the opposition reminds me of my days when I was in the child-rearing 
occupation, and we had a child that would continually talk, interrupt, for whatever reason, and we . . . 
What do you think we called him? ‘Motor mouth,’ until he grew out of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. I don’t think those comments referred anything to the question. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. You’re right; they didn’t. The consultation and talking 
with people did take place. I will give you a copy of my calendar and you can look at the groups that I 
have met with. I think it comes out to about 59 since probably the first of June, and if you want to zero 
in on the NGOs out of those, that’s fine also. 
 

Funding Cuts to By Ourselves 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Health. Over the weekend we 
learned that a group known as By Ourselves, a group of people who have mental problems, have gotten 
together to serve the community needs of a group of people, a large number of people in the city of 
Regina and elsewhere in the province. It has come to light that that group has had their funding cut 
totally by the Department of Health, and I wonder if the minister will confirm or deny that this group, 
who maybe aren’t that popular as a group in Saskatchewan, and defenceless, whether or not their 
funding has been totally cut by his department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I take exception to the words of the  



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
747 

member opposite indicating that there’s certain people out there in Saskatchewan that aren’t that 
popular. That may be your interpretation, sir, but it certainly isn’t the interpretation of this government. 
 
Now let me explain to you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you would be quiet for a moment I might 
just tell you the answer. If you’re willing to listen, you’ll get the answer. If you want to chatter just keep 
chattering; the choice is yours. 
 
I want to tell you that there are decisions that have to be made, as my colleague, the Minister of Social 
Services, said. It is true that By Ourselves this year will not be funded. 
 
But I want to say at the same time, and I want to say at the same time, and I’ll say it twice so that you 
understand and don’t get it wrong, that I am going to visit some areas in North America within the very 
near future, Mr. Speaker, to see how the delivery to people in this category is performed, is probably one 
of the best areas in this continent. That’s where I’m going to see how we can better deliver services to 
these people, and I can assure you that this government on this side of the House will come back and 
institute a program far in excess of anything you ever did in the last 10 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A new question, Mr. Speaker. Let me remind you, Mr. Minister, that you found 
money to give the doctors a 6 per cent increase, and you have cut the services available to the mentally 
ill. I ask you what kind of priorities you have to cut the services available to mentally ill and give the 
doctors an increase in salary? How do you justify leaving these people without any services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, the opposition is wrong in their facts. It wasn’t 6 per 
cent; it was 5.75 per cent to the medical profession. I think that is a very reasonable . . . And I 
congratulate the doctors of this province for accepting that type of a settlement in this year of restraint. 
 
The member opposite tries again to mislead this House, to mislead the people of Saskatchewan, by 
saying ‘vast numbers of people.’ By Ourselves, was one group of people in Regina, Mr. Speaker. I think 
they were funded to $5,000. I said previously to the other member and I say it again: that I am going to 
investigate some of the most up-to-date delivery services, health services to people with psychiatric 
provinces in this continent. And we will come back from that and we will bring in programs that are an 
added benefit to these people. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. Is the minister telling us that you believed the services of By 
Ourselves to be superfluous to the mentally ill? Is that what you’re telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t know, again, how you interpret. I did not say that at all. I said it was one 
aspect of the delivery on a much broader scale. I am going to look at that total delivery of services by 
this government and this health department to the people with mental problems. And I can assure you 
again, and I’ll say it for the third time within three minutes, that that will result in an improved program. 
Bear with me, my friend. Listen, watch and learn something. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Question to the Minister of Health. Is he attempting to tell the people of the 
province that the way he is going to improve the care for mental patients 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
748 

and people who have mental problems is by cutting programs? Is this the new, improved, number one 
system that he talked about so much prior to the election? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, again I will indicate to the member opposite that I think the new, 
improved system is $70 million more in this budget than last budget. I think the new improved system 
again is $17 million to cancer services that were neglected by their government over the last ten years. 
Those are two evidences of improved service and when we assess and come down with the new program 
for the mentally ill it will be of the same magnitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Nursing Home Beds in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the Minister of Health. I have here a news report 
which is headed, ‘Nursing Home Bed Numbers Frozen in the City,’ referring to Saskatoon. When the 
minister took over the Department of Health, and he will be aware that there was a proposal to build 144 
beds in Saskatoon, nursing home beds. I wonder if he could inform us whether or not this plan to build 
that facility is now been scrapped by this government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, there is no intention to scrap that plan. I want to inform the ministers 
again, as a government that listens to the people, tonight at 5 o’clock I am leaving for the Saskatchewan 
association of special home care’s convention. I just inherited this part of health delivery service, as you 
know, the first of this month. I am going to visit with them over the next few days and, in consultation 
with those people, who are the boards who are delivering the service, I can assure you, once again, that 
we will come up with plans and delivery models — just watch the paper and listen to the radio, boys — 
that will be more acceptable to the people of Saskatchewan, and furthermore satisfy the vast need that 
you left this province in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary to the minister. As he will know, the waiting list in 
nursing homes in Saskatoon has increased since you became Minister of Health and since your 
government took over. The average waiting list for level 4 beds is now about two and one-half years in 
the city of Saskatoon. And what I would like to know is when you will be meeting your commitment 
that you made to the people of the province before April 26th, ’82, that you would take care of the 
nursing home problem, when by every indication the problem has gotten much worse. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, I think for anyone to ascertain and find out what 
should be done, you go and talk to the actors and the people in the scene, and that’s what I’m doing 
tonight. I want to assure the people of Saskatchewan and the members opposite, though, that the plan 
that we will come up with will be a sincere plan that we can develop, and not as you did in last April, go 
around and promise them all across the province of Saskatchewan, playing on the people who need 
nursing home accommodation. And you were the minister at the time, and that’s exactly what you did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
749 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the minister. As proof of his goodwill to the 
people of Saskatchewan, I would like to inform them that last year this government promised six . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. This is not a time for giving of information, but rather a time for asking 
questions. If the member has a question, get directly to it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Health is whether or not he will agree 
that in this year’s budget, nursing home construction, there has been a decrease of 30 per cent in the 
budget of nursing home construction from this time in this year, as to what you had in last year’s budget 
— a cut from $4 million, or to $4 million from $6 million in nursing home construction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Would you clarify this? Is this our budget this time, and our last budget, or your 
fudged budget that you had in April? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, this will be the Conservatives’ fudged budget, where last year you 
promised 6.4 million in Social Services for nursing home construction. And this year (in case you 
haven’t read your own budget), it’s $4 million, a decrease of 2.4 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — As you realize, I’ve just taken over this portfolio, but my colleague and good 
friend who was the minister in charge of this before, tells me there is 2 million in that budget for 
enriched staffing, and I think that is a service to the people in those homes. And if there’s that need for 
new staffing, again, one goes back and says, ‘I wonder’ what the situation was like there three years ago, 
four years ago, as late as 10 years ago?’ 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, that’s fine about the staffing. But the question was on the funding of 
nursing home construction, to get back to the question. Is it true that there is a cut from 6.4 million in 
last year’s budget — your budget — to 4 million this year in your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I would just have to take . . . I don’t have the figure right in my mind. I will check, 
and I will report back to you. But I want to say once again that we will, and we are committed to 
delivering what we say we will. And that’s the difference. We will build the nursing homes that we can. 
But I think that’s a commitment that the people of Saskatchewan want and respect. And that’s a 
commitment I make today. 
 

Grant Cuts for Credit Unions 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister mentioned the responsible promises; I may say the government 
opposite wrote the book on these things. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I have cautioned the member twice today. I would ask you now to get up and deal with 
questions as questions are supposed to be dealt with. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — My question is to the Minister of Co-operatives. And I’m referring the minister to 
the grants for credit unions for assistance for low-income borrowers which was reduced entirely, once 
again an effort to make the poor pay for your irresponsibility. 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
750 

I ask you how you justify deleting that program entirely. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, St. Mary’s Credit Union in Saskatoon, as well as the Prince 
Albert Credit Union, indicated that no one was taking up the services offered in this program devised by 
the former administration, so it was by their own initiative that they discontinued the program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the minister have that in writing? . . . 
(inaudible) . . . That may have something to do with the noise surrounding you. My question to the 
minister was a supplementary. Do you have that in writing from those credit unions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I’ll take notice of that question. I’ll have to ask the department people, Mr. 
Speaker, if they have it in writing. 
 

Administration of Rent Control Problems 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I may say, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, a new question again having to do with 
services provided for those on the lower echelon of economic scale. It has to do with rent controls. 
 
I would remind the minister that when your officials were before the public accounts committee, they 
indicated they were having difficulty keeping up with the workload. How do you justify cutting staff in 
that area when they’re having difficulty keeping up with the workload? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, as a new government, we believe in productivity, something that 
that former administration didn’t believe in. We say that we can do the same amount of work with the 
same number of people . . . I mean more work with the same number of people than they were able to 
do, and administration of rent control problems are carrying on. We’re picking up the backlog quite 
nicely, and hope to have it in good order . . . in good hands in short order. 
 

Greenbush Challenge Camp 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the Premier, the Deputy Premier and the Minister of 
Justice, may I direct a question to the Minister of Environment? Mr. Minister, you may be aware that a 
program, which is close or within your constituency, and innovative criminal justice program, 
well-established program, the Greenbush Challenge Camp for young offender, near Hudson Bay, was 
discontinued by the Minister of Justice, the Attorney General. I would like to ask you whether you are in 
agreement with the discontinuation of that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been well aware of the discontinuation of the program. And 
when I looked into some of the facts and found out some of the true facts about the whole program, it 
has a lot of value. It did assist young offenders. But one of the things, the cost-wise of it, was that it cost 
$188,000 more to keep the same number of offender in that camp as it would to keep them in a 
correction institute. In other words, the number of employees per inmates was: for every two inmates 
there was one employee. In correction camps, or correction institutes, I understand it’s 15 to 1, which  



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
751 

was a very major concern. In times of restraint that was taken into consideration. And I fully realize that. 
 
There’s other things that can be done with that camp, and we’d have no doubts about it. So, although 
we’d be sad to see it go, at the same time we realize that the economic restraints may prevail. I’ve talked 
to the Attorney General and he’s just taken another look at it, a serious look at it. I don’t know what the 
end result will be. But until that time I’m not . . . (inaudible) . . . comment. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Passing of Jeff Bugera 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, it is with deep sadness today that I report to the House that Mr. 
Jeff Bugera, deputy minister of Consumer and Commercial Affairs, died early this morning in hospital. 
 
We express regret at the passing of this fine young man. The sympathies of this entire Assembly are 
extended to his wife and family. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to say on behalf of the opposition that 
we join you with heartfelt sorrow. I had, and many members of this opposition had, known Mr. Bugera 
when he was deputy attorney general, I think, for some years. He did an outstanding job in the 
department and was missed when he was gone. He went to your department, and I think acquitted 
himself very well there. His family and friends are no doubt going to miss him. I say as well, Mr. 
Minister, the public of Saskatchewan are going to miss him as well. 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Preamble to Bill No. 6 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’d like to give a statement today concerning bill No. 6. On Thursday, March the 17th, 
1983, first reading was given to Bill No. 6. An Act to amend The Public Utilities Review Commission 
Act, standing in the name of the member for Regina Centre. This bill contains a lengthy preamble 
which, in itself, is a permissible though little-used form for public bills in this House. However, the 
contents of this particular preamble have caused me serious concern. 
 
I refer all members to Beauchesne’s Parliamentary Rules and Form, fifth Edition, paragraph 705 on 
page 218: 
 

The purpose of a preamble is to state the reasons and intended effects of the proposed legislation. 
Though a preamble is not necessary in a public bill, it is sometimes inserted in bills of great 
importance in order to place on record the intentions of the framers of the bill. 
 

Further, I would like to cite Erskine May’s Parliamentary Practice, 19th Edition, page 465: 
 

Though a preamble is not often incorporated now in a public bill, it is still employed in bills of 
great constitution importance or bills to give effect to international conventions in order to place 
on record the intentions of the 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
752 

framers of the bill. 
 

I find that the preamble to Bill 6 is not restricted to the purposes or usage’s outlined above. A technical 
problem arises in the first clause of the preamble which states that: 
 

Whereas the Government of Saskatchewan enacted The Public Utilities Review Commission Act 
. . . 
 

Strictly speaking, the Government of Saskatchewan cannot enact any statute. Only the legislature has 
that power. 
 
Also, the fourth clause of the preamble states that: 
 

Whereas the public utilities review commission has indicated that it may proceed to court to 
clarify the application of the act to such a case; 
 

And this clause is hypothetical and speculates on the actions of the public utilities review commission, 
and is therefore inappropriate as part of a preamble for a bill. 
 
Also, the fifth clause of the preamble states that: 
 

Whereas although the original act contemplated that the term ‘rate’ would apply in such a case 
but the government or certain of Her Majesty’s ministers have failed to understand or recognize 
this fact, and it is therefore necessary to clarify the legislation. 
 

This is going far beyond the normal bounds of a preamble in that it is introducing debatable material and 
opinions that would be more appropriately placed before the Assembly during debate on second reading. 
It fits neither the practices of this House nor the guidelines for preambles as set out in parliamentary 
authorities. Therefore, I rule that Bill No. 6 is out of order. However, this ruling does not prevent the 
member for Regina Centre from resubmitting his bill in a proper form. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Resolutions 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, I have four motions to move with regard to interim supply. First 
motion: committee of finance Consolidated Fund. 
 

Resolved, that a sum not exceeding $243,885,210 be granted to Her Majesty on account for the 
12 month period ending March 31st, 1984. 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I just want to clarify, Mr. Chairman, we have . . . This is the usual procedure 
whereby we have an opportunity to question the ministers on the motion. Am I right in that? I guess I 
am. I ask you, Mr. Minister, I understand there are some unpaid bills in the Department of Finance, bills 
for goods and services delivered, supplied prior to March 31st, 1982, but which cannot be paid out of the 
‘82-83  



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
753 

appropriations because the funds had run out, and you now propose to pay them out of the ‘83-84 
appropriations. Is that understanding accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Okay, in response to that, we are still paying some bills out of the ‘82-83, but 
that we are looking very closely at that to ensure that they are in fact appropriated and not simply a 
mechanism by which people are trying to get around the appropriation concept. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I want to be sure that the minister of I understand each other. We both know 
that normally the books in the fiscal year are kept open for 20 to 30 days after the end of the year, and 
services which might have been rendered in March might still be billed in early April and, in fact, might 
be paid in early April, but out of the previous year’s appropriation. 
 
What I understand is that this year, because funds have run out, they are . . . For services that were 
supplied in March, you are billing in April, but paying out of the ‘83-84 appropriations, and that’s a 
marked departure from what has been done in the past. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I suggest that it’s not a marked departure and if you had listened to my answer, I 
indicated that we are still paying accounts out of 1982-83 fiscal year, still today, on that transition 
period. Okay, we’re still paying that but you have to ensure that they are, in fact, appropriated in that 
particular year. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, is the minister telling me that my understanding is wrong, that that is not in 
fact going to occur, that you are not going to be paid out of the ‘83-84 appropriation? Are you telling me 
that my understanding is wrong and that will not in fact occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that it’s not different from before, that we review each one of them 
and have to be satisfied that they are legitimate expenditures from the appropriate period last year, and if 
they are, then we would pay them under that ‘82-83 year and have the books open for that period of 
20-25 days. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay, just then so that we are clear, the minister then is stating that it is not the case 
that goods and services supplied prior to March 31, ’82 are being paid out of the ‘83-84 appropriation — 
that you’re not doing that. Is that what I understand you to say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — what I’m saying is that we are doing it the same way as it was done before. 
Obviously, some will be and some won’t be. You try to do it the best you can to catch them and pay 
them at the appropriate time. We’re not doing it any way different than it was done before at that same 
period of time. 
 
Resolution agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I move: 
 

Resolved, that towards making money, the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1984, the sum of 
$243,885,210 be granted out of the Consolidated Fund. 
 

Resolution agreed to. 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
754 

Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I move: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $59,509,250 be granted to Her Majesty on account of 12 
months ending March 31, 1984. 
 

This relates to the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 
 
Resolution agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I move. 
 

Resolved, that towards making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1984, the sum of $59,509,250 
be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund. 
 

Resolution agreed to. 
 
The said resolutions were reported, and by leave of the Assembly read twice and agreed to. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I move that Bill No. 7: 
 

That the bill, An Act for the Granting to Her Majesty Certain Sums of Money for the Public 
Service for the Fiscal Year Ending March 31, 1984, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move that the bill be now read a 
second and third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a second and third time. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I would like to inform the Assembly that the Chief Justice is here at this time for 
Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 
 
At 2:49 p.m. His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne and gave 
Royal Assent to the following bill: 
 
Bill No. 7 — An Act for the Granting to Her Majesty Certain Sums of Money for the Public Service for 
the Fiscal Year Ending March 31, 1984. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 2:50 p.m. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill 
No. 1 — An Act to amend The Education Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. When this bill came forward a few days ago, I  



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
755 

 
indicated that I wanted to make a few more comments in respect to it. I want to say first of all that the 
Minister of Finance introduced them in a rather cavalier manner, indicating that these bills were only of 
a housekeeping nature, and I want to say that there is a fair amount of significance in the particular bills 
that are being introduced, and in particular to the amendment to The Education Act. 
 
I want to point out a few of the significant features that are in fact established by the introduction of this 
bill. I want to say that it would appear that the full disclosure, financial disclosure, by the government is 
somewhat reduced by the proposals that are being introduced. It now appears that these new revolving 
funds will be entirely separate and apart from the Consolidated Fund. It also appears that, if at the end of 
the year there is a surplus or a deficit in a particular revolving fund, the government may be able to 
simply carry this forward from year to year. That is a departure from the previous arrangement. 
 
Also, no longer will any of these accounts, these revolving funds, have any maximum limit set by 
statutes. Previously in respect to advance accounts, limits were set by legislation. Now all such limits are 
set merely by order in council. I think that’s a departure, and I think it hands over to the executive 
branch more control over the financial affairs, less control for the public. Also, no longer will there be 
any statutory requirement that details that the financial transactions should in fact be published. Thus the 
Assembly and the public will probably no longer be protected by the requirement that these transactions, 
these expenditures and revenues, be published for scrutiny. 
 
Similarly, there appears to be no longer any clear requirement that these funds and their transactions be 
audited by the Provincial Auditor. Not only have they cut the staff of the auditor in this budget, they 
now seem to want to reduce his scope still further. 
 
Another point that I raise of considerable concern, it is especially interesting to note that each of these 
bills is to come into force on April the 1st, 1982, that is, at the beginning of the last fiscal year, 
retroactive. And it seems to me that for the government to impose this retroactive feature is indicating 
that the government has been acting all along as if these bills were in fact to force, and acting as though 
they had the jurisdiction, even though it was not in place, and as a consequence of the retroactivity: one, 
is that they have been doing it all along and need it now to give it legislative authority; or secondly, what 
they want to do is to mask that which they were doing during the past year. In other words, it seems to 
me it’s basically not putting forward the same information that they would have under the previous 
advance accounts during the past year. 
 
So obviously their retroactivity is of considerable concern. And the Minister of Finance, in his 
comments, did not touch upon the reason why he is going back to April the 1st, 1982. And in my mind, 
as I said, Mr. Speaker, there can only be two reasons: one is that they have been already acting as though 
the legislation had been passed; or secondly, they are afraid to disclose in the previous method that the 
transactions of the government as occasioned with the use of the advance accounts, and as a 
consequence want to go back with retroactivity. 
 
Certainly it would be useful to us if the Minister of Finance would, in fact, address those basic concerns 
that we have with the act. As I say, under the advance account system  



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
756 

any surplus was transferred to the Consolidated Fund. Under the proposed legislation, the revolving fund 
concept appears to have changed so that the funds are entirely separate and apart from the Consolidated 
Fund. Unlike the existing legislation, with the exception of The Department of Continuing Education 
Act, there is no statutory limit on the total amount of the advances which may be made to any individual 
fund. In each case, this limit is to be set by order in council, as I indicated. 
 
And thirdly, under the existing legislation the Minister of finance is directed to publish, with the Public 
Accounts, statements detailing the status and operation of the account previously. We feel that that is 
now being bypassed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I think that if some of these concerns . . . As 
the minister says, ‘It’s not,’ then certainly we welcome his comments in respect to that. And again I 
repeat is that most legislation dealing with advance accounts specifically directed that the Provincial 
Auditor be given access to information which would allow the Minister of Finance to complete the 
statement to be published in the Public Accounts. And it’s our feeling that this section has been 
eliminated. 
 
So I want to say then, that those are basically our concerns, Mr. Minister of Finance and certainly in 
your summary we would also like your comments in respect to the retroactivity provision. I might just 
point out that when we come to the committee of the whole, in respect to The Education Act 
amendment, there again I’ll give you notice now that it would appear that the powers of the minister to 
use the revolving fund would appear to be expanded under section 11(3)(b) of the proposed amendment. 
And we will be raising that with you in the clause by clause discussion of the bill. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. I will not be very long, Mr. Speaker. We passed these issues through in 
the fall and I don’t think these bills changed what we had in the fall. Suffice it to say that the opposition 
is just as unhappy with these in March as we were in November. 
 
For a party that campaigned on the basis of responsible government and open government, you lost your 
virtue in a great hurry. They were introduced some time ago as housekeeping legislation. They are in 
fact anything but housekeeping. They make it more difficult for this opposition to do its job. They make 
it more difficult for the legislature to control the activities of this government. And given the speed with 
which this government is losing control and with which they are losing their ability to manage public 
affairs, that is no insignificant item. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I could well appreciate that the 
member from Weyburn might not understand what’s going on and I forgive him. It’s less easy to forgive 
him for the noise that’s coming from this corner. 
 
There are a number of issues, Mr. Minister, which we’d ask you to direct yourself to. Some of them 
were mentioned by my colleague from Quill Lakes. You apparently are able to carry deficits or 
surpluses forward into a subsequent year. I think you’re going to find it’s more . . . 
 
And I would be interested in knowing how the Department of Finance intends to control these funds. 
There has always been a problem, Mr. Minister, with these funds. They have been, I think under various 
administrations, a subject of abuse by departments who have sometimes funded activities out of the 
advance account which might not have been permitted in the regular funding. That isn’t a problem that 
arose under the former administration, nor certainly did it arise under yours. My experience goes back to 
the administration of Ross Thatcher, and it was a problem then. I’d be interested in knowing, Mr. 
Minister, how you intend to strengthen the control of the Department of  



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
757 

Finance over these advance accounts, so that they are not the subject of abuse. I say if you’re allowing 
them to carry deficits or surpluses forward, your problems are going to be exacerbated. 
 
There’s no longer any maximum limit set by statute, as was mentioned by my learned friend, and that is 
a departure. It is not one which we welcome. It is difficult enough for this legislature to exercise control 
over the spending of government in this day and age, difficult enough with any opposition, more 
difficult when one is working with eight members, however able and qualified they are, and certainly in 
this case that’s certainly the case. It simply weakens the control of the legislature when you no longer 
have the maximum set by statute. Instead of answering to the legislature when you increase the 
maximum amount, you will now answer, if at all, to the regulations committee, and perhaps not to the 
regulations committee, as I think about it, because that deals with the propriety of the regulations and 
not really their substance. So it will be, I think, much more difficult for this legislature to exercise 
control over the maximum expenditures. True, we can always raise the amount in estimates. Given the 
behaviour of this government to date undoubtedly the ministers will come utterly uninformed as to what 
the amount of the advance accounts are and, thus, we won’t be able to question you on it, simply be able 
to get information. 
 
There should be some kind of requirement, Mr. Minister, that this information be available in a timely 
fashion well in advance of the estimates. And I don’t know what the system is. It is pointless for us to 
put questions on the blues, since not one of them seem to be answered in any kind of time. It also 
appears that there’s no statutory requirement that the details of the financial transactions be published. 
It’s probable that that would appear in the Public Accounts at some point in time — I’m not sure about 
that — but that comes, as you know, somewhat late. And again, Mr. Minister, it weakens the control of 
this Assembly over the expenditures of the government. I point out to the minister — and it’s part of an 
ongoing argument which we’re having about the Provincial Auditor — I point out there is no 
requirement that there be audited by the Provincial Auditor. It appears to be an intentional thrust of this 
government to weaken the Office of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
You have not done so, certainly, by legislation, but you have been critical of him personally and you . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I wouldn’t describe the comments ‘chintzy’ and ‘unprofessional’ as 
very complimentary. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m sorry; I guess it was not. It was about the 
Ombudsman. I’m sorry; the minister is right. It was the Provincial Auditor’s staff whom you cut by five. 
And I take that, together with the lack of any requirement that these be audited, to suggest that perhaps 
the Provincial Auditor isn’t going to be auditing these. And that, I think, Mr. Minister, is a new 
principle. I think it has been true that the Provincial Auditor has not audited all of the crown 
corporations, but theretofore the Provincial Auditor has audited all of the transactions with respect to the 
line departments. 
 
And if someone else is now going to be auditing these funds (as I guess they’re going to be called) then 
that is a sharp departure and it is, I would suggest as well to the minister, a sharp loss of control. The 
Provincial Auditor’s independence is guaranteed, and it is for that reason that he audits the line 
departments and not a firm of chartered accountants. I may be wrong and there may be in this 
legislation, or some other legislation, some requirement that the Provincial Auditor audit the funds. But I 
don’t see it and I’d be very interested in hearing the minister. 
 
I just want to . . . 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
758 

An Hon. Member: — Don’t ask Paul for help. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, certainly, Mr. Speaker, it’s a case of the blind leading the blind if the minister 
of industry and commerce is rendering advice on fiscal affairs. 
 
The last thing I want to comment on, Mr. Minister, is the retroactivity of these . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, if you want me to go on at length, I can certainly do that. Given the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Do I hear a popular demand that I carry on? I you people are enjoying this, far be it 
from me to rob you of what few pleasures you have in government. I will go on as long as you people 
cheer me on in the fashion that you are. 
 
To get back to the point, Mr. Speaker. I want to mention the retroactivity, Mr. Minister. I think it is 
inappropriate, with a bill of this sort, which is a new concept, and changing the fashion in which the 
legislature exercises control over the spending of the executive arm. This is not a tax bill. It is one thing 
to have a tax bill retroactive, and to have that come into force on the day on which it is announced. But 
this, which relates as it does Mr. Minister . . . You can shake your head until it drops off, Mr. Minister, 
But this bill goes directly to the heart of the ability of this Assembly to control and exercise control over 
the executive arm of government. And I think it is most inappropriate to make that retroactive. 
 
Surely, Mr. Minister, we ought to have had the opportunity of talking you and the other members of the 
treasury bench out of this. Given the fact that it’s now retroactive, that’s virtually impossible to do, 
because in fact it’s already been implemented. And what the minister is presenting us with is a fait 
accompli. What you have done is to take away, to whittle down a significant power of this Assembly. 
And you have done it without giving us any real opportunity to debate it. 
 
So I say, Mr. Minister, we will be voting against this, notwithstanding the supplications of the member 
from Weyburn. I’m not going to carry on any longer. I would appreciate it if you would address yourself 
to these problems, Mr. Minister, when you’re closing debate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. speaker, we will get into, I’m sure, the details of this, when we get into the 
committee of the whole and we can go through the particular concerns raised by the members opposite. 
And it is a fairly technical bill. I can simply try to reiterate the fact that this particular bill is to try to 
correct the advance accounts. And I believe the member opposite referred to the fact that there is 
problems with the advance accounts, or problems with the advance accounts as we found them. 
 
Many recommendations by the Provincial Auditor . . . In fact this bill is a result of a recommendation by 
the Provincial Auditor that advance accounts were no the way to go. And in fact one of the main reasons 
for that, Mr. Speaker, was that there was literally no control with the advance accounts. As the member 
opposite, I’m sure, is . . . (inaudible) . . . to admit. Under the advance account system that was in place 
there was literally no control, not only by the legislature, but there was literally no control by the 
government, as well, as to how those in fact were controlled. This would become a budgetary 
expenditure, and in that sense we’ll have more control with it with regards to the legislature and 
particularly by the treasury board, able to control the inflow and the outflow of information from this. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
759 

To suggest that it’s not going to be somehow any information passed on, clearly this is a function, and 
the member from Regina Centre, as chairman of the public accounts committee . . . Clearly in the public 
accounts committee we’ll be dealing exactly with this type of thing, as we of course have in the past. I 
think if you want to bring that when we move this bill into the committee stage, we can go into the 
details and specific questions of that, but certainly any question certainly with regard to the auditor, as to 
whether or not we are somehow taking away the power of the auditor with regard to this, I think perhaps 
more appropriately can be placed at any time, as you know, to the auditor in public accounts. It doesn’t 
have to necessarily refer to the particular act or the particular report of the auditor. If you have that 
concern I think it would be very easy for you in the next public accounts meeting to raise that concern 
with the auditor, and ask him directly: is this in fact taking away the power of the Provincial Auditor? I 
would be very surprised, I would be very surprised if he was to respond that way. 
 
With regard to the other reference with regard to cutting the staff of the Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker, 
I think that we can go through that question. We dealt with it. Many of the problems associated with the 
auditor’s office in the past (and this is perhaps not the proper form to get into that), but many of the 
problems associated with the auditor in the past was the problem of being able to recruit people, and 
additional dollars would have to be put in, significant dollars, into recruiting people, Mr. Speaker, and 
now the problem is not quite the same, given the particular nature of the economy. But I think that’s not 
an appropriate place with these advance accounts to talk with regards to that. We can go into that in 
detail when the estimates come up for the Provincial Auditor, or I’m sure you can raise that point again 
in the public accounts committee at any time. 
 
But with that explanation, Mr. Speaker, this is a technical bill with regard to the accounting through the 
advance accounts. I would say that those details will be taken up and handed out, Mr. Speaker, when the 
matter is dealt with in committee of the whole. With regard to that, Mr. Speaker, I would . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Will the minister permit a question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to get into the give and take in answers with regards 
to this particular bill. . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . Sure, if you want to ask me about unemployment, 
go ahead. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, it has to do with public accounts committee. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and I hope I’ll be given just some liberty to give you the background of the question. It struck 
me as I was listening to you, let us assume that you may be right, it struck me entirely appropriate that 
these bills should be referred to the public accounts committee for consideration before they’re studied 
here in committee of the whole. And I remind the minister . . . I shouldn’t say remind the minister, I 
should inform the minister that we’re had a ruling from our Assistant Clerk, Ms. Ronyk, that we cannot 
review bills unless they are referred to the committee. We cannot simply go off on a new field of inquiry 
and ask the Provincial Auditor about the bills. So I ask the minister, before you take your chair: will you 
refer these bills to the public accounts committee? I think they touch directly on the work of the public 
accounts committee. And if you will, then frankly I will save all of my concerns on the subsequent bills, 
because I do admit there’s a further field of inquiry that should be pursued and I think the public 
accounts committee is the place to do it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in response to the question, the process will 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
760 

go to the committee of the whole. At that point in time, I can make available the officials; I can make, if 
you like, available . . . You, at any point in time, of course, being that the Provincial Auditor is an 
employee of the legislature, you, at any time, have a right, as a member, as does anyone else, to go and 
pursue any questions with regard the Provincial Auditor, his concerns with regard to this particular 
legislation. So, with regard to referring it to the public accounts committee, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same 
people. If you want to ask a question with regard to it — or your colleague that’s on the public accounts 
committee — you will have as much forum, you can ask all the questions you like in the committee of 
the whole. If you want the advice of the Provincial Auditor, go ask the Provincial Auditor for his advice. 
 
If you want to put it to the public accounts committee to simply delay and stall the bill, then I would see 
no use to it. I would rather, Mr. Speaker, that we take this up with regard to . . . in the committee of the 
whole, and I’m sure that we will able to provide all the information to the hon. member with regard to 
his questions. We could come down to a point where he will not agree with what we are in fact doing, 
but I think we will certainly provide all the information to him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With response to the question, I would simply move second reading of Bill No. 1. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the 
next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that bill 
No. 2 — An Act to amend the Department of Continuing Education Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just want to make a comment about the 
public accounts committee and the proper use of the public accounts committee. And I quite frankly feel 
it’s surprising that the Minister of Finance can turn around so fast. You must be getting dizzy with the 
speed of the revolutions. 
 
The Minister of Finance knows full well there is every difference between discussing it in public 
accounts, and us discussing it here in this Assembly. And you know full well what the difference is. The 
difference is that we have the officials there as our support staff in that public accounts committee, and 
we can put questions directly to them. That is not the system in the House, and full well you know it. 
They are your support staff in this House; they are not our support staff, and for the minister to suggest 
that public accounts committee operates in the same fashion as committee of the whole is just ludicrous, 
and I’m surprised that the minister should be — particularly the minister who was chairman, and such an 
active chairman, should be so . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . should be, yes indeed, such a principled 
minister. I’m surprised that you should misunderstand that. 
 
I frankly don’t see why you won’t, unless you are afraid of what might come out in public accounts, Mr. 
Minister. I will give you . . . The member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg and I will give you our 
assurance, if you refer to public accounts, we will be finished with it in no less than two sessions — in 
two sessions. That’s two days, Mr. Minister. You have our assurance, and if you want the assurance 
from the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, just indicate that and he’ll put it on the record as well. We 
will not hold it up in public accounts. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
761 

I frankly don’t see what your concern is. This is so devoid of any legislation. I frankly don’t know what 
we’re going to be doing, so I don’t see what your concern is about getting it back and getting it done, but 
perhaps hidden in the labyrinth of the Department of Finance there’s some reason why you want these 
passed. We will not hold it up in public accounts, Mr. Minister. We will not hold it up in public 
accounts, but the public accounts committee gives us a far sounder examination of that bill than 
committee of the whole will, because we have the support staff to serve us. When they are in this House 
. . . I’m surprised to hear that the Provincial Auditor would come into the House as one of your support 
staff, but perhaps he would. You may be right about that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t say that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, you did. You suggested . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I just said when he comes in for his estimate. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All right. I will admit that perhaps I may have misunderstood the Minister of 
Finance. I thought you were calling the Provincial Auditor. But surely the Provincial Auditor is an 
appropriate person to examine about this before it is done. 
 
The minister’s timetable suggests that you want these things done before we’re ever going to get to the 
Provincial Auditor’s estimates. I’m not sure what purpose it’s going to be to question him at that time, 
because it will be a fait accompli. 
 
Mr. Minister, unless you’re stonewalling — and I wouldn’t suggest that of someone with your track 
record — but unless you’re stonewalling, I do not see why you won’t refer these to the public accounts 
committee. These bills directly impinge upon the ability of the Assembly to make the government 
accountable. It is directly within the jurisdiction of the public accounts committee, unless you are not 
prepared to defend them, unless you are not prepared to have your members defend them in public 
accounts. 
 
I tell you that I don’t necessarily, I don’t necessarily stand on holy ground on this one. I remain to be 
convinced. If you can convince me that this provides a better accounting than the old system — and I 
admit there were flaws in the old system but I think your system’s worse — if I can be convinced that 
it’s a better accounting system, I’ll be prepared to change my view. I’m always flexible. But the public 
accounts committee, Mr. Minister, gives us a much better opportunity to do it than this Assembly does. 
And I don’t know why you people don’t use some of these committees and expand them. 
 
You were great apostles of these committees when in opposition. My goodness, the things that these 
committees weren’t going to do for the administration of public affairs in Saskatchewan. Now that 
you’re in government you seem to be taking a different view. So I ask the minister to reconsider the 
position you took. And if you won’t reconsider it, will you at least have the courtesy to tell us why not? 
Please do not insult us by suggest we’re going to hold it up, because we’re not going to. Do not insult 
our intelligence by suggesting that the committee of the whole operates in the same fashion as the public 
accounts committee, because you know very well it doesn’t. If you will not be open and responsible 
enough to refer it to public accounts, at least provide us with some scintilla of a justification for your 
actions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’d just like to make one comment, Mr. Speaker, with regards to  



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
762 

the member’s interpretation of what officials appearing at the public accounts committee as support staff 
. . . Officials appear at the public accounts committee are witnesses before the public accounts 
committee, not support staff. At least they were when I was in that particular job, and you in fact called 
the department and you called them as witnesses to ask question of them. 
 
Now, the other point I would wish to make is this: that these initiatives, Mr. Speaker, were not of our 
doing. These initiatives were approved and started by the former government in February, 1982, and this 
policy affects the beginning of the 1982-83 fiscal period. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the 
next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill 
No. 3 — An Act to amend The Public Works Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to say a few words on Bill No. 3. 
It’s very similar to the two that we have dealt with here today, and similar to bills we have dealt with in 
the last session, which the minister was attempting to lead us to believe that they were of a housekeeping 
nature. I’m glad to see that today he is changing his tune on that and has said they’re quite technical 
now, if I understood him in the last speech.  
 
And I agree that they are so technical that the minister who tried to bring them to the House before 
Christmas, I believe, did a very poor job — not the Minister of Finance. I’m saying the minister who did 
at that time had a very difficult time even reading the bills, let alone explaining what they were about. 
And it took us a great deal of time that day in committee to get explanations. And I would assume that in 
trying to get answers on committee on these 1 to 5 bills, we’ll have the same great problem in trying to 
get answers on what was assumed to be, by their prognosis, bills of housekeeping nature. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these bills are anything but housekeeping nature. What they do, in fact, is allow the 
government to carry over debts, or surpluses, from one year to the next with no accounting taking place. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we are seeing is an attempt by this government to work outside of the 
Consolidated Fund, to even further fudge the numbers than what we have seen in the past two budgets. 
 
For a government that was elected on a commitment and a speech and a theme of open government and 
free access to information, I find it very, very difficult to understand this kind of an attempt to work 
outside of the legislature, which is an attempt that they are trying to carry out at the present time. 
 
We’re looking at a bill which does not come into effect once it is passed by this legislature, which was a 
criticism which I have heard coming from the member opposite who is attempting to bring this bill 
through the House today. It appears that they have worked on the principle of these bills since last year, 
that a whole year has gone by where they have worked on the assumption that this was the law of the 
land. It’s amazing that they would even bother to bring these bills in and get approval for them when 
they have worked on this principle for the past year. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I predict that what it will lead to, this kind of jiggery-pokery with the 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
763 

finances of this province, both the Consolidated Fund as well as the heritage fund, that the deficit which 
we have seen grow from $220 million in the first year of operation to 317 in the second will grow even 
more and more rapidly as we get into this kind of accounting, where deficits and surpluses are 
transferred around from one year to the next to the point where no one knows exactly what’s going on, 
even the Minister of Finance. And this is an attempt to pull the wool over the eyes of the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, in playing with numbers so that they will attempt to make themselves look better than 
they really are, but in the end it will catch up to them. And when the deficits come in at 220, at 317, and 
on and on, we will see the result of this kind of an accounting system and this type of a rearranging of 
the money accountability of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
There are a number of questions which I will be raising in committee. And, Mr. Speaker, I agree with 
the member from Regina Centre who says that this is important enough to be referred to the public 
accounts committee. And I would think that we should be looking at that option, to be able to bring in 
people who can explain to us the full ramifications of going to this type of a deficit or this type of an 
accounting procedure. 
 
And I hear members around the House, from time to time during this debate, saying that these bills are 
inconsequential and that there really is no need to debate then. Well, I wish they would get to their feet 
in this debate, rather than yelling from their desks, and explain to us how changing the accountability of 
a government to one which is attempting to hide the numbers from the public is meaningful to the 
people of the province, and explain to us how this is going to make the province a better place to live in, 
and how going down the Trudeau trail of deficits that this kind of accounting leads to is better serving 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the 
next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill 
No. 4 — An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, when the minister introduced this bill on March the 29th, he said, ‘Mr. 
Speaker, this amendment to The Agriculture Act applies the same way as before,’ and then went on and 
said that, ‘It’s a brilliant act, An Act to amend The Department of Agriculture Act,’ and sat down. That’s 
the information he gave. Now, I read through Bill No. 4 very carefully, and I read the explanatory notes, 
and that isn’t the same as it was before. They’re making some drastic changes. Now, was he 
intentionally misleading the House, or was he trying to be funny? Or what the minister was trying to do, 
I don’t know. 
 
But when it says in here, Mr. Speaker, ‘This amendment to the agricultural act applies the same way as 
before.’ And then he goes on to say, ‘I’m sure the Agriculture critic will get up and say that in some 
devious method by which we are going to change The Land Bank Act or sell the Crow off to 
somebody.’ And I think that this is much more important to farmers and the people of Saskatchewan 
than giving it that kind of weight, for a government that has got elected saying that, ‘We are representing 
the farmers; we have a Premier that has a quota book and we are going to speak for the farmers.’ 
 
And here they’re trying to change the method of funding that is used to fund agricultural groups in the 
province — boards, commissions, people that deal with 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
764 

drainage project or whatever — that be paid out of the revolving fund. And trying to do it in a way that 
. . . I don’t know if we’ll be able to call you accountable or not. I’m not sure that when you . . . To pay 
for existing provisions, in section 14, for example, to pay for necessary service in connection with such 
purchase, distribution and sale, the net amount of such advances shall not, at any time, exceed $6 
million. It’s just a matter of a trivial $6 million expenditure. And your minister said it’s the same as 
before. 
 
I don’t think it’s the same as before. Before the introduction of a revolving fund, if the money wasn’t 
spent in a given year, that was the end of that funding and reapplication had to be made to treasury, and 
there are many changes that are different. And I think we should have a chance, in the public accounts 
committee, to look at how accountable is the Minister of Agriculture going to be. 
 
When we did agricultural estimates, Mr. Speaker, you weren’t in the Chamber, but if you would have 
been, you would have known that I got very frustrated trying to get some answers out of him. He tried to 
make light of some of the questions we were asking. And I think this is a serious matter and I think the 
minister should give me some explanation, particularly in one, in the expenditures of a group. Say a land 
development group is planning on a drainage project that’s going to be $3 million, not six. How is that 
going to be handled out of an advance account, if that project doesn’t receive approval by the end of 
April and is just in the process, and yet it was approved for funding that year? What’s going to happen to 
that amount of money? How is the revolving fund going to deal with that situation that wouldn’t have 
happened like it was before? He says because it’s going to be exactly the same as it was before; it’s 
going to apply the same as before. So I would like to have at least that question answered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like — again, this is the same particular piece of legislation 
as we dealt with in Bill 1 through Bill 3 — to deal with the question with regard to public accounts. I am 
informed that in fact the proposal of this revolving account is on the advice and the recommendation of 
the Provincial Auditor. That’s why it was brought in. And the reason it was brought in is because it 
came up in a study at a study requested by the public accounts committee, and this was the 
recommendation from that study, that it be approved this way and proceed this way. That is where it 
came from. That is where it came from to go into this, and the Provincial Auditor will continue to audit 
the same as before. 
 
You want to go back and do everything all over again. I can’t believe this, Mr. Speaker. What we have 
done is had advance accounts where many of the problems that they raise were of concern. And what 
happened, Mr. Speaker, is that the public accounts committee, at that point in time, as it was raised year 
in and year out and year in and year out by the Provincial Auditor — the question of advance accounts 
. . . This was then put to the Provincial Auditor to come up with a recommendation. The 
recommendation he come up with is the legislation that we see before the House today, that we see 
before the House today, Mr. Speaker. We were asking on the advice of the Provincial Auditor. He will 
still have the authority and the power to audit these particular revolving accounts, just as he did with 
regards to the advance accounts, Mr. Speaker. We were acting on that advice. 
 
We have been held up with regards to this legislation in the previous session. We’re simply introducing 
it again. And as I said before, this particular legislation was designed by the previous government. We 
are now going through a harangue with  



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
765 

regard to what we should be doing. With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the 
next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill 
No. 5 — An Act to amend The Family Farm Improvement Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, when Bill 5 was introduced the minister told us ‘Bill No. 5 — An Act to 
amend The Family Farm Improvement Act, for the third time.’ I was wondering when he closes debate 
if he could tell this Assembly: when are the other two times, or the time we raised it? He said, ‘Once for 
them and twice by us.’ 
 
The same arguments apply that I made earlier, that he’s not giving us any information and particularly in 
dealing with The Family Farm Improvement Act, because of the notice we had that the purchases by 
family farm improvement act and the money they need for funding their operation is going to be 
insignificant because all family farm is going to do from here on in is engineering services. They’re not 
going to sell equipment any more. So the need for an advanced revolving fund there has become 
redundant. And so it’s not clear to us at all why he needs this piece of legislation. 
 
And I think that this bill should be pulled entirely. In fact the family farm improvement branch is not 
going to be in the buying and selling and marketing any more, unless it’s some retroactive thing, and this 
is where I’m concerned. Maybe they need this revolving fund for just this particular act and all the other 
ones were introduced so they could handle this one, because I’m not sure what they’re going to do with 
the supplies the family farm improvement branch has on hand now. And possibly their give-away to 
their dealer friends will likely be hid by introduction of this bill. 
 
And if that isn’t the case, then the minister should come clean and tell us that he has no devious 
intentions in mind, and tell us that you don’t need a revolving fund for the family farm improvement 
branch because they’re not going to do any more business. They’re not going to do any more business. 
They’re not going to sell any more goods. They’re not going to buy any more goods. Why do they need 
a revolving fund? Their engineering fees are free. There’s never been a charge for engineering fees. So I 
don’t think they need a revolving fund in the family farm improvement branch at all. So tell us what 
you’re planning on doing with the equipment and materials that you have on hand, who you were 
planning on giving it to, and how are you planning on hiding it in this revolving fund? 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the 
next sitting. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — With leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I would move that Bill No. 1 be referred 
to the public accounts committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — The motion would be out of order because the bills have already been referred to 
committee. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
766 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CONSUMER AND COMMERCIAL AFFAIRS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure – Vote 4 
 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister please introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To my left, Mr. Allan Higgs, executive director, 
commercial division, acting deputy minister; and Mr. Orville MacGillivray, the Acting Rentalsman; and 
Mr. Al Dwyer, head of the administration branch. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I want to begin with the subject of the liquor board and the liquor 
licensing commission. You have made statements, Mr. Minister, that you are considering opening up the 
bill to increase the number of outlets available in Saskatchewan. My first question, Mr. Minister, is: 
when are we going to see the bill? 
 
And I want to preface my remarks, Mr. Minister, with a complaint to the corporal’s guard of ministers 
who are left, indeed, the corporal’s guard of ministers who attended today. The attendance today ought 
to embarrass you people. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I know, I know. The Minister of Highways 
believes that any comments about the needs of the poor are irrelevant. And I know that you believe that 
any question period with needs . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . they elected me and they didn’t elect Mr. 
Petrychyn. That should suggest I know something about them. 
 
Mr. Minister, that was not quite what I intended to question. It’s not quite what I intended, although I 
will get into it with the area of the provincial mediation board. 
 
I want to ask you, Mr. Minister: when are we going to see the bill? This is the 15th day of this session, 
16th day of this session, I am sorry, and all you have on the order paper is five bills, which are of 
fundamental importance, but which we have seen before. Mr. Minister, I have been involved in one 
fashion or another with the legislative program for this government since 1971. And this is absolutely 
without precedent, to be heading into the 16th day of the session and have no idea what you people are 
doing for legislation, unless we read it in the media. 
 
Why aren’t you introducing the bills? And I point to you, particularly, Mr. Minister. The bill which you 
are going to introduce you introduced in the last session. There can be no drafting. I assume it has been 
passed by your caucus and your cabinet. And I’m asking you, Mr. Minister, where is the bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know where the hon. member is coming from. What 
does this harangue have to do with the estimates of Consumer and Commercial Affairs? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I asked the minister a simple question: to whom is The Liquor Act and The Liquor 
Licensing Act assigned? And I know you don’t know, so I’ll tell you. It’s assigned to the Minister of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Therefore, it is you who administer it; therefore, it is a proper 
subject in your estimates. Check, just check the order in council which assigned the bills; you’ll find 
they’re assigned to you. They’re 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
767 

therefore your responsibility and a proper subject of discussion in estimates in this House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, The Liquor Act will indeed be in front of this House in coming 
weeks. There will be amendments to The Liquor Act. We will deal with them in due course. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s an interesting response. I wonder if you’ve any intention at any time to deal 
with my question, which is: when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — In due course, Mr. Chairman. He has referred to the intended amendment to 
The Liquor Act in regards to special liquor vendors. I do indeed intend to reintroduce that amendment to 
this House in coming weeks. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, why don’t you reintroduce it now, so we can do some work on the bill? Why, 
Mr. Minister, are you leaving this bill to the . . . And I accuse you of leaving this legislation till the 
dying days of the session when you’re going to dump it all on us, and then we will be caught in a sort of 
a Catch 22 of either prolonging the session or not doing a proper job of dealing with legislation. The 
traditional courtesy which other administrations . . . I appreciate that this government is awfully short on 
those traditional courtesies. 
 
I see the Minister of Highways looking as if he just bit a lemon. You were never, Mr. Minister, 
subjected to a session such as this, where on the 16th day of the sitting you had no idea of what the 
legislative program was. I ask you, Mr. Minister: why don’t you introduce it now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, this isn’t the proper time to be introducing legislation, and the 
hon. member from Regina Centre knows that. We are here to deal with the estimates of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, so let’s get on with the business at hand today. You’re wasting time of this 
Chamber and the members herein. . . .(inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, the minister has some sort of a hearing problems, Mr. Chairman. I don’t 
know if it would be appropriate to put these questions in writing; we’ll see if he has a visual problem as 
well. My question was not ‘Will you introduce them?’ but ‘When are you going to introduce them?’ 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, referring to Routine Proceedings and Orders of the Day of the 
Legislative Assembly, it’s quite plain and simple on here: you go through the routine proceedings, 
presentations of petitions and so on, down through oral questions, ministerial statements, and 
introduction of bills — that’s when it comes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I thank the minister for that recital of the rules. Mr. Minister, my question — and 
again we’re having great difficulty and I’m not sure what it is — we’re having great difficulty; you are 
not hearing what I’m saying. Why don’t you introduce them now? The question is not ‘Will you 
introduce them now?’ The question is not ‘Where do we introduce them?’ The question is, ‘Why don’t 
you introduce the bill now?’ 
 
I’m making an issue of it, Mr. Minister, over this bill, because I want to make a point to the government 
and that is that you are being very discourteous in not introducing the legislation which was available. 
And you must have this available. 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
768 

If the press reports can be believed you are apparently going to introduce what you introduced before. 
Why is it not before the Assembly? Why don’t you introduce it now, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I simply repeat, Mr. Chairman, today we are here to deal with the estimates of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. The bill in regards to an amendment to The Liquor Act will be 
introduced in due course; I would expect after the estimates for 1983-84 are completed. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, that is exactly what I suspect you’re going to do. Mr. Minister, that is exactly 
what I just finished accusing you of doing: dealing with the estimates and then dealing with the 
legislation. That is an inappropriate way to conduct this House. That is an inappropriate way to conduct 
this House because it does not give us time to work on the bills. 
 
The procedure which has been used since time immemorial is that the bills are introduced as soon as the 
government has them ready, and gives the opposition an opportunity to look them over. It has never 
been the procedure of any administration to deal with all the estimates first and then all the legislation. 
That would be unfair to any opposition, much less an opposition composed of eight members. 
 
Now I ask you again, Mr. Minister, why won’t you introduce the bill? I have every suspicion it is 
because you want your estimates through the House before we see the bill so that we cannot question 
you in the estimates on it. I have every suspicion that what you said is quite accurate. That is exactly 
why we’re not seeing them, because you want to deal with your estimates first. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the estimates of this department have nothing to do with the 
liquor board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I take it the minister is going to stonewall on this one. Is that the case? You 
absolutely refuse to answer the question as to why you’re not introducing them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The bills will be introduced in due course, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to deal as well, Mr. Minister, with the appointment of the chairman. My 
learned colleague from Cumberland raised the issue the other day, and it is a subject of concern to me as 
well. The liquor board . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . My colleague was in the House, and is absent. Our 
attendance today, on a percentage basis, is a good deal better than yours. I could consume this entire 
question period by asking where all your members are, but I won’t. He raised the issue of having the 
same person head the liquor board and the liquor licensing commission. I tend to agree with him, Mr. 
Minister, that this is inappropriate. The liquor board is in the business of selling liquor. And I appreciate 
that’s an oversimplification of their role. I hope that the liquor board don’t see it as their role to 
maximize the sales of liquor, but it is their job to sell it. It is the job of the liquor licensing commission 
to act as a judicial and an administrative tribunal to control the distribution and the sales of liquor. To 
have one person doing both is, in a sense, to have one person being judge and prosecutor. And I ask you, 
Mr. Minister, why you chose to have one person fill both those roles, when in fact there is a conflict of 
interest. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
769 

Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask that this member be called to order. We’re here to 
deal with the estimates of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Liquor board is another matter that can be 
dealt with in public accounts. It is not in the blue book, the matters of the liquor board. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — He can ask a question, unless there’s another estimate that we can look at for the 
liquor board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I missed Mr. Chairman’s comments. You asked us to go on to another issue while 
you . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman: — No, I said you can ask the question unless there’s another section that deals 
specifically with the liquor board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you. Well, I assume now you’re going to answer my concerns and the 
concerns of the member from Cumberland about the appointment of Mr. Pederson, who I know has no 
political affiliation. I know he’s got an arm’s-length relationship with this government. Yes he does; I’m 
sure he does. He may be a good man, but his relationship with the government is scarcely arm’s length. 
So I ask you, Mr. Minister, why you would appoint one person to two positions which are apparently in 
conflict. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, at this time of integration of the liquor board and the liquor 
licensing commission, which I might add is in progress because of the efficiencies and the savings we 
are realizing from this integration — some $276,000 in the first year of integration, as it were, not the 
wasteful $100,000 a year they were paying to have the liquor licensing commission housed in a separate 
headquarters on south Albert Street. They were a wasteful administration and they know it. 
 
Now, Mr. Martin Pederson is indeed the chairman of the liquor board and also at this time the chairman 
of the liquor licensing side until integration is completed through a legislative process. Mr. Pederson is 
not being paid any salary to be the chairman of the liquor licensing commission. Indeed, at this time we 
have brought in a chief inspector from Saskatchewan, Mr. John Weir, to act as the chairman of the 
licensing committee. Those duties and those functions will be carried out efficiently by Mr. Pederson 
and Mr. Weir. We are also in the process of forming a board of directors for this new body, as it were, 
the liquor board. Mr. Pederson is the chairman. Mr. Murray Wilkie is the vice-chairman. In due course 
other members of that board will be added, and they will be on a part-time basis. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, you made some very serious accusations. First of all you indicated that 
the previous administration was a wasteful administration and that you are going to be making 
substantial savings with the reorganizations. I think that if you’re going to make the accusations then 
you should be able to file with us a detail of all the savings, and I would ask you to do that now. Table it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I will be pleased to provide the hon. member from Quill Lakes 
with a document showing the efficiencies that we are going to realize. In his reference to my accusations 
in regards to the liquor licensing commission in that south Albert location for which they contracted to 
pay $100,000 a year, why did the former chairman have a shower constructed in his office over there 
like you did in the offices in Saskatoon of Saskatchewan Mining Development Corporation? That’s the 
kind of waste that he former administration demonstrated to the people of 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
770 

Saskatchewan. That’s why they wiped you off the map on April 26. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think, Mr. Chairman, that here we have a minister who is supposed to come into there 
to answer specific questions, who makes allegations which he cannot substantiate and is unwilling to 
substantiate, and starting to make political statements which can’t substantiate. I think that it’s evidence 
that this minister is one of the weak ministers on the other side of the House, and it’s certainly a 
consensus among all of his backbenchers that that in fact is true. 
 
But I want to ask the minister: you indicated that there was substantial savings into what you’re doing. I 
suggest then that you have those information, and I ask you: can you table it at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I had indicated to him just several minutes ago, Mr. Chairman, that I would. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, I was also listening, and my colleague, the member for Quill Lakes, 
raised this. But, you said that you were planning on integrating the liquor board and the liquor licensing. 
I would like a little detailed explanation of just what you expect. Is that the same function, in y our 
mind, the licensing and the role of the liquor board? Do you see that as a single-unit function that can be 
integrated under one administration? Or one area, where you ‘re talking about integration, that tells me 
. . . It sounds as though you’re trying to combine the two into one operation. Do you see the liquor 
licensing and overseeing of liquor sales as the same, as a separate function from that of marketing and 
selling, like the liquor board does, or do you see that as an integrated unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — They are indeed separate functions, Mr. Chairman. That doesn’t preclude the 
fact that they can be under the same board, as it were, one liquor board; one liquor board in handling 
marketing, shipments of liquor and what not, and also handling the licensing through a separate branch. 
However, the board of directors, once it is finalized, formally finalized, will be making those final 
decisions as to what specific function will be. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Do you not see this as a problem? I was under the impression that liquor licensing was a 
policing type of board that would police liquor sales. Do you see that as a policing function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The primary function, Mr. Chairman, of the licensing side is to assist licensees 
in the operations of their premises. I don’t regard it as a policing function, but we do have to have 
licensing inspectors out there to see that they are abiding by what the act says they have to abide by. I 
don’t regard it as a policing function. 
 
Mr. Engel: — In other words, you don’t consider it policing if — the house they’re open to sell liquor, 
or who they sell liquor to, the age of the individual . . . You don’t consider that a policing function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Licensing inspectors, Mr. Chairman, are there to see that the licensees abide by 
the act, and they’re there to assist the licensees, to make sure that they understand what the act says. A 
policing function can be carried out by the police agencies of the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
771 

Mr. Engel: — You’re reading a broad term into it and misrepresentation of the question I asked you. I 
was asking about a regulatory function of the licensing section of the present liquor licensing aspect of 
it, and I wasn’t referring to actual breaking of the law. What I am saying is: if you have the same body 
corporate dealing with marketing, and the individual is there and taking the orders and the amount and 
the volumes they’re handling, and that same body then also is in the regulatory aspect of it, do you not 
see you’re subjecting your civil servants to a tremendous amount of pressure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — There will be a separate and distinct licensing committee, Mr. Chairman. The 
marketing will be handled by entirely different people than the licensing committee. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, if that’s the case, where is this tremendous saving you’re handling there, other than 
I see the minister looking for a role where he’d be influential? This is why I’m concerned with the 
integrating of this. You’re trying to increase your role of influence so that the people buying are dealing 
with exactly the same body as when you’re trying to police it. And it makes for a very convenient role 
for you in your political application of it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — In regards to the hon. member’s accusations regarding political influence, there 
will be no political influence in the licensing committee. There will be part-time people appointed to that 
licensing committee — people who understand the problems and the abuses of alcohol in the province of 
Saskatchewan, who will indeed be able to relate to the problems that alcoholics have and relate to the 
needs for education, as it is in regards to alcohol there. So there will be no political influence in the new 
liquor board in its new set-up. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I am pleased to hear that, because I’m afraid we’re going to need to do an awful lot of 
educating in this whole area of the use of alcohol, if what the minister is telling us and what indications 
were in the original introduction of your piece of legislation that was before this Assembly just a few 
months ago . . . and I, too, would join my colleagues in saying that I would like to see that bill and the 
new implications of it while we have a chance to question you on your estimates, and maybe a good 
procedure would be that we delay continuing these estimates now until we see the bill. And then we’ll 
come back and finish your estimates as far as your consumer and corporate affairs estimates are 
concerned, because I feel that what you’re doing . . . and my gut feeling is that you are opening this wide 
open. I just came back, I came back from visiting a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You’re going the 
same direction as many places in North America are today. The Minister of Health told us today he’s 
going down to review the health delivery program all over United States and North America. I don’t 
think that’s a good place to look to see where you’re going to get the good delivery of program. And if 
that’s who you’re copying when you’re talking about liquor licensing and liquor sales, and if you want 
to go the same direction as our neighbours to the south of us are, where every gas service station, every 
grocery store, and every corner store, be it a 7-Eleven or what it is, is selling liquor. You can buy any 
kind of booze you want at any time of the day or night. And if you think that that is going to restrict the 
use of alcohol, I think you’re badly mistaken. And you’ll need one heck of an educational program to 
educate the people on the use of alcohol. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I am simply amazed where the member is coming from. He 
doesn’t understand what’s going on in this House. Where were you in the last session when I introduced 
the amendment to The Liquor Act as it is in regards to 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
772 

special vendors? You were here. You know what it says. Why are you bringing all of this up now? It 
will be the same amendment as was introduced before. 
 
Mr. Engel: — If you have the piece of legislation, and if your assurances are that it’ll be the same, why 
don’t you give it to us? What is the delay in bringing it before this House now so that we can debate it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — It will be here in due course, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Minister, that I’m having some difficulty seeing the savings 
to which you allude. If what you’re saying is you’re going to maintain . . . Let’s start back at a more 
elementary step. Do you still intend to maintain . . . do you admit . . . Let’s go back one step further . . . 
Do you admit that the liquor licensing commission’s function is primarily control? Is that common 
ground between us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, they’re playing this to no end. I am prepared to discuss this 
issue to all lengths when we introduce the legislation. We are here at this time to do the estimates of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. Let’s get on with the job at hand. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I can well understand why the minister wants to avoid the subject, but that 
doesn’t make it any less pertinent to your estimates. We are trying to uncover these savings which you 
promised the province of Saskatchewan. My friend from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg alleges, and I share his 
suspicion, that the changes are being made not because they’re going to save any money, but because 
they’re going to increase the accessibility of alcohol in this province. That’s my suspicion as well, I’m 
not sure we’ll see alcohol sold in service stations this year, but his suspicion is my suspicion, so we want 
to know, Mr. Minister, about these savings. 
 
You indicated earlier that the liquor licensing commission did not have a police function. Who polices 
the act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve indicated to the member opposite that I will be pleased to 
answer these questions when we get into the legislation. I’ll answer them in due course when the 
legislation is before this House. At this time we’re here to get through the estimates, and as soon as we 
get through the estimates we can discuss in detail any questions that you have at that time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you said a moment ago that the liquor licensing commission did not 
have a police function. So dismally informed are you that you don’t know the truth. The fact is that they 
do have a police function. To whom do the inspectors report? The man in the moon, or the Minister of 
Finance, or the Attorney General? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I had a recent conversation with one of the chief 
inspectors, Mr. Barry Hicks, who I’m sure is known by the previous administration because he has been 
with the liquor licensing commission for some time. He advises me that liquor licensing inspectors do 
not regard themselves as policemen. I don’t want to get into an argument of definition of the word. They 
are not policemen; they are inspectors. They are there to see that the licensees abide by the act, and that 
they provide assistance to licensees in regards to interpretation of the act. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
773 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, that’s a brand new definition of an inspector — someone who assists the 
licensees in interpreting — and if the licensee wants to interpret his license to mean he can open Sunday 
morning at 11 o’clock, it’s the role of the inspector to assist him in finding that interpretation in the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you not admit that the function of an inspector is control, to ensure that the licensees 
obey the legislation? And if that isn’t a police function, what in the name of heaven is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — He’s quibbling over the word ‘police’ and we have two different definitions. 
To me a policeman is a man in a uniform, RCMP or provincial police or any other police agencies that 
there may be across this country. A licensing inspector is a licensing inspector and he’s there to see that 
the licensee obeys the legislation. It’s as simple as that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Exactly. Exactly. He’s there to ensure that the legislation is obeyed. His is an 
enforcement function. I’m glad that after 15 minutes the minister finally comes clean. Now if we could 
have a little success in some of these other issues, we might get on to the rest of your estimates, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
The liquor licensing commission has an enforcement-control function, a judicial and an administrative 
function. The liquor board is in sales. We have been suggesting to you that these are two diametrically 
opposed functions. One wants to increase sales; one want to control excessive sales, and those functions 
are not coterminal. They’re normally operating in diametrically different directions, and you are putting 
them in one body. If the minister is not going to put them in one body; if you’re simply going to move 
the whole mess into one building, that’s different. I’m fascinated to know how you’re going to save any 
money putting them all in one building, because you’re going to need the same amount of floor space. 
But, maybe I’m overlooking some genius that you people have fostered. 
 
I want to know, Mr. Minister, if you will admit that one has a control-enforcement function; one has a 
marketing function. Is that common ground? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll spell it out again. We’re going to have a liquor board and a 
licensing committee — a liquor board and a licensing committee. Each will serve in a different way 
under the liquor board as a whole. And I don’t see why the member from Regina Centre is confused 
about this. It’s as plain as the nose on his face. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I’m glad the minister finds this matter so simple. Perhaps we’ll proceed a 
little faster then. Is the minister telling me that there is no difference between the committee and the 
commission? Is that what you’re telling me: that it’s the same thing, just a difference in nomenclature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — What I understood you to say: is the licensing committee the same as the 
former licensing commission? It will serve the same purpose. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, all right. That’s only part of the answer though. Will it have the same powers; 
operate in the same way with the same legislative authority? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes. 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
774 

Mr. Shillington: — All right. And it will be composed of people who are independent from the 
responsibility for marketing liquor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes, with one exception, the chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Why the exception? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I guess it is time to remind the member opposite of a committee, the former 
administration in 1978, which recommendation at that time was that the liquor board and the liquor 
licensing commission come under one jurisdiction, under integration. That was a recommendation of the 
former administration in 1978. I think it was Mr. Faris, was it not? A Mr. Don Faris made the 
recommendation. Now I don’t now why exactly he made the recommendation, but I can tell you that 
we’re making it for efficiency and productivity and a saving of over one-quarter of a million dollars in 
this first year. Other provinces find that their liquor boards work well in this manner, Manitoba and 
Alberta in particular. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I don’t know. He must have done it. Mr. Faris I doubt made any 
recommendation in 1978 about the liquor board, Mr. Minister. Throughout the entire of 1978, Dr. Faris 
was the minister of education, and you people may think that education and liquor should be one 
responsibility. That was never our view and we never had one minister who was both, and I frankly 
don’t know what committee you are referring to. I ask you, Mr. Chairman, if there is logic and reason to 
have two separate committees, because they serve different functions that may conflict. Why is it not 
logical and reasonable to have two different chairmen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Because I have faith that the present chairman is quite capable of handling 
those functions. On another matter, Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to table the Faris recommendations 
of 1978 if the hon. member would like to have a look at them. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I think the ones you are referring to, if I’m not mistaken, are 1972 not 1978. I 
think it was during the first term of the former administration. Mr. Minister, if you have dissimilar 
functions which may conflict, how can you have one person doing both? He may find himself pulled in 
opposite directions. That is like re-creating the Star Chamber. The problem with the Star Chamber was 
that the prosecutor’s role and the judge’s role was one. And I say, Mr. Minister, you are similarly 
confusing the two roles. Surely, if one is to exercise a control-enforcement function, the board itself is to 
exercise a sales function, surely they should be handled by different people, and not having one person 
trying to separate those very conflicting responsibilities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I have complete faith, Mr. Chairman, in the abilities of the present chairman of 
the liquor board. He is a responsible, human person. He is working hard at getting the liquor board and 
the liquor licensing commission together into one agency, if you will. I also have faith that the licensing 
committee, as I have outline it earlier, will indeed perform its duties in good conscience and in good 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, what are you saving besides the chairman’s salary? I want to get back to the 
chairman in a minute, but what are you saving besides the chairman’s salary? You’ve got two 
committees, which you’ve told me are no different. They are carbon copies of what we used to have 
except one person now is the head of both, I gather . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Call it a committee 
instead of a commission. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
775 

Where are you saving the money apart from the chairman’s salary? How are you arriving at this saving? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — In the main, Mr. Chairman, we’re saving the salary of the liquor licensing 
commission chairman, which I believe was in the area of 52 or $53,000, somewhere in there; also the 
salary of the vice-chairman. The vice-chairman, by the way, retired last August. Also the salary of the 
secretary of the liquor licensing commission, as well as the support staff — there are duplications in 
support staff that occurred when we had the two bodies in different locations. They can now be 
amalgamated for efficiencies. And also, as I alluded to earlier, the $100,000 in rental costs for the South 
Albert location. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, will the minister not admit that the rental costs are irrelevant to the 
discussion? That could have been accomplished without combining the two functions. If you thought 
that you had excess floor space in a given building, surely the minister of government services could 
have made use of that without combining the two into one. Will you not admit that the rental space is an 
irrelevancy to the discussion of the principle involved, that the floor space could have been used by 
some other agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Government services, Mr. Chairman, was not responsible for the leasing of that 
facility in South Albert. It was apparently handled by the chairman of the liquor licensing commission at 
that time, and I would like to believe that had government services handled that lease agreement that it 
wouldn’t have been as expensive as it turned out to be. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, now I’m pursuing a minor point for just a minute. I can well appreciate that 
the liquor board would provide its own floor space. Are you telling me that the liquor board also 
provided space for the liquor licensing commission? The liquor licensing commission is simply an 
agency. It’s not a separate crown corporation. I’m surprised to hear the liquor licensing commission 
which is simply an agency of government, is providing its own floor space. That’s not common, to put it 
mildly. The liquor board is a crown corporation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The liquor licensing commission, Mr. Chairman, has their own estimates, and 
therefore they handled the lease agreement on their own. The liquor board, of course, handles its also. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I take your word for it that the liquor licensing commission made their own 
leasing arrangement. There are not many agencies of government that do, but I take the minister’s word 
for it. 
 
It’s an aside, actually. It’s by and large an aside. The question to you is: what are you saving besides the 
lease space, which I allege, I know you will deny it until the end of all time, but I suggest that you have 
too much lease space. That scarcely requires an amalgamation of the function. What are you saving 
besides the chairman’s salary and the lease space, if you insist on throwing that in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — He’s asked that question at least four times. I don’t know if it doesn’t sink in. 
You are making allegations that I don’t know what’s going on. I suggest to you, you don’t know what’s 
going on. You have asked the same question six times. 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
776 

Now, Mr. Lawyer, sitting opposite there, I’ll tell you what we’re saving. If you want to take the rent off 
$276,000, it’ll be approximately $176,000. I also told you earlier that I would provide you with a written 
submission of what those savings would be. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Will the minister confirm that all you are saving is the chairman’s salary and the 
leased space? Do I take that? And if the minister simply wants to nod his head, I will take it at that. Is 
that all you’re saving: simply the chairman’s salary and the leased space? Is that all you’re saving? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — No. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All right, then, where else are you saving the money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I indicated to you earlier that I would provide this information to you. I also 
provided it verbally, just a few minutes ago. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, the minister’s a bit piqued, I see. I’m sorry if he’s a bit tender on the subject. 
I’m not asking you for the figures. I am asking you for the areas in which you are saving in. You’re 
saving in the area of the chairman’s salary; you’re saving in the area of leased space. What other areas? 
I’m not asking you for the amounts; I am asking you for the areas, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I’ll go over it one more time, Mr. Chairman. We’re saving moneys in the area 
of the salary of the liquor licensing chairman — commission chairman; the vice-chairman; the secretary; 
the support staff, where duplications occur; in phone bills; in other services; in toilet paper, and what not 
— things like that. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How many staff will be eliminated in the amalgamation? Does the minister know 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The general manager of the liquor board, Mr. Bock, is working on that right 
now. I would estimate that it would not be more than two or three or four positions at the most, if that 
many. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — All right. We have the chairman and the vice-chairman and the secretary and two or 
three staff, and the leased space. Have we got it all now, or are there other areas where you’re saving 
money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I have indicated to him I would provide him with that information and I will, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that the cost of . . . And I’ll suggest to the minister 
that there is a problem with the consumption of alcohol in this province and in our society. The amount 
of alcohol that’s being consumed is rising relatively rapidly, and most of the studies which have been 
done suggest that increased accessibility results in increased consumption. And the function of the liquor 
licensing commission is by and large to limit the accessibility of alcohol; that’s by and large what it 
does. That’s a bit of an oversimplification, but that accounts for 75 per cent of what that commission 
does: is to limit the accessibility to alcohol, to ensure that the act which controls the accessibility of 
alcohol is enforced. So I say, Mr. Minister, you have a significant problem in our society with alcohol. 
The consumption of alcohol is rising rapidly on a per capita basis. It is causing problems in every 
segment of our society. It is bloating the budget of the Minister of Health. It is bloating the budget of the 
Minister of  



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
777 

Social Services. It is playing havoc with the finances of the Saskatchewan Government Insurance. It is 
causing us problems right across the board. And I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that the cost of all that 
makes your savings relatively insignificant. 
 
I am not suggesting that if we have the opportunity we should ever, ever pass by the opportunity to save 
a couple of hundred thousand dollars, if that’s what all this comes to, and I don’t know. We should never 
pass that opportunity by, if we see it clearly. But, Mr. Minister, if what you are doing increases 
accessibility to alcohol and thereby increases consumption, to put it crassly and to forget the human 
tragedy, the cost is going to exceed a hundred fold your savings, if what you are doing is increasing 
accessibility. And when you weaken the control of the liquor licensing commission by blurring it with 
the marketing function of the liquor board, you are in fact running the risk of increasing the accessibility 
of alcohol. I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, for a comment and something other than the normal pious 
platitudes which we have been treated to this afternoon — I’d ask you, Mr. Minister, for a comment on 
how you’re going to ensure that the access to alcohol continue to be as limited as it is when you have 
blurred the functions of the two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the liquor committee as it is made up will be very cognizant of 
the abuses of alcohol in this province. They are not there for the reason of increasing consumption in 
this province; neither indeed is the integration of the liquor board and the liquor licensing commission 
have anything to do with the consumption. 
 
If he’s referring to the amendment that will be introduced later in the session as it relates to the special 
liquor vendors, we will deal with that at the time. What we’re saying through this amendment is that the 
communities in Saskatchewan — the smaller communities, the villages, hamlets and towns that want 
special vendors in their communities — they will first have to indicate it to the liquor board through a 
local . . . (inaudible) . . . It’s the communities who are going to make that decision, not the liquor board, 
Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The minister, does he not believe that there is a correlation between the availability of 
liquor and the consumption of liquor? And I go on further to indicate that in respect to the special 
vendors, throughout the years we have always had within the statute a limitation as to the number of 
special vendors we have. That was in the act itself. What you are proposing is an uncontrolled right for 
the minister to grant as many special vendors’ licenses as is deemed necessary by the minister and not be 
answerable to the debate in this legislature. 
 
I ask you: do you not agree that increasing the special vendor outlet to an unlimited number, which you 
are proposing, is there not a correlation between the availability of liquor and the consumption of it and, 
as a consequence, the human costs related to the overuse of alcohol? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The answer to the hon. member from Quill Lakes is no, of course we don’t 
want uncontrolled accessibility to liquor in this province. What we’re saying is that we want to give the 
communities the right to put a special vendor in their community after a local option vote. We have 
many, many letters on file, Mr. Chairman, that have indicated that small town X, wherever it may be, 
wants the service of a special vendor, because they don’t want to drive 20, 25, 30, or 50 miles to buy 
whatever it might be — a bottle of spirits, a bottle of wine, or a case of beer. And many of these smaller 
communities complain. They complain, Mr. Chairman, that business is being 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
778 

dragged away from their communities and taken away to a town 50 miles away where they spend their 
money on groceries, on dry goods, on hardware, on farm supplies, and whatever else. And this is one of 
the reasons why they’re asking for this service in their own communities. 
 
I am not in favour of uncontrolled dissemination of liquor, and this amendment to The Liquor Act will 
not do that. In fact, according to the estimates, the best estimates of the liquor board in Saskatchewan, 
consumption will not rise by any appreciable amount. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have a further question, Mr. Chairman. Recently in Regina there was an instance 
where in fact the liquor board was granting a license in a neighbourhood in which a group of people had 
to unite to keep a liquor outlet right from next door to a school. You’re talking about the public having 
the right to make decisions. Here was a decision that had been made by the liquor board and the public 
had to revolt against it. 
 
What I’m saying to you: in your proposed legislation, what you’re doing is taking from the legislature 
the power of curtailment of the availability of liquor. Certainly if there are a few communities 
throughout Saskatchewan which have, as you say, and I doubt very much your facts, that they’re 50 
miles away from a liquor outlet — I mean, that’s an exaggeration that even you shouldn’t be making, 
because you know better — but what you are in fact doing as a policy is to have uncontrolled 
availability of liquor, and the further opening up of the liquor to the public. And I want to say that that 
leads to exorbitant use of liquor and the social costs will increase. 
 
We have rumours of it going to be put into the phantom coliseum in Saskatoon in the event that Molson 
Breweries signs the contract with the Hunter-Batoni group, that the condition of it is that you sell liquor 
at the hockey games — Molson’s. You also indicate that some talk is being made that you’re going to in 
fact extend it to Taylor Field. And I want to say that every trend made by this government is to secretly 
make availability more and more available, and that’s why you won’t put in an increase to meet those 
particular cases, but you want unlimited right to increase the availability. 
 
I want your comments as to what is your direction in respect to the availability of liquor. Are you going 
to extend it to Taylor Field? Have you done any surveys on it? What is your thought in it? Where are 
you going to extend it — to the coliseum if it ever comes to be in Saskatoon? Why aren’t you limiting 
the number of special liquor outlets, rather than an unlimited number, if in fact you’re saying with 
sincerity that it is not your direction in fact to make liquor totally available and extended throughout this 
province, the like of which we have never seen? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I’ll remind the member from Quill Lakes that that’s why you’re sitting over 
there. Eight measly little members. Fifty-six over here because we listen. We listen, the members from 
Quill Lakes; we listen. We will listen to the people of Regina and the football fans of this city. I 
understand they’re going to have an open forum, and if that open forum clearly indicates that they want 
the service at Taylor Field, then we will listen to them. We will sit down and talk to them. 
 
The same goes for Saskatoon. We have made no dealings with any NHL team, no dealings whatsoever. 
In regards to your reference of North Regina, Argyle Park, the people out there clearly indicated what 
they wanted out there. The city of Regina rezones that so it was available to a liquor licence out there. It 
wasn’t the government of  



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
779 

Saskatchewan. It was the city of Regina, and if you paid attention to what’s going on in the province 
you’d know that. You know nothing about what’s going on. That’s why you’re sitting over there. 
 
And it was one of your people, it was one of your people who led the charge to Regina city council: let 
us have a licensed outlet at Argyle Park. Then he conveniently turned around, turned the other cheek, 
and said, ‘It wasn’t me.’ You’d better start listening to what’s going on, Mr. Member from Quill Lakes. 
You don’t know nothing . . . anything. Pardon my grammar. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I would like to ask the minister that in proposing this expansion of the liquor 
availability in this province, has he received briefs from the Anglican Church and from the United 
Church and from the Roman Catholic church? And are you aware of a brief that was submitted by the 
joint church groups to the federal government in respect to the relaxation, opposing the relaxation of the 
availability of liquor, and also of gambling? And I’ll come to gambling in a moment, which you’re 
opening up in this province. Are you aware of those briefs and have you in fact met with those church 
groups, which, when I was minister, I met with and listened to? I ask you, if you’re communicating with 
the public, tell me what groups you have met with in respect to formulating your policy for the 
expansion of liquor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the liquor review committee, made up of several members of 
this House, has listened to many groups. They have talked to associations across the province, 
associations across the province. I have talked to people of the churches of this province; I know where 
they stand. I know where many various groups stand on this particular issue. What I am saying again 
and again and again here is that we are prepared to listen to all views, Mr. Chairman. We are prepared to 
weigh the factors coming from both sides, and we will do that. The liquor review committee has done a 
good job. I will be reviewing a final report in due course from them, and at that time we will be making 
some decisions in regards to The Liquor Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to follow up on this, Mr. Chairman. I have heard from the members opposite 
that their motto, their direction, is ‘God first, the family second, and the Tory party third.’ I wonder 
whether you’re getting your priorities mixed. It seems to me that with liquor and gambling, what you’re 
looking at is the Tory party first, and you’re catering to those who want to get the sales of liquor at any 
cost to society. I ask you again: can you indicate to this group here today — have you met with the 
various church groups in respect to implementing your policy of expanding liquor availability in this 
society? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to table a document with the member 
opposite indicating the groups that the committee has met with, and I’m sure that the member from Quill 
Lakes will realize that the membership of those associations and committees are church-going people — 
many of them. I would say that a lot of them go to church. 
 
Mr. Koskie — Well, I want to follow up, Mr. Chairman, and I want to ask the minister a simple 
question. Can he indicate and table and provide us with the information, the  



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
780 

particular church groups that he has met with since he assumed the role as minister in charge of the 
extension of liquor availability in this province? A simple question: have you met with the United 
Church? Have you met with the Catholic Church? Have you met with the Anglican Church, and the 
Lutherans, and the Baptists? Those are all the groups that we met with during the time that I was 
minister. Have you met with them before embarking on this new policy of expansion of the availability 
of liquor in our society? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I have indicated to the member that I will supply him with a list of the groups I 
have met with. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to return to the issue of the liquor sales at Taylor field. I’d be interested in 
hearing the member from Rosemont. I well appreciate that the keen race for the cabinet position and 
your prominence in that race makes it impossible for you to get into it. I would like to hear you on this 
subject, and I’m surprised that your conscience doesn’t force you into the debate, but I’ll leave that. I’ll 
leave that. Did I understand the minister to say a moment ago that if a referendum were held in this city, 
or there were some indication the majority of people in Regina wanted liquor sales at Taylor Field, that 
in fact you would consider yourself bound by that? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I didn’t indicate any such thing in regards to a referendum. I made reference to 
the city of Regina holding an open forum, and letting the community, the city of Regina, decide what 
they want, not us as a government tell them what they can have. In regards to the service of light beer at 
Taylor Field, personally I don’t care. I got to one football game or I’ve attended one football game in the 
last five years, and I don’t drink beer. So I’m saying to that member that the people of Regina should be 
able to decide, and the football fans that attend at that stadium should be able to decide what services 
they want there. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But surely Mr. Minister, it is a decision for society as a whole and not just for the 
fans at Taylor Field. 
 
I want to say that I’m no teetotaller, but you simply can’t read the annual report of the liquor board — 
and I know members opposite have some kind of a disinclination from reading, and I know annual 
reports are anathema to you people, and you absolutely refuse to read them, but I recommend that you 
try the last annual report of the liquor board and look at those per capita consumption figures. You 
cannot look at them and read them without a sense of concern about where our society is going. It is 
getting to be a serious problem and a very costly one, and the tentacles of the liquor problem are in all 
segments of our society. 
 
I can virtually go across the front row of the treasury benches and I can tell each minister sitting there, 
including the minister for rural affairs, how this problem is exacerbating your financial problems. And 
that’s being crass about it; that’s forgetting the human tragedy involved. And I suggest to the minister 
that this is not simply a decision for the fans of Taylor Field. I suggest this is a decision for all society. 
 
I would also suggest to the minister that you have a responsibility to provide some leadership. For the 
minister to get up and say, ‘I don’t care; they can do whatever they want.’ Surely leadership is more than 
that, Mr. Minister. Edmund Burke, I think it was Edmund Burke, who said that, ‘You owe the voters not 
your obedience, but your judgement.’ I ask you, Mr. Minister, for your judgement on the issue, and 
don’t just tell us that you’re going to do whatever the voters want. Give us your judgement. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 

 
781 

Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I would answer that inquiry with another one. It was the former administration 
that licensed the Green and White Room in Taylor Field as it is now. It wasn’t this administration that 
put a licensed outlet into Taylor Field. It was you that put it in there, not this administration. Why did 
you do that? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, is the minister going to entirely avoid the subject and refuse to tell us where 
you stand? Is the minister going to entirely avoid the subject, or will you give us your judgement, to use 
the phrase of Edmund Burke? Will you give us your judgement on the issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I have never varied one bit, Mr. Chairman, in how I feel about the availability 
of liquor. I say it’s up to the people of Saskatchewan to decide that, up to the people of Regina, and up 
to the fans in Taylor Field, if that’s what we’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Before the clock runs out at 5, I want to deal with Mr. Martin Pederson himself. I 
wonder if you would tell this Assembly what his qualifications . . . I would like his salary, but I’m 
prepared to take that in writing. But I would appreciate it, Mr. Minister, if you would give us his 
qualifications for the positions of liquor board and liquor licensing commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — We can supply that information to the member, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, I’m asking you for his qualifications. Surely the minister doesn’t have to go 
back and read that. Surely you remember why you appointed him. I don’t expect you to remember his 
salary in detail, but I’m not sure it’s entirely fair, unless it’s exorbitant, to make a public issue out of it. 
His qualifications, Mr. Minister, are . . . Given the fact that he’s a former leader of your party, his 
qualifications are, I think, an appropriate item for discussion, but I’d ask you for his qualifications for 
the job, as distinct from his salary. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I’ll supply that information, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Have you no idea why you appointed him, or can you think of no reason other than 
the political pressures to appoint him? Can you not give us any? If you can’t, I’ll take the suggestion of 
the member from Saskatoon University. If you can’t give us all his qualifications, no doubt the list 
would be so lengthy, can you give us some of his qualifications for the job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t have a complete outline of Mr. Pederson’s . . . or his 
resume here with me at the time, but I can tell them that he has management capabilities. He is a very 
personable person. During the short time that he has been the chairman of the liquor board the staff there 
has indicated to me that Mr. Pederson is doing an excellent job. They enjoy working with him. He is a 
person that has great capabilities in directing staff, in controlling operations of the liquor board, in 
supervising the operations of the liquor board. 
 
He formerly owned and managed a company known as Manpower Services in Saskatoon, which was a 
company which placed people looking for work, so, therefore, he has experience in human resources. 
He’s also a former farmer. He farmed for many years in the Strongfield area of Saskatchewan. 



 
April 11, 1983 
 

 
782 

He’s also a man that paid his dues to our nation. He was a fighter pilot in the Second World War and has 
flown many missions over enemy soil during the Second World War. Mr. Martin Pederson has my 
complete confidence. He has the confidence of the Premier of Saskatchewan that he can do the job, and 
he has the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan that he can do the job. That’s why he’s there. And 
if you want to know his salary, it’s 60,000 per annum. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I followed this debate with a great deal of interest — how the 
minister is attempting to defend the opening up of liquor outlets, opening up liquor outlets in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I suppose that he is to be commended for the fact that he is honest 
enough to admit that he wants more liquor outlets and wants more liquor at public functions. But what I 
have a great deal of difficulty understanding is how the Minister of Highways, in his sanctimonious 
fashion, goes around the province and pretends that the Conservative Party and this Conservative 
government is against liquor being involved in people’s lives. 
 
What I would like to explain to you is how you square your talk about increasing liquor at various 
functions to the Minister of Highways’ accusation that people would be drinking less. How do you 
square that conflict with the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The member is putting words into his head that I never said. I never said I 
wanted increased consumption. I never said I wanted increased consumption in the province. I said that 
this government is prepared to increase the numbers of special vendors in the province — in the hamlets, 
in the villages, in the towns that indicate they want that. It is a matter of service, not increased 
consumption. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Is the minister saying, Mr. Chairman, that there’s no correlation between the 
number of liquor outlets and the access to liquor and consumption of alcohol? Is that what he’s trying to 
make people in Saskatchewan believe? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I again repeat what the advice has been to me from the liquor 
board and through the liquor board: that they feel that the consumption in Saskatchewan will not 
increase appreciably by lifting the limit on special liquor vendors in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve had in the area of 950,000 to 980,000 people for the last 30 years, and essentially the amount 
consumed has remained fairly stable. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS

