






















































Hansard: November 23, 1983


147 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 23, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. MR. DIRKS: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
the Assembly, a group of 23 students and two teachers from the Dieppe School in my constituency of Regina 
Rosemont. They are seated in the west gallery with us this afternoon, and I would ask all members of the Assembly 
to join with me in welcoming them here this afternoon. I will be meeting with them after question period for 
pictures and refreshments. Would you welcome them here, please? 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. DOMOTOR: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to welcome to the Assembly, and through you to the 
Assembly, a number of 36 students from the Carmen School, accompanied by the principal, Mr. Glen Hipp, and 
Gary Engel, and the parents, Bernice and Ed Engel, Teresa Engel and Marlene Schmidt. 
 
I’d like to especially welcome them because I used to spend some time at this school as a teacher myself. It’s very 
reflective of the kind of communities we have in the rural area where you have a combination of a small school and 
the close comradeship that you can get with the teachers and the students and the parents. I hope they have an 
interesting and informative day, and I’ll be meeting with them with drinks at 2 to 2:30 and pictures. I’d like the 
Assembly to welcome the guests this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. WIEMAN: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of that dynamic colleague of mine from the constituency of Mayfair, I 
would like to introduce some students from his constituency from Lawson Heights School. I understand that are 50 
in number and five teachers. I would like to introduce the principal, Art Dickman, Betty Schultz, and Marianne 
Amos. Mr. Glauser regrets that he is unable to meet with you this afternoon, but I look forward to taking those 
duties on his behalf. If information that I have received is correct, you’re also in the wonderful care of Mr. Rod 
Meyer, the bus driver. And just a little caution to you students that Rod Meyer — if that’s the same person that I 
remember — is a past teacher, so he knows every trick in the book. So when you go back to Saskatoon, remember 
to be on your best behaviour. I look forward to meeting with you shortly after question period. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — With the permission of the Assembly, I’d like to revert back to notices of motions and 
questions. I understand the Minister of Education was trying to catch my eye and I missed her. 
 

NOTICE OF MOTION 
 
HON. MRS. SMITH: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on Monday, November 28, 1983, 
move first reading of a bill, An Act to establish the Women’s Secretariat. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 



 
November 23, 1983 
 
 

Renovations at Regina General Hospital 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Minister of Health. It has to do with the postponement 
of phase 3 of the modernization and expansion at the General Hospital. I wonder if the minister could inform the 
Assembly and the people of Regina when this important health program and plan will go ahead. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to discuss this with the member opposite. It’s true that the 
additions to the General Hospital have been deferred for some time. It is the belief of this department and this 
government that one complete the job that you’ve started. 
 
As you may well be aware the Pasqua Hospital is under some renovation. That is being completed. There are 
ongoing discussions with the people from the board of the General Hospital, and I must say at this time the 
pleasure I would express at the sincere and dedicated and mature attitude that the members of the board of the 
General Hospital had when the word was given to them. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, I wonder if the minister would tell us; what date did you give the board that 
they would have to wait till to get money from you to go ahead with the project? That was the original question and 
still is. When will you be proceeding with the renovations at the General Hospital? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — My officials are in continual consultation and discussion with the board of the General 
Hospital. They’re meeting this month. We are looking at possible things that can be done to satisfy some of the 
requests from the General Hospital. We have continual consultation. We’re not hanging out any promises or any 
make-believe promises like someone I know did in April of 1982. We don’t come out with $100 million of 
promises that can’t be fulfilled. I want to indicate to you, had there been a heritage fund, as the people of 
Saskatchewan believed there was, from the last government, some of those fictitious and fudged figures that your 
government opposite put out may have been able to be fulfilled today. But this government and this Department of 
Health beehives in practical, common-sense solutions to the problems of Saskatchewan in health and in other 
fields. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Rehab Centre 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — New question to the Minister of Health. After the blustering on the last question and 
no answer, I wonder whether you can inform the Assembly when the long-promised rehab centre — which was a 
project which included the workmen’s compensation board, a number of millions of dollars, as well as over $1 
million, I believe, from the Kinsmen which was raised through Telemiracle which would be made available — 
when this project will be announced, and when it will go ahead, Mr. Minister. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Let me indicate to you that at this point in time there are consultants looking at the 
possibility and the feasibility of phasing in rehab services with the Wascana hospital, on the grounds here of the 
Wascana Centre. They are in discussion with the staff and the patients at that hospital (a little different venture). I 
have listened to the Voice of The Handicapped, who said to me, “Mr. Minister, we believe that is the best location 
for that centre.” So there are ongoing consultations regarding the possibility. 
 
I want to assure you and I want to assure everyone in this House and the people of Saskatchewan that there is no 
moratorium on the construction of rehab centres. There is no moratorium on the construction of hospitals. You can 
shake you head all you want, because  



November 23, 1983 
 

149 

that’s what you had was a moratorium, and the people are finding that out. These projects will go ahead; they will 
be planned, and they will be the best projects that the province of Saskatchewan can supply. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary to the minister. While he may not have a freeze on 
rehab centres, the fact that he isn’t building any may be defined as that. But I wonder if you could tell me: can you 
please inform the Assembly whether you have now cancelled the idea of having a rehab centre associated with the 
Plains hospital here in Regina. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — As I indicated to you, we are looking at various sites, and the most recent one we are 
looking at is the Wascana hospital, which has a great deal of support from many of the people who use rehab 
services and have used them in the past. That’s what we’re looking at this time. There has been no decision as of 
yet where it will be constructed. There are consultations going on at this time. I can give you the assurance that 
there will be a rehab centre. There won’t be any pie in the sky, and I take interest with note of the, perhaps, 
condemnation of the Kinsmen’s money going to the sold-turning that I did last Wednesday in Saskatoon for the 
children’s Kinsmen centre, $1 million. Now if you’re ashamed of that, I am certainly not ashamed, and the 
members of my government are not ashamed either. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Hospitals 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, the long bow drawn by the member from Indian Head-Wolseley 
doesn’t go unnoticed. Another project which I would like to ask you about, Mr. Minister, has to deal with the joint 
report, which is now over a year old, from the Saskatoon joint planning committee, dealing with the three hospitals 
in Saskatoon — City Hospital, St. Paul and the University. Can you give an indication today when those three 
projects will be going ahead, given the fact that they now have a waiting list of in excess of 5,000 people. 1,800 of 
them waiting for elective surgery or cancer treatment. When will that project be started — any one of the three in 
Saskatoon? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Okay. Fine. I’m glad you asked that question. I’ve been waiting for you for about four 
days. 
 
I want to indicate to you that, first and foremost, this government will be having capital construction in hospitals in 
Saskatoon, which, if you will recall, is a bit different that the decision made by you fellows, who said, “We are 
going to hold Saskatoon, and build in Regina.” We don’t deal that way. We govern for all of Saskatchewan, and 
Saskatoon will get their share. 
 
You wanted to know about the joint planning facility. I want to indicate to you the pleasure I express with the 
people in Saskatoon, the members of those boards. I have met with St. Paul’s to give them $1 million for needed 
equipment, if you will recall. But I have met with them since then. I have met with University, and I have met with 
Mayor Cliff Wright and City Hospital. Those people are realistic and quite willing to work together on a joint 
planning facility. I congratulate them. They realize as well as I do and everyone on this side of the House, that there 
will be a commitment to hospital construction in Saskatoon. 
 
It was of interest I noted that you said, “neglected cancer.” Well, let me indicate to you my friend, who neglected 
the cancer. When we came to power 18 months ago we realized the neglect to cancer that had gone o n in 
Saskatchewan and put $17 million on a commitment. 
 
You mentioned the waiting lists, Mr. Speaker. He talks about the waiting lists. Now I was going to say this 
afternoon when I was speaking, but it doesn’t hurt to tell the good news twice. And I  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
want to tell you about the waiting lists. If you will check back you’ll see the waiting lists started to develop in 
Saskatoon in 1976. And, Mr. Speaker, the government opposite, in 1976, withdrew 400 positions from hospitals to 
buy potash mines. That’s why there are waiting lists in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, a final supplementary to the minister. With a great deal of bravado that 
he can, in this Assembly deal with the problem of 5,000 people on the waiting list in Saskatoon many of them for 
elective surgery — heart surgery, as well as cancer — that he can stand here and speak very loudly . . . I wonder if 
he would give an indication of when any one of these projects in fact will have money coming forward to them 
from your department, or whether we will see a continuation where the member in charge of Energy and Mines in 
the province gets all of the money and Health gets short-changed? When will this change and when will you, at the 
cabinet table, demand that money come forward to the Department of Health? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I always knew that my hon. friend opposite had a short memory, but I didn’t know it 
was fading with age. If you will recall back to the budgets, the two budgets of my good colleague, the Minister of 
Finance, has brought in, there has been a considerable emphasis on health spending in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — In fact, there has been a greater emphasis on health spending in the province of 
Saskatchewan than any other province in Canada since the PCs took office. 
 
Now, in specific, you again mentioned cancer — let me just tell you again, a $17 million commitment to cancer. I 
think that was a great commitment. That was a neglect that we picked up — 10 years of neglect to cancer patients. 
 
You mentioned the waiting list. Let me indicate to you what we have done on the waiting list, and let me reiterate 
one more time for those who it doesn’t sink in with, that the waiting list developed when 400 positions, 400 people 
looking after the sick of this province, were taken out of health services so that money could be made to buy potash 
mines. Now, that isn’t very compassionate care. No wonder they’re there and we’re here. 
 
However, you also mentioned health care — health patients and heart operations. I want to indicate to you that in 
the last year at the Plains hospital here in Regina, Saskatchewan, the heart operations each week have increased 
from 12 to approximately 20. Each week. 
 
You asked about the waiting list. You asked about the waiting list. I have set up a committee of the administrators 
of the hospitals, of the heads of medical staff in the hospitals, to sit down and advise this government how we can 
best address the waiting list in Saskatoon. So that would be your most . . . (inaudible) . . . We have put in, in the 
last budget, 200 new positions in health, trying to pick up that dastardly deficit of bodies that you left us with your 
potash mine buying. 
 
Also, the committee has come forward with suggestions. Seventy-four new positions have been put into health 
services since the committee suggested it. Now, if that isn’t a commitment to patient care, I don’t know what is. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 

 
Uranium City Hospital 

 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question also to the Minister of  



November 23, 1983 
 

151 

Health, and it’s regarding the situation in the Athabasca Basin, or the hospital at Uranium City. Could the minister 
indicate at this time what the plans are for the hospital in Uranium City? Are your plans to maintain that hospital, 
and is there a resident doctor manning that hospital at this time? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Yes. Thank you very much. Uranium City is certainly a concern of mine, as it is of 
yours, and if you will remember, I think this summer visited Uranium City to review the hospital and assess the 
needs of the people in that area. Since that time, as you know, we did have doctors under contract at Uranium City. 
I can recall you asking the question — I think it was last year about the same time — and we worked out a contract 
in which Uranium City had adequate medical services all through the year. And let me tell you, that was no easy 
task in the time when the town was turning down, but the people of Uranium City have been afforded the health 
care that they deserve. 
 
There have been some problems in the operation of the hospital, and I must congratulate Mr. Elmer Schwartz, who 
is the administrator of the City Hospital in Saskatoon. He has lent some expertise and some consultation to the 
administration of the hospital. 
 
In regards to the doctor, I can assure you, hon. member, that we are looking at this. At the present time there is a 
locum in there that is going to serve for the six weeks, and that my department, along with the people in Uranium 
City, are certainly looking at addressing this need. And your basic question — is the hospital going to close down? 
— I can say at the present time there is no decision to close the hospital at Uranium City. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — One short supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could you indicate whether there is a full-time 
doctor on staff at the Uranium City Hospital at this time? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — My indication, in just checking the other day, hon. member, is that a locum is gone in 
for six weeks. Now, you know, probably better than I, the distance is trying to get people in there and so on. But I 
would say that there is certainly arrangements made. Whether the man is there right at this minute. I can’t give you 
that assurance, but the arrangement is made for six weeks at Uranium City of a locum. And I give you the 
assurance that I and my department will be doing all within our power to assure that medical services are 
maintained to Uranium City throughout the coming year. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. THOMPSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Health. As you have indicated, there 
is a doctor on staff for six weeks. I think that six weeks is pretty rough when you consider the isolation that them 
folks are living up in the Athabasca Basin to know that they only have a doctor for six weeks. My new question, 
Mr. Minister, is regarding the new hospital that we have in La Loche which has not had a resident doctor since 
July. It’s a fairly large hospital serving a community of 2,400 people and a fairly large area, and it has not had a 
resident doctor since July.; Could you indicate at this time what your plan . . . And also by way of information, Mr. 
Speaker, that hospital is manned for 12 hours a week — 12 hours a week it’s manned by a doctor. Could you 
indicate what the plans are to straighten out that serious situation that we have in that hospital at La Loche? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I can assure you that we are certainly looking at whatever possibilities, Dr. 
Hoffer was there, as you well know, for many years, and he did leave this year. we are looking at ways that we can 
attract doctors into the North. I realize that a six-week locum is a short duration, but I give you my assurance that 
we will do all we can. I remember distinctly discussing this with you last year. And I’ve told you that we would 
come up with a solution. And we did come up with a solution where three doctors from Saskatoon served Uranium 
City. We are working on these things. You know as well as I do that to have people locate in the North is no easy 
task. But I can give you my assurance, Mr. Member, that we are  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
doing all we can . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . Did you have something to say? We are doing all we can to satisfy 
these medical needs. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could you indicate to the House, Mr. Minister, where the 
referrals are going to from Uranium City. Where are the maternity cases going from La Loche? Where are the 
maternity cases going? And where are all the medivacs going from the situation that we have in La Loche? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I believe that La Loche is being serviced out of the Meadow Lake clinic at this 
point in time. And certainly any serious coming out of Uranium City or La Loche, as you well know, will be taken 
by air ambulance into Saskatoon if that’s what’s warranted. But I understand that La Loche is being serviced out of 
the Meadow Lake clinic at this time. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You have indicated that the medivacs re being transferred to 
Saskatoon. I indicate to you that when you have a hospital of that size that does not have a resident doctor, and it 
has a doctor for 12 hours a week — 12 hours — who in charge of the hospital and the patients for the rest of the 
week when there is no doctors in there? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Well, I want to indicate, and you well know coming from the North that we have some 
of the most dedicated people as our health nurses in northern Saskatchewan, and in many cases those people have 
to deal with very serious situations. I want to congratulate those people because there are very few losses of life or 
serious situations developed from their judgement. They make those judgement calls. If they need to get out then 
the air ambulance and the medivac will get them out to Saskatoon, or to Meadow Lake, or to Prince Albert, 
wherever those people can get the vest service possible for what they need. You may condemn those people, and 
may say they need a doctor, but I want to tell you from my visits to the North from seeing those girls that are in 
those nursing stations I have nothing but praise and congratulations for their dedication to Saskatchewan and to the 
health care of people in the North. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I never indicated at any time, nor are we discussing, a 
nursing station. We are discussing a hospital, not a nursing station, and let me tell you Mr. Minister . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The member is making a speech. If you have a question will you get directly to 
it. 
 
HON. MR. THOMPSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker, and by way of information could the minister indicate 
if there are other hospitals in this province other than the La Loche hospital and the Uranium City hospital that are 
not manned or serviced by a resident doctor? Could you indicate if there are other hospitals in this province other 
than La Loche and Uranium City that are not serviced by a resident doctor? And I am talking about hospitals, not 
nursing stations. 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Speaker, I couldn’t name offhand the various hospitals. I think the member realizes 
that I just want to indicate though that I do believe that you were casting some aspersions upon the nurses in 
northern Saskatchewan, because you kept saying, “a doctor for only 12 hours” — only 12 hours. I want to tell you 
that as I have said before, there are areas and you know it well coming from that area where there are not doctors 
there at all times, but there are dedicated people, dedicated nurses, dedicated community health nurses, good 
community liaison people that I believed are looking after the heath care of the people in that area. So I take 
exception when I hear you insinuating that these people aren’t doing their job because they work for my 
department, and I’m proud of the people who deliver health services in the province. 



November 23, 1983 
 

153 

 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. THOMPSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. You have not answered the question. You are fudging 
around the issue. Not once have I indicated that we didn’t have dedicated nurses in our hospitals. We are very 
fortunate in Northern Saskatchewan that we have dedicated nurses because we don’t have doctors. Your 
department has not provided doctors. 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Does the member have a question? Would you get directly to it? 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m having trouble with the minister to get an answer out of 
him. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: do you not agree that we should have residents doctors manning them 
hospitals in Uranium City and La Loche at all times? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I have told you as plainly as I can tell you that we are doing everything possible to try 
and get doctors into those hospitals. You know that from past experience. You indicate that in some situations the 
nurses are not doing an adequate job. I take extreme exception to that. But I give you my assurance that we are 
doing all we can to have doctors in the hospitals of northern Saskatchewan. And I will also take notice of your 
question — and I will supply you with that answer. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would you not agree, Mr. Minister . . . You indicated 
that you doing everything possible to get a resident doctor up there. Would you not agree that your department has 
made an agreement to service the hospitals at Uranium City and La Loche from Southern doctors, the one at La 
Loche from Meadow Lake, and that you are continuing on that course rather than getting a resident doctor into that 
community? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Oh, duddle fuddle. Let me indicate to you that as a rational individual you would 
realize that probably the optimum is to have a resident doctor. But you know as well as I do, if you can’t get a 
resident doctor, the next best thing is to have doctors on contract that will go in and look after hospitals. That’s 
what we did last year. That, I believe, was quite satisfactory. We have Meadow Lake doctors going up there now. 
 
I think you know as well as I do, and if you will honestly admit, that we are doing all we possibly can. And I assure 
you once again, we will continue to do that so that the people of northern Saskatchewan receive adequate medical 
care. What more you ask, I don’t know. But that’s the commitment I give to you, and I give to the people of 
northern Saskatchewan, and I give to the members of this Assembly. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. And by way of information, Mr. Minister, only 90 miles away 
from La Loche there is a large hospital with three resident doctors. Why would you not have the hospital at La 
Loche served by those doctors, rather than flying the doctors up from Meadow Lake to service La Loche, and all 
referrals, medivacs, and maternity cases, instead of going to the large hospital at Ile-a-la-Crosse or going to 
Meadow Lake, where we have three resident doctors only half the distance from Meadow Lake? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Mr. Member, you know as well as I do, in many cases the tenure of doctors in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse was about three months. In fact, I met a lady up there that was pregnant and had nine different 
doctors during her pregnancy. Now let me indicate to you that we will look at any type of situation to best handle 
the delivery of health care services in the North. If you have some suggestions, I ask you, as an MLA representing 
those people, come forward with a suggestion. I would even work along with you to try and solve this problem. 
 

Hospital Services at La Ronge 



 
November 23, 1983 
 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question also to the Minister of Health. The question, Mr. 
Speaker, is related to a very important matter. It’s related to a much-needed service, an essential service, and I’m 
speaking of the La Ronge hospital facility, and a nursing care home. The minister is aware, the government of this 
province is aware, that a major project proposal was already approved by the former administration in 1982. So 
proceed with that proposal. Proceed with that project. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. YEW: — Can the minister now confirm that they will proceed, and approve this much needed facility for the 
people of La Ronge, and the people of the surrounding communities of La Ronge? 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Let me just indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, I think it would be very interesting to check 
the date of the promise of the hospital to La Ronge. I think you would find, Mr. Speaker, that that hospital was 
promised very close to the time of the April election in ‘82 and perhaps in ‘78, and I wouldn’t doubt even in ‘75. 
But I want to tell you, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you the true facts, that in the last ten years, over the last ten years, 
the government opposite spent 2 million a year on hospitals outside of Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
I want to also indicate to you, Mr. Speaker, that in the 18 months of the Devine government since I’ve been the 
Minister of Health, we have put $35 million into rural hospitals in Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — I have met with the people from La Ronge, as I have met with many other people in the 
province of Saskatchewan. I know that they have a desire for a hospital, as do many other communities. And I can 
tell you with the track record of the Devine government over the last 18 months that as things go on, and as the 
economy improves because of the good action of my colleague in the oil business, and my friend in industry and 
commerce, and the Minister of Agriculture, that this province will see, not a moratorium, but construction of 
hospitals, and nursing home beds in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT 
 

Family Violence 
 
HON. MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, the incidence of family violence, and in particular wife beating, is of major 
concern to everyone. The physical and psychological damage inflicted upon the battered wife is well known to 
everyone in this House. The effect on children who are exposed to this violent environment can be overwhelming. 
But more often than not this type of violence is largely ignored, and set aside as a domestic dispute. Very often the 
incident goes unreported and is quickly forgotten. 
 
This government believes wife beating is not simply a domestic quarrel to be cast aside, and ignored. We believe it 
is serious, and violent crime, just as serious as is common assault or assault between strangers. 
 
We therefore have taken some dramatic initiatives to ensure domestic violence is treated for what it truly is — a 
violent crime. The provisions of the Criminal Code as it relates to assaults must be enforced. To this end I recently 
instructed the director of public prosecutions in the Justice Department to press for harsher sentences in cases 
involving wife battering. Only when we begin to recognize the serious nature of this crime can we come to grips 
with it. 



November 23, 1983 
 

155 

 
I have further instructed my officials not to withdraw charges except in the most exceptional circumstances. In fact, 
the final decision on whether to withdraw charges now rests with the Crown not the victim as was the case in the 
past. We believe these initiatives will act as a strong deterrent to those who would otherwise abuse their spouse. 
The threat of conviction is often enough for a sobering second thought before a criminal act takes place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am happy to say that women’s groups and interested groups throughout the province have reacted 
very favourably to these initiatives and the initiatives were long overdue. However, one major drawback in coming 
to grips with the question of wife beating is that there are as yet no reliable statistics available. There are no 
separate statistics available on the federal level on domestic violence. Traditionally wife beating is included in the 
broader category of assaults, and no breakdown is available. Without reliable statistics we cannot realistically hope 
to eradicate this reprehensible and violent form of assault from our society. 
 
With this in mind, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to announce to this House and the people of Saskatchewan that I have 
instructed my departmental officials to put into place a reporting mechanism that would allow for the compiling of 
separate statistics on wife-beating cases. Only when we have hard, reliable statistics can we begin to deal with this 
serious problem in a meaningful and comprehensive way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of categories of statistics I have instructed my officials to establish. Some of them 
are: the number of complaints, the number of charges laid, the number of charges not proceeded with, and the 
reason for the dropping of charges in each case. It is my view, Mr. Speaker, that those statistics will also help us get 
the geographical indication of the seriousness of the problem and location of the problem. 
 
These are the kinds of questions for which we need answers, and by gathering statistics in these categories we will 
be able to come to grips with this social problem. We will then be able to properly allocate the resources for such 
needed facilities as transition houses, treatment for the offender as well as for the battered spouse. We hope to have 
this statistical mechanism in place by December of this year. 
 
I have expressed the government’s concern over this issue to our police forces at a recent meeting in Saskatoon 
with the chiefs and police commissions of the police forces across the province. I have asked for and received their 
full co-operation in dealing with this very serious problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe these initiatives when taken together represent a responsive and realistic approach to a 
situation that has been neglected for far too long. Wife beating is a serious crime, and it should be treated as such. 
The penalty should reflect society’s abhorrence of this crime. Mr. Speaker, various groups have expressed their 
support for this kind of initiative, and I know we have the support of the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a brief comment in respect to the minister’s statement. 
 
I would like, first of all, to indicate that wife beating, of course, is a very serious problem in society, and I would 
like to say that wife beating and child neglect is related to two significant problems in society. One is the abuse of 
alcohol, and I think that this government of this day has taken the contrary position in the liquor advertising and the 
effects that it has in increasing the abuse of the use of alcohol. 
 
The second thing, I want to say: that it’s directly related to employment. I look at figures here in respect to 
unemployment and child in care and the problems associated with it, and I find that in  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
1981, the unemployment rate was 3.9 per cent. Children in care — 2,132 in September of 1983, we look at the 
figures; there’s unemployment at 6.6 per cent, and there are now 2, 549 children in care. The association of the 
problems are directly related to the abuse of alcohol, and the government has taken a contrary position in 
increasing the consumption of alcohol. They have failed to meet the essential factor of increasing employment, and 
as a consequence is that crises arise in the family. 
 
I want to say that I welcome the announcement by the minister, but I question the sincerity of the government 
because I read here, “Delays, lack of money hurting three new transition houses.” The transition house in La 
Ronge: in early 1982, her group was promised about $250,000 in a federal grant for capital cost. The former NDP 
government promised to guarantee the houses . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The hon. member knows that during this discussion in ministerial statements 
you can only lead with the items that are directly associated with the statement, and I would ask you to do that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I want to say, then, directly on the subject is that one of the areas, Mr. Speaker, and I 
believe I was coming directly to the relationship, and that is in respect to the assistance to wives. There are three 
transition houses: one at La Ronge where we had promised to increase funding and it has been denied; we had 
another transition house in La Loche and that has been not funded; and the final one is in Yorkton. 
 
I think the sincerity of the government is lacking in respect to the announcement by the minister. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitutions in Committees 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The member opposite asked what we’ll do Monday. We’ll do the same thing Monday 
as we do Tuesday. We’ll deal with the throne speech debate. 
 
I would like to move, seconded by the member from Meadow Lake, by leave of the Assembly: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Weiman be substituted for that of Mr. Sutor on the list of members 

comprising the standing committee on public accounts. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by Mr. McLeod, by leave of the Assembly: 
 
 That the name of Mr. Sutor be substituted for that of Mr. Weiman on the list of members 

comprising the standing committee on public accounts. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 



November 23, 1983 
 

157 

 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in reply which was moved by Mr. Schmidt. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to rise in this debate on the throne speech 
which was read in this Assembly a couple of days ago. It’s the first opportunity for the members of the opposition 
to get a chance to have a look at what the so-called blueprint is for the coming year and for the future — the vision 
that the Conservative government has for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it’s fair to say, after reading very closely the throne speech and realizing that it is a review and a rehash of 
last March’s throne speech, that there is indeed very little to be excited about. There is very little vision or future 
that can be found in the throne speech that was delivered in this Assembly. 
 
I’d like to also, before I get into the main part of my remarks, congratulate the new Lieutenant Governor who did 
an excellent job of reading what has to be a speech that was in fact very difficult to read, lacking in substance, and 
great on length. But, Mr. Speaker, I think that all members would join with me in congratulating him on a job well 
done. 
 
I also appreciated very much, at the evening in his speech that he gave at the Centre of the Arts, his sense of 
humour and good spirit. We look forward to working with him and carrying on the long tradition that I believe 
helps to make Canada and Saskatchewan one of the most stable countries in existence in the world at this time. 
 
I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the new cabinet ministers — all of them, all nine of them 
— along with the new Legislative Secretaries. It brings to, I believe, 37 the total number of Legislative Secretaries 
and cabinet ministers, and that is indeed a great number of individuals. In fact the joke around my constituency is 
that the definition of a loser is anyone who doesn’t get into Grant Devine’s cabinet. I would just like to say that that 
joke is becoming more and more relevant as more and more people from the back benches flood in and take over 
as cabinet ministers in this government. 
 
One of the areas that I would like to spend a little time on, Mr. Speaker, is the whole area of one myth that seems to 
be around about Conservative governments in general, but which is quickly disappearing as we go into the second 
year and in fact approach the third year of this government’s term in office, and that is the myth that Conservative 
governments somehow are able to run a leaner, trimmer, more efficient government. I think at the time of the last 
election there were a good number of people in Saskatchewan who believed they were electing such a government. 
Since the election we’ve heard a great deal of talk and chatter from members opposite about this new government 
— this efficient government. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s all it’s been, is talk. 
 
I think that anyone who doubts this statement should just look at the last budget that was read in this Assembly — 
a record-sized budget, $3,125 billion spent by this government which in fact was a 10 per cent or more than 10 per 
cent increase over the previous budget. or anyone who is on a school board or a hospital board and were told that 
the increases in grants, or R.M., or urban municipality, that the grants could only be in the area of 5, or 6, or, in 
some cases, 4 per cent, have a hard time understanding how government spending can increase by 10 per cent, and 
yet grants for that party operations can only be increased by 4, or 5, or 6 per cent. Mr. Speaker, I say that so much 
for inflation minus one in the province of Saskatchewan. It is nothing but a myth and anyone who believes that this 
government intends to cut back in spending need only look at the deficit budgets we now find ourselves in. 
 
The facts of this Conservative government are quite different. Instead of a lean, trim government we have a 
bloated, extravagant, incompetent government, which has a very difficult time in  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
dealing with the dollars that the taxpayers are paying in terms of income and education and other forms of hidden 
taxes, that this government is so inclined to collect. 
 
At the same time as the Conservative government is spending record amounts of dollars, we find that in the area of 
health, which was a theme during question period today, that health spending is depleted, that education is not 
getting the grants it needs. During question period the minister went on at great lengths telling us how he was 
setting up committees, telling us how he was studying the problem with waiting lists in the province, but little to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan what he would do in order to get the funding that he needs to build the needed 
hospitals in places like Regina, and Saskatoon, and La Loche, and Maidstone, and the list goes on and on. 
 
But I think one of the things that the people of the province are quickly coming to realize is that this government is 
very much involved in wasting tax dollars, and is very much involved in double standards. And the examples are 
many. 
 
I want to put onto the record today just a few of the examples. I don’t want to take a great deal of time because 
most of them are well-known to the people of Saskatchewan. But I’m just not so sure that members in the back 
benches haven’t been brainwashed by the ministers in cabinet into actually believing some of the lines that they are 
now putting around. 
 
I think one of the areas that we should start at in terms of the double standard, and we shouldn’t start at the bottom 
of the scale, but we should start in the Premier’s office. Since the election 18 months ago the staff in the Premier’s 
office has increased to more than 100 people. Now that’s 100 individuals, political advisers and others, who are 
paid very high salaries to attempt to keep the Premier and his cabinet people out of trouble with the people of 
Saskatchewan. And we have a Premier who wanders around the province talking about restraint and talking about 
how we should be restraining ourselves, but yet he in his own office is doing something quite different. 
 
One hundred people now work, or more than 100 people, now work for the Premier in his office. Not only has his 
staff increased greatly in numbers, but the amount spent in the Executive Council office, or the Premier’s office, 
has increased by 56 per cent since he took office a short 18 months ago. I believe that even government 
back-benchers find this kind of two-faced performance unbelievable when it comes to talking about restraint on 
one hand, and spending very large amounts in the Premier’s office. 
 
Members may say, “but the election was included in that budget and that’s why the increase was 56 per cent.” But 
let me assure you that the comparisons are made between March of ‘82 and March of ‘83, and that the election 
budget which would show an even more drastic increase was November of 1982, and that these are direct 
comparisons, and it’s very obvious that the spending in the Premier’s office is right out of hand. The total amount 
that was spent this year in fact, in the Premier’s office, is $6.8 million. 
 
Many people are well aware as well, that the amounts being paid to these special advisers, political advisers, range 
from $300, $350 to $410 a day. and this was a point that was brought out during estimates last year. and what those 
salaries have increased to, well, we’ll have to wait until the budget of March to find out what the horror story now 
is in terms of taxpayer’s money being wasted in an attempt to keep this government in power at all costs. I think 
it’s a free and easy approach to the taxpayer’s money which certainly doesn’t stop at the Premier’s door, but carries 
on in many other departments. 
 
I was interested on the news last night that a news story which was carried indicated that a new jet aircraft had been 
put into service to fly the new expanded cabinet around. We now have three jet aircraft in Saskatchewan or a 50 
per cent increase, and that about matches what they will need for the nine extra cabinet ministers which they have 
appointed. Now it’s my  



November 23, 1983 
 

159 

understanding that a used Cheyenne jet of that vintage costs the government about $500,000. and the costs of 
operating would be in the hundreds of dollars per hour. So now we have another number. It’s not costing us $3 
million a year for this new expanded cabinet, but we now have to include a jet aircraft on top of that which will add 
another million or two, I suspect. We’ll check the record for that, and in estimates we will be making more of that 
story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that the restraint, or the lack of restraint, did not end at the Premier’s door but went on to 
other areas of the government, and I would just like to comment on another area where we saw bonuses of $3,000 
being paid to 500 of the top bureaucrats and political advisers who already earned over $50,000 a year or more. 
This item alone, Mr. Speaker, adds $1.5 million to the debt of this province because that’s where it goes. It’s 
included somewhere in that $537 million that the taxpayers now owe to the banks in New York and the lending 
agencies of the world. 
 
I think that the example of them all which sets out how this government is treating one group of people with 
disdain and another with a very soft had has to be the increases of the 16 highly paid bureaucrats who are already 
earning in excess of $59,000 last year. Even the member from Moose Jaw South has indicated in the press in the 
Moose Jaw Times Herald that he, too, is upset with the fact that this government seems to have a double standard. I 
must say to that member, although he is not here today, that I congratulate him for having the stamina and foresight 
to stand up to 55 other members and make a point very strongly. He also, as well, Mr. Speaker, is the first member 
of the government who has spoken on the throne speech and brought out some interesting statistics on nursing 
homes in the province. I would just like to congratulate that individual. 
 
The most glaring example has to be the Conservative government’s treatment of one of their deputy ministers, a 
person by the name of Otto Cutts, who came to this government on May 5 of 1983. He was paid $61,000 to carry 
on in that department. Now his department was changed a little later, a couple of weeks later, and with it went an 
increase of $11,000 when the title was changed from Minister of Government Services to the Minister of Supply 
and Services, Mr. Speaker, that is an increase of 17 per cent, and that $11,000, Mr. Speaker, amounts to more than 
the person who is earning minimum wage earns in a year. That $11,000 amounts to about $2,000 more than a 
minimum wage earner earns in the province of Saskatchewan under the restraint program at the other end. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the working people of the province who are being told that 5 per cent increases are the norm and 
that’s all they can get are becoming more and more upset with this government’s attitude towards double 
standards. We have seen the minister, in an attempt to console people on his budgeting process, go out and talk to 
various groups and try to get them involved in the deficit budgeting process. It was interesting that this year a few 
of the groups who had gone along with that program in the 1982 budget told him that they wanted no part of it. 
They wanted no part of a deficit budget, and I believe that in the years to come all groups will say that that process, 
where there is no input but only an explanation of how bad the budget is going to be, is not one of consultation but 
one of trickery and deceit on the part of the Minister of Finance. 
 
One other area, Mr. Speaker, where we have a little discrepancy and a little double standards is in the case of Mr. 
Dennis Ball, and the members in this Assembly will know Mr. Dennis Ball who was hired at $35,000 a year 
retainer, plus $500 a day. Now the government decided that this wasn’t enough for that part-time position, and in a 
position that paid a maximum of 55,000 under the New Democratic government, he got a little increase to $95,000 
a year. My colleague from Regina Centre has mentioned, and other, that that pay salary amounts to more than the 
vice-president of the United States. 
 
I think it’s interesting that a person who works for a part-time job for the government is now earning more than any 
court judge in the province of Saskatchewan, is earning more than any cabinet minister and I believe, unless the 
Premier has raised his salary, in fact is earning more  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
than the Premier of the province. Mr. Speaker, I say again: so much for the Conservative government’s 5 per cent 
wage guide-lines when it comes to senior civil servants and bureaucrats in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as well, Mr. Ball still has the opportunity to practise law, to carry on his law practice on the 100 or 200 days 
which he isn’t working for the government, to supplement his meagre income, and I’m sure that the government 
will help him out if in his time of need he does not have enough cash in his pocket to pay his bills. Because it 
seems that this government, when they have someone coming to them with a problem and they’re earning 100,000 
or 150,000 a year, seem to open the treasury very quickly to deal with their problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make a comment on the crown corporations and the direction that they are heading in terms 
of getting the involvement of very, very (I suppose you could say) incompetent cabinet ministers off the boards of 
directors. And I’m not sure why the strategy of this government, what it is, to change the boards of directors: 
whether it’s because they cannot find competent people within the government to do the job, or whether it’s to hide 
in fact behind an individual the great increases in utility rates which we have seen and will continue to see over the 
coming years. 
 
The promise and the recommendation of the Wolff Commission and the Wolff report was to take away from the 
politics that might and could become involved in the crown corporations, and the Conservatives announced this as 
a depoliticization of the crown corporations. At first glance it may look impressive and it may look important, until 
you see the kinds of people and the names of the people who have been associated with directing and looking after 
our crown corporations. They include former Conservative MLAs, and former Conservative candidates, and 
presidents of the Conservative party, and fund-raisers for the Conservative party, and vice-presidents of the federal 
Conservative party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that this guise is little more than a ploy of the government to attempt to cover up what will be 
outrageous mismanagement within the crown corporations and outrageous increases in utility rates, which we will 
be seeing in the future. And I say, putting these kind of political people in charge of the crown corporations is like 
putting a skunk in charge of the hen-house. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — It’s not the total story that is being told here about crown corporations. We have seen 
the record profit of 1981, under an NDP administration, of $126 million go down and down and down until in 
1982 we have a record deficit in the crown corporations of $115 million. I believe that the Conservative 
government in Saskatchewan is bent on destroying the crown corporations, to put for sale as many as they deem 
necessary to fulfil election promises made in the heat of an election, as well as to attempt to balance a budget that is 
getting out of hand and is about to affect the credit rating that Standard & Poor’s in New York are now talking 
about reviewing. I predict that if another deficit budget is to come into this Assembly the people who borrowed the 
money to back up these deficits will look very closely at whether or not the credit rating we now hold will continue 
in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention as well that the appointment of the 12 crown corporation heads, which was 
done a couple of weeks ago, will cost us a great deal as well, because while in the past we have had ministers 
sitting on these boards who were not paid extra we now will have to pay in the area of $1,800 a month retainer to 
each one of them. We will have to pay up to $300 a day for each day they work on crown corporation business. 
These appointees will cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan at least one-half million dollars a year, which will be 
directly applied to each and every power bill in the province. Here, again, I believe the government is ducking its 
duty in dealing with the problems of utility rates here in the province of Saskatchewan. 



November 23, 1983 
 

161 

 
I think the ultimate example of double standards has to be in the appointment of nine new cabinet ministers, Mr. 
Speaker. We have gone from what was one of the smallest cabinets in Canada very quickly to the third largest in 
the country. The stories are around about people who have very little to do during the day — the minister of 
hailstones, who everyone is wondering what his job is. In fact, the story about the minister of hailstones is that the 
staff won’t let him look out the window in the morning because he wouldn’t have anything to do in the afternoon. 
And this is the job of that new minister. I’m not sure how he can keep up with all of the adjustments that he has to 
do, and all the driving that he has to do to check crops and check how much hail that has happened over the 
summer. 
 
I think that this double standard, where we have the largest government, the largest cabinet, and the largest number 
of legislative secretaries in the history of the province is dishonest and is a disservice to the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We in the New Democratic Party are not the only ones who have been talking about the double standards 
associated with this government. I’d like to quote from a little article that appeared in the Premier’s own press a 
little while ago, a couple of months ago, and it’s titled “A Time for Restraint.” It goes on to say: 
 
 The Conservative government is being more than generous when it comes to salaries for civil 

servants. Just recently it was revealed in the legislature that salaries for senior civil servants and 
political staff has been increased by 6 per cent to a maximum of $3,000, retroactive to April 1st. 

 
It’s hard to visualize how a government that has frozen minimum wage for two years can be so generous to those at 
the top of the income scale and those at the opposite end find themselves increasingly difficult to make ends meet 
at a rate of $4.25 an hour, having their wages frozen. It would seem this is the time for our government to show the 
true meaning of restraint rather than a double standard restraint policy for low-income people, another for 
high-income people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this double standard concept that we have talked a great deal about is not our idea. It comes as 
well from the Premier’s own newspaper in Estevan and from another article that I would like to quote from, from 
the Star-Phoenix, and this one is dated the 22nd of October and is called, “A Mixed Message on Restraint.” It says: 
 
 So far, the public perception is one of mixed messages over restraint. It’s one of many coming out 

of Regina recently, as the government has seen fit to bestow large salary increases on a number of 
its senior bureaucrats while telling others they have to settle for 5 per cent limits and fight against 
inflation. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that these kinds of editorials would indicate that it’s not only the eight-member 
opposition who are talking about double standards, but each and every press, even as far away as the Toronto 
Globe and Mail, are talking about the double standards that are associated with this government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — One other clipping that I just picked up by accident today is dated October 8, and it 
again comes from the Star-Phoenix, a paper that is not known to be a great friend of the New Democratic Party by 
any means. But they as well have picked up on the theme and the title is “Restraint at 17 Per Cent and 5.” And they 
go on to point out how some highly paid bureaucrats get 17 per cent while those on minimum wage are frozen at 
zero. And they say in part: 
 
 At worst, it’s a display of a double standard that Saskatchewan people will find hard  



 
November 23, 1983 
 

to swallow. 
 
And I believe that it’s the first time actually since the 1929 to 1934 era that double standards like that have been in 
place in this province. And I believe as well that the people of Saskatchewan, if they believe their government is 
trying hard, will give their governments a chance. And that has been proven with Tommy Douglas, who was here 
for 20 years, and Allan Blakeney, who was premier for 11. 
 
But if you compare that to the Conservative philosophy and the double standards, the only time they were in power 
in the past was the one term from 1929 to ‘34. And my colleague from Athabasca, I believe, is going to go into 
some detail in that era of government and make some very interesting comparisons. So I will not dwell on that 
point. And the members opposite say, “Good.” And I can imagine well why they would not want to dwell on that 
era of history because it’s not a very proud one, the last time that we had a Conservative government. 
 
But I predict that history will judge this government with its double standards towards the poor, towards people in 
nursing homes, and its attitude towards all oil companies, in a similar manner. Because I believe that right-wing 
governments, whether they’re the Anderson government or whether they’re the Reagan government or whether it’s 
the Devine government, treat people the same. And they believe that the old trickle-down theory of economics is 
the one that should be in place in Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the whole concept that we had elected a lean and trim government is anything but true. And the 
final example that I would like to point out is the example of the four-year-olds who were cut out of the dental 
program. That program, which cost about $600,000 a year to include 7,000 children in the dental program, was 
cancelled last year. The provincial cabinet expansion cost the government $3 million a year. 
 
These kinds of priorities, Mr. Speaker, where we can afford to buy another jet aircraft, where we can afford to pay 
civil servants great amounts of money, will not go unnoticed by the people of Saskatchewan, and we will do our 
part to make sure that in fact they do not go unnoticed. 
 
I think that the most disturbing of the things that the Conservative government has done is to not only give out 
great deals of money to the people who are least in need and probably the least deserving, is how they have treated 
a number of people who are in need of health care and in need of social programs. 
 
Again, I mentioned during question period the lack of program direction by the Minister of Health, and I would 
encourage him to stand up on behalf of the people who are on waiting lists in cabinet, to see whether some of the 
100 million in tax reduction — the tax free royalty structure that has been set up for the oil companies — that even 
half of that money would be redirected to the Department of Health. 
 
I think that he could even do it on very political terms. He could talk to the Minister of Energy and Mines and tell 
him that “Look, 5,000 people on waiting lists in Saskatoon, your home city, is not a good idea.” Why don’t we 
shift some of that money, even for political reasons, to attempt to save some of the political MLAs from Saskatoon 
who represent the Conservative Party? Because they will have a very difficult time in a number of Saskatoon seats 
if that little problem of 5,000 on a waiting list for a hospital bed is not solved in the very near future. 
 
I mentioned during question period the issue of the General Hospital expansion. I want to comment again that this 
$21 million, which was to have been spent on rebuilding and expanding the General Hospital, would have meant 
not only the waiting lists would have shrunk, but 250 people would have been working this winter rather than 
being on the welfare lines. 
 
I would encourage the Minister of Health to go back to cabinet and relook at his program and  



November 23, 1983 
 

163 

see if he can’t get money for that program, as well as for the building of the new rehab centre. That program was 
set up in conjunction with the workers’ compensation board and Telemiracle, which would have allowed for a $45 
million project. The plans were in place, the model was there, the land is there. What the minister is saying is that 
he now wants to study it more, after being in government and being the Minister of Health for two years. 
 
And while last year the minister could bluster and carry on and run down the previous government — no one 
expected anything in the first year. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, that two years hence, when the minister is still 
talking about studying such things as the rehab centre and regeneration of hospitals, his story is becoming more and 
more and more empty, and people are beginning to wonder whether this minister is really in fact in charge of his 
department. 
 
I would like to mention as well the development of the Saskatoon hospitals — the city Hospital, St. Paul’s 
Hospital, and the University Hospital. In 1981 a report was begun under the previous government, known as the 
report of the joint Saskatoon hospital facility planning committee. This report was given to the minister in June of 
1982, and since then he has done nothing to implement the recommendations of this report. In fact what he said in 
question period today is that he had no intention of implementing the recommendations of this report, which called 
for expansion at the City Hospital and St. Paul’s and University to increase the number of beds to 1,521. And he 
has done little, or nothing other than to announce that he is going to consult more and study more, and his lines are 
becoming very, very repetitious. I would encourage the minister, if he hasn’t got a copy of this report, if he’s lost 
his copy, he can get one in the library, or I’ll pass him mine. The recommendations are there to deal with the 
problem of Saskatoon. If you’re incapable of dealing with it, then you should allow some other member who can 
read this report to go ahead and plan the hospitals and get them on the drawing board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the area of hospital care I think it’s obvious that we have a problem in the cities, but it doesn’t stop 
there. The town of Maidstone and the town of La Ronge are looking for new hospitals and have had nothing from 
this government. The town of Shaunavon, in meeting with the board chairman, is telling me that the average daily 
census for that hospital has been cut back by two, even though the patients in the hospital has increased slightly. In 
that way the government is cutting back a good deal, and they are talking about running a $60,000 deficit in order 
to pick up the slack that has been cut back by this government. 
 
The list goes on in that Department of Health. Nursing home rates which have increased by 14 per cent in the last 
year will now increase every three months as announced by the minister — 14 per cent, while everyone else is 
talking about five per cent — and that’s unless you are on minimum wage, or in a nursing home, or some such able 
position to defend yourself against this government. And at a time when the government has cuts of $100 million 
for oil companies, the rate increases for nursing homes goes on and on and on. They will not end but will increase 
now every three months. the irony of this is that every time the federal government increases the guaranteed 
income supplement (that’s the federal government, this terrible federal government we have), the member for 
Indian Head-Wolseley will dip into their accounts and take exactly what that increase has been. And I say that kind 
of treatment of the people in nursing homes should not be accepted. And I believe that that policy will have to be 
changed, Mr. Minister, if you intend to get re-elected and your government is to get re-elected. 
 
In terms of the area of social services, we had an announcement this week that the senior citizens advisory council 
was going to be restructured and changed. He claimed that this was being done in order to have input from seniors, 
and to affect and to give recommendations on what should be done in the area of senior citizens’ care. 
 
Well, I think if the Minister of Social Services were serious he would simply look at the fact that the Saskatchewan 
Income Plan, which pays out money to seniors who have no other income, has been frozen for the past two years. 
The Saskatchewan Income Plan which allows for $25 per individual per month, or $45 per couple per month, has 
not been increased since this  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
government came to power. That added to the list of minimum wage and other areas where these people with so 
much money has been frozen, I believe is inexcusable and would encourage the minister to do something about it. 
Others on the list of seniors would include free telephones, which was promised by this government, which is 
nowhere to be seen. 
 
And even members of their caucus are now beginning to say that this kind of treatment of our senior citizens is not 
to be accepted. Here, again, it’s the member for Moose Jaw South who has taken upon himself to correct the ways 
of his colleagues. In the Times Herald of this month on the 4th of November he placed an ad, on his own change I 
imagine, announcing that the provincial government home repair program is no longer in effect. This isn’t the 
government running this ad — this is a member of the Conservative caucus who is announcing for them that the 
home repair program is in fact cancelled in the province of Saskatchewan. I say this kind of treatment of the senior 
citizens will not go unnoticed. 
 
One other area, and it was talked about in a ministerial statement by the Justice minister today, has to do with wife 
beating and child abuse. and I will not go into a repetition of what was said here in the House today. But I would 
like the Minister of Justice to look closely at the relation and correlation of unemployment and incidents of wife 
battery or spouse battery and child abuse. I think that all sociologists would tell you that there’s a direct correlation, 
and one which the government should be interested in. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Are you saying the rich don’t do it? 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I’m saying that when people are forced out of work by the government, in particular, 
and the government plays a role in forcing people onto the welfare rolls, that the self-worth of those individuals, 
whether they are male or female, goes down. The incidence of family breakdown, wife battery, and child abuse 
goes up. 
 
In checking the unemployment rates in Saskatchewan, and your own statistics, we find that in September of 1981 
the unemployment rate in Saskatchewan at 3.9 per cent. The number of children who were in the care of the 
Minister of Social Services was 2,132. In September of 1982, when the unemployment rate had risen to 6 per cent, 
the number of children who had been taken out of the home by the Minister of social Services had increased to 
2,480. In September of 1983, when the unemployment rate had gone up to 6.6 per cent, the number of children 
who had been taken from their parents had increased to 2,549. 
 
I say it’s immoral and unjust for a government, and for a Minister of Social Services, to be so self-righteous about 
what he is doing and concerned about, while at the same time the number of children in care of the minister since 
September of ‘81 has increased by 20 per cent. 
 
I would also like to quote from a document which relates about transition houses which have been cancelled at a 
time when the government is saying how concerned they are about the plight of women who are finding 
themselves in very difficult home positions. This comes from the Leader-Post, dated November 14, and talks about 
the cancellation of a program in La Ronge. With your permission, Mr. Speaker, I will take just a moment to read 
briefly from this article. Under La Ronge transition house, the article says: 
 
 In early 1982, her group was promised about $250,000 in a federal grant for capital costs of a home. 

The former NDP government promised to guarantee the house’s operating expenses — the fiscal 
structure on which southern transition houses work. But the Conservative regime did not follow 
through and provide such operating money, thus the transition house never got off the ground. 

 
I would encourage the members opposite to look closely at the transition house in La Ronge, and if in fact they are 
serious that they put the money in to it at their next cabinet meeting. 



November 23, 1983 
 

165 

 
At La Loche the situation is similar. And from the article again: 
 
 Transition house organizers in La Loche are more discouraged about their plans — still frozen — to 

build a safe house. 
 
 Christine Janvier, president of the Dene Kwan Self Help Council and Housing Corporation of La 

Loche, the group planning for the home, said: “We’re not going anywhere,” in a telephone 
interview Tuesday. 

 
 The council had a written commitment from the NDP government for a women’s crisis centre but 

the money for the plans was cut by the Conservatives last spring. 
 
And yet another one, from Yorkton: 
 
 The Women in Crisis group is progressing slowly, since its inception last March, towards providing 

services for battered women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to point out that here again, even in the Department of Social Services, we have the 
double standard concept, and one which this government is going to have to deal with very quickly if they are to 
salvage the operation which the wheels have apparently begun to falloff. 
 
One other issue from the Department of Social Services has to do with the day care program in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The Minister of Social Services will know that a study done in 1981 indicated a number of 
constructive and a number of innovative changes that should take place in the day care programming in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That review which was done in 1981 included hearings throughout the province, 
included briefs from as money as 150 individuals and groups, and laid the groundwork for developing what would 
have been the most innovative day care system in all of Canada. But since this government has come to power we 
have heard nothing about that 1981 report, and I believe with good reason. Because I think this government is bent 
on doing away with the system of publicly owned and parent-controlled day care centres, and that they are looking 
very closely at profit-oriented privatisation of the day care system here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the word is that Kinder Care of Alabama is looking very closely at Saskatchewan and the 
government’s new policy of day care to see whether or not they can establish shop here and make some money on 
taking care of the children of this province. But I would like to warn the Conservative government that that plan 
will not go unchallenged by the NDP opposition, and that we will do everything in our power to point out how 
having two systems of day care, one for the rich and one for the poor, is unacceptable just as it in education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s obvious, having outlined a good number of problems in the Department of Social 
Services, that all is not well. and I think in closing I would just like to point out one other group in the health care 
area who is disturbed and finding it very difficult to deal with the problems of control and restraint in the 
Department of Health. In a brief that was submitted to the government this past fall from the Saskatchewan Union 
of Nurses, I would like to quote briefly from some of the problems that they see. On page 3 of that brief, SUN says 
in a couple of points: 
 
 (1)  71 per cent of a survey agreed that staffing is not adequate to provide a professional level of 

patient care. 
 
 (2) 77 per cent felt burnout is increasing. Burnout is the loss of ability to professionally perform 

job functions as a result of increasing job stress. 
 
The third point, Mr. Speaker, is: 



 
November 23, 1983 
 
 
 (3) 87 per cent found that the work-load was increasing, 
 
meaning that either the case-load is increasing, or the staff is not there to pick up the load. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they go on to talk about how the problem could be solved with funding of hospitals and nursing 
homes being changed. What they are talking about very directly is this government increasing funding to the health 
and social services area. And they say that insufficient funds are being allocated to the health needs of our senior 
citizens. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that the case being made by the opposition would indicate that we are concerned and 
disturbed that the money going to highly paid civil servants and oil companies is misdirected money, that more 
should go to health care, and I hope that the Minister of Health will look very closely at exerting more weight in 
cabinet in getting funds for those areas. 
 
I think after those comments it’s obvious that I will be voting against the motion we are presently debating. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it is indeed a pleasure and an honour to once 
more take part in the throne speech debate in this legislature of Saskatchewan. In the number of years I’ve had the 
opportunity to do this, and I think I’m always looking forward to the challenge to put forth my viewpoints as an 
MLA for the constituency of Indian Head-Wolseley, which I’m very proud to have represented since 1978; and 
also as a minister in the government of the Hon. Grant Devine in charge of a — and I say modestly — a rather 
important portfolio in this government. This portfolio, the portfolio of Health in the Devine government now 
stands for about one-third of expenditures of this government, a commitment to health care, a commitment beyond 
that of any other province in the Dominion of Canada. 
 
I had to listen with amazement to my colleague across the floor as he ended up his comments on staffing, Mr. 
Speaker, you were present during the debate during question period, and I believe that I laid it out very plainly and 
clearly, and I’m sure you did, sir, understood that the reason, Mr. Speaker, the reason that the SUN nurses are 
concerned about staffing, the reason that there are waiting lists in the province of Saskatchewan, are situations, Mr. 
Speaker, that have not developed since April of 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those situations started and were brought about by the decrease in 1976 of 400 positions from the 
Department of Health — 400 hands-on positions — so that the government opposite could go forward under 
greedy socialist take-over schemes of buying the potash industry in this province, putting potash ahead of health. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate to you since becoming the Minister of Health in the last 18 months, we have 
in the last budget put in 200 positions, and we will continue to staff up that terrible situation that we inherited, the 
total neglect of cancer, and the taking out of 400 positions. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I believe that you and the members of this legislature heard very clearly during the question 
period the defence by this government of our health expenditures. 
 
And I don’t want to take up too much time this afternoon, because I understand that our friends opposite are in a bit 
of a hurry to get off to their convention. And, Mr. Speaker, being a very accommodating individual, as I am, I will 
certainly cede to that request. Because, Mr. Speaker, from what I can see in the four or five days that we’ve been in 
this session, and from what I hear of members opposite’s activities during the summer — flying around 
Saskatchewan, perhaps questioning their leader, from what I can sense — I think that the convention of the NDP 
party is going to be one of the biggest fights that we’ve seen in the history of Saskatchewan for some  



November 23, 1983 
 

167 

time, and far be it from me to impede the boys from getting on with their scraps. 
 
I want to indicate to you . . . No, I just can envision this conference, this convention, Mr. Speaker. Because the first 
fight, the most interesting fight, is going to be for the presidency. they are going to have about three or four of them 
in the run for the presidency. And I can just see it now, Mr. Speaker. I can see Mr. Gross, and he will be followed 
by Reggie and the high rollers in the NDP. They are the guys who want to have a little hoop-la and a little fun. 
That’s one group. I don’t know who is in that group. 
 
Then there will be another group headed by Mr. Van Mulligen. Remember that gentleman, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Van 
Mulligen, the public servant that was non-political, today running for the leadership of the NDP Party. You know 
what he’ll be leading? He will be leading the Van Mulligen march, Mr. Speaker, and I can assure you as sure as 
you sit in that Chair that that march will start with the left foot forward. That will be the Van Mulligen march. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — And then, Mr. Speaker, non-political Van Mulligen with the left-footed march. And 
then following Mr. Van Mulligen would be the incumbent, or the lady that I have not met personally, Mrs. Scotton, 
who is presently the president of the party. But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t cast any ill-fate upon Mrs. Scotton but I’m 
sure that because of her input, her strong input into the selection of a successful date and a successful platform for 
the April ‘82 election, that her chances of being re-elected as president of the party are very, very slim. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that isn’t all that comes to mind when I envisage this meeting of the NDP at their convention. I 
see another group coming, walking across the floors of the convention. And I call them Peter Prebble and the 
proletariat. That’s another faction in that party that will be marching up to the stage. And then to add a little colour, 
I’m sure that Don Cody will come flashing in there for just a little colour to it. 
 
But the most drastic and sad situation, Mr. Speaker, is the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, I can see him walking 
hand in hand with Nadine Hunt, while trying to wink at Larry Brown and trying to indicate to some of the old CCF 
why he is advocating radicalism in the trade union movement. There is a man with a quandary. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — There is the fellow who is really under the heat at this convention, Mr. Speaker. But, 
Mr. Speaker, what I’ve described to you of this convention, so far as I see it, is only the surface. The serious part, 
Mr. Speaker, is not the left-footed march of Harry Van Mulligen or the high rollers of Reggie Gross. Not that, Mr. 
Speaker. Or not even the Leader of the Opposition. The serious part are the vultures; the vultures waiting around 
for the kill for the next battle. 
 
If I were a little mouse in the corner, like one of my colleagues sometimes has been in the past (not naming any), I 
would be very interested, Mr. Speaker, in looking at Mr. Roy Romanow and see what Mr. Roy Romanow is doing 
and who he is talking to. And I would be very interested to see if Mr. Jack Messer takes time off from the 
Macdonald commission and his Liberal jobs to be there. And I will watch very closely Mr. Jack Messer to see who 
he talked to and where he was moving. 
 
And I would look again at Mr. Lorne Nystrom and see who Lorne Nystrom was talking to. Because the little march 
of the presidency, the farewell song of the Leader of the Opposition, the swan song of the old leader, is not the big 
thing; it’s the undercurrent of who is talking to who. And most important, Mr. Speaker, at this convention, if I were 
able to be there (and thank God I won’t be there), but if I were able to be there it would be to watch the seven little 
dwarfs opposite to see where they’re going. Are they going to support the old leader, Snow White, or  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
are they looking for a new man, a new hand to wield the socialist sickle throughout this province. That is the 
question, and, Mr. Speaker, I think that is going to be a very interesting convention. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in closing on the conversation, because I just wanted to lay this out briefly, that the 
Shakespearean play of Julius Caesar will be kid’s stuff compared to this pinko party at their convention. I’m sure, 
Mr. Speaker, that there will be sings saying in a very . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . way, maybe they won’t be big 
signs, but as one of my colleagues said: “Leave your knives at the door, boy.” And I think there might even be a 
little flag-burning to raise a little more hoopla. That’s what I see at the convention, and I want you to report back to 
me next week to tell me how it went. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, be that as it may I would now like to go on with what we started this morning in question 
period, or this afternoon. I found that very enjoyable. I thank the hon. member opposite to ask these questions 
because . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . Well, we will leave that to the . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . of the people 
of Saskatchewan, and I’ll put my bets against you any time, my friend. Anyways, let’s go with this, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it is high time that we explode the myth of the NDP party with what they say they have done in health care. 
Mr. Speaker, I think you realize that I’m a reasonable man and I will give credit where credit is due, and I will 
indicate to you that in the first few years of the Blakeney regime there were two or three good things in health. 
There was a drug plan and a dental plan, which we will continue and which I believe the people of Saskatchewan 
appreciate. But, Mr. Speaker, let me indicate to you those were in the early years of the Blakeney regime, up to 
about 1975. My colleague beside me can tell you vividly what happened following that. 
 
I remember in 1975 that this government soon began to lose touch. They soon began to realize that they knew 
better how to run the lives of the people of Saskatchewan than the people did, and they embarked upon massive 
take-overs in the potash industry. They believed that the creation and the selling of the crown corporations to the 
people of Saskatchewan was the paramount needs of the people, to the extent, Mr. Speaker, that through their 
public advertising campaigns they literally choked them down the throats of the people of Saskatchewan, only to 
pay the bitter price at the election of 1982. They believed in big government, and I’m not going to elaborate on 
these. Anyone can go back and look into the files, but basically, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is that the Blakeney 
government lost touch, began to believe that they knew better than the common sense out there in Saskatchewan 
how to run this government; and basically, they forgot the needs of the people. I want to show you, Mr. Speaker, 
that what I’m saying is just not fiction, because if you check the records of time you will see what happened and 
the indicators to show that this is true. 
 
If you will look back, in 1975 we see the growth, the beginning, and the start of the Progressive Conservative 
Party, and some of my colleagues in this Chamber were elected at that time. They weren’t a strong force, but 
certainly there was an alternative to the people of Saskatchewan and they were turning towards that alternative. If 
you will recall, in 1978, Mr. Speaker, when you and I entered this Chamber that, other than a vicious vendetta 
against the Progressive Conservative leader, if you check the popular vote we came so close to beating those 
fellows it wasn’t even funny. Did they listen? They didn’t listen to the people of Saskatchewan. They continued, 
and thank goodness they did, because that’s why we’re here and they’re there, and, I believe, for some time to 
come. They believed and went on with their control, their take-over, we-know-better-than-thou attitude. 
 
Even some of their own people couldn’t put up with it. I remember the gentleman that sat in this desk right here, 
Hon. Jack Messer. He couldn’t put up with it any longer and he quit. I don’t know what Ed Whelan did, but I 
remember Ed Whelan. He was dumped from cabinet. Even the member from Regina Centre, who sits over there as 
an opposition member today, was not able to stay in that cabinet. Mr. Speaker, it was very evident that the NDP 
government, under the directorship of the Leader of the Opposition, was on a disaster trail. And all this time they 
tried to  



November 23, 1983 
 

169 

raise the myth that they were the defenders and the saviours of health care. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let me indicate to you some of the things that have happened ;in health care under that 
jurisdiction since 1975. I have indicated to you about the 400 positions deleted for the purchase of potash mines. In 
psych services, where they do a lot of crowing, a deletion of 150 nursing positions during that period of time, Mr. 
Speaker. Hospital construction — only $2 million a year over that 10-year period outside the cities of Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
And, of course, I think the highlight was the people who tried to hoodwink the old people of this province that they 
were the ones who would care for the elderly. They brought Mr. Douglas in here to scare them in 1978, but they 
learned the truth by 1982. And they’re learning the truth now, Mr. Speaker, because in the building of special-care 
homes it was a disgrace — I can say nothing more than a sheer disgrace — for a government with one of the eldest 
populations in Canada to have one of their ministers of the Crown, on January 4, 1976, Mr. Smishek, write to Mr. 
Rolfes, the minister of social services, indicating, “Until such time as a need for additional beds can be clearly 
identified and a suitable construction policy defined, a moratorium on further commitments will be enforced.” Mr. 
Speaker, in ‘76, a moratorium. A moratorium means a cease. 
 
And did they leave it alone in ‘76? No, here’s another letter to the secretary-treasurer of the village of Theodore, 
Saskatchewan, a small town in Saskatchewan. Theodore. We all know where Theodore is. I’m not going to go on 
with the whole letter. It was written by a fellow in the senior standards consultant in the Department of Social 
Services, under the instruction . . . It’s not his decision. It was the decision of Mr. Smishek and the cabinet. That is 
what he says “ . . . has prompted the government to place a moratorium on the development of any additional 
special-care beds and focus attention and priorities to the development of other services.” Mr. Speaker, that’s two 
letters two years apart. 
 
But let me tell you another horror story, just to show how that government opposite dealt with people in 
Saskatchewan. This is a little town called Middle Lake, Bethany Pioneer Lodge, Middle Lake, Saskatchewan. I will 
go back to a letter which would start here in 1979 and the people of Bethany Lodge say this. They talked about the 
mid-Canada consultants who had done a study of their home and it said: 
 
 It was the recommendation of the consultants that we not pursue the avenue of renovating the 

hostel, but instead to rebuild a new one. 
 
Okay. That’s what they said. Then we’ll go up here to July 31 and we have a letter again from Mr. Ross, who is 
saying: 
 
 The major deficiencies include foundation deterioration due to excess sulphur action; deterioration 

of the superstructure including roof insulation, moisture-proofing, fire separation, etc.; and the need 
for upgrading the mechanical and electrical systems. The consulting firm has suggested that the 
existing facility be replaced. 

 
That’s what the consulting firm said and that’s what the people wanted. I see here a list of 20 things that perhaps 
are wrong, with some alternatives. The last alternative is this: “Phase out in total over a five or six-year period.” 
That doesn’t mean rebuild: that means phase out. And then in brackets, (could you believe this?): “Would this be 
politically possible?” Now is that putting need or politics in there? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s more. How these poor people were battered back from pillar to post. I’m looking at another 
document here of July 2, 1980 — same topic, same discussion — recommendation that the department reject the 
request of the board of Bethany Pioneer Village to replace their existing home with a 60 special-care bed facility. 
So now they’re down to rejecting it. 



 
November 23, 1983 
 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it goes on worse. On the first of that document, written by, I presume, the minister — it’s 
hand-written notes — who says . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . No, I think it was Mr. Koskie there this time. It 
says: 
 
 Please ask Maura Bills (no longer with us) why we are upgrading to level 1 at a time when we are 

planning to phase out level 1. 
 
You know, we’re operating and then phasing out. But the reply, hand-written, is more interesting from the person 
who says this: 
 
 For the new level 1 could be deleted and would read “approval be sought” by which Bethany 

Pioneer Village would be upgraded to level 2 standards. More importantly, in this option, level 3 
care would be phased out. 

 
Level 3 phased out. Now I want to read one here in which a Marlene Giles was in attendance, and I think we know 
who that was. I want to point this out to you to show the utter turmoil and confusion that those poor people were 
put through. It says here: 
 
 Consideration to the upgrading of the level 1 and 2 standards and the retainment of a 20 per cent 

construction grant, conditional (conditional, Mr. Speaker) that level 3 accommodation be phased 
out within five years. 

 
Phasing out the level 3's. My question was: where are they going to put them? Further down in the document, right 
here, they have 23 level 3 residents are accommodated in the home as of February, 1981. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go on with one more thing, and this was from Marlene Giles to Mary Lou Deck, executive 
assistant to the Minister of Social Services, and here were the options, Mr. Speaker. Listen to this. This is as late as 
1982. By gosh, it’s March 15, 1982. That’s just about a month before the election, wasn’t it? And here were the 
things they were thinking of at that time, and I wonder how the people of Meadow Lake would feel about this: 
 
 (a) The existing homes be phased out and beds to serve the area be built in Humboldt and 

Cudworth. The home be upgraded to level 2 standards, conditional that level 3 
accommodations be phased out within five years. 

 
And it goes on and on. But, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve made my case. 
 
I want to end with this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that an OC was passed and I don’t have the date right here, but I know 
the minister that passed it. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — No, this is the new OC. This was the OC passed by the Hon. Patricia Smith when she 
was minister, indicating that a special care home would be built in Middle Lake. No fiddling around — do we 
phase out three, do we make one, double standards — but a commitment, Mr. Speaker. A commitment to the care 
of those people in Middle Lake, Saskatchewan. I think this is compassionate care, Mr. Speaker, for the people of 
that area. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s well known by the people of Saskatchewan, from the letters I get, it’s well known 
the great consideration and the support for health care under the Devine government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on all afternoon and indicate the many positive things that we have done as a government: 
such things as a chiropody program, such things as the cancer commitment, such things as the 11 million for the 
construction of special care homes, 35 million for rural  



November 23, 1983 
 

171 

hospitals. The list goes on and on. People in places, in nursing places, to better serve the clients of this province. 
There’s all type of things, Mr. Speaker, that we could go on and discuss. 
 
But handed to me today were a couple of exciting bits of information here. As I started out at the beginning of my 
remarks, I laid out a scenario of this convention in Saskatoon. I think I told you some of the in-fighting and the 
intrigue and the things that will be present there, but I want to also indicate some of the things that they will be 
discussing. I want to tell the ambulance operators of Saskatchewan that they would be very interested in listening 
to resolution 109, and resolution 109 says: 
 
 Whereas the need exists to improve the road ambulance services in the province of Saskatchewan 

. . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, which government put them under health where they’ve been crying to be for years? This government 
here. 
 
 . . . be it resolved that we encourage the present government to implement fully the emergency 

medical technician course started by the previous NDP government, and it is NDP policy that the 
government implement a government-owned road ambulance service as part of a comprehensive 
health care delivery service in Saskatchewan. 

 
Now I want to hear the ambulance operators of Saskatchewan hear that one. We have a good ambulance system. 
We have improved it, and we will continue to improve it, but we will not make it a state-owned ambulance service 
in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. TAYLOR: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they played funny games with the seniors of this province 
in supplying special care homes, as I pointed out with Middle Lake. About five years of indecision, split decisions, 
not knowing which way they’re going. I have to say this to you: unfortunately for the people of Saskatchewan . . . I 
suppose fortunately, because they won’t get back in, but they haven’t improved their act at all. 
 
Let me read to you some of the resolutions that will be discussed concerning senior citizens’ care at the coming 
NDP convention. Not only will there be a fight as to who’s boss there’s going be utter mass confusion going on. 
Let me read this one. This comes from Prince Albert, and I’m just going to read the “Be it further resolved.” We 
don’t need all that preamble. 
 
 Be it further resolved that the comprehensive plan will set acceptable standards of care, set 

equitable costs for each care level, and most importantly establish sufficient places for our seniors 
(listen to this), for our seniors to live in harmony with the community, their own community. 

 
That was number 131. We go down to resolution 135. 135 says this: 
 
 Be it resolved as NDP policy that the Saskatchewan government arrange to have enough level 3 and 

4 care beds in cities and large centres that individuals who need this kind of care can get it in the 
city and large centre nearest where they live. 

 
And which way are they doing? And then I can go to one down a little further here, 138, and it says: 
 
 Be it resolved that the NDP pressure the Department of Health to consider seriously the need for 

more level 4 beds in rural centres. 



 
November 23, 1983 
 
 
So here they are, one page, three resolutions, all concerning citizens. One bunch want them all in the cities; another 
bunch says let them live where they grew up; another bunch says put them in small towns. That is indicative of the 
complete confusion, utter confusion, lack of direction that that government had in dealing with people’s lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and tell you the many positive things that we are doing in the Department of Health, but 
I’m very proud of my colleagues in this legislature, because I sat here last night and listened to the speeches of the 
member from Saskatoon and various parts of this province, my Legislative Secretary from Saskatoon, who laid out 
very well the positive achievements that this government has made in health. And I’m not going to reiterate those 
at this time because there are many speakers and I said at the beginning I would be brief, because I’ll have many 
opportunities to tell the people of this province about health in this province. 
 
But I just want to say, and I want to end on this commitment, that I am proud of the achievements of the Devine 
government in all fields and I’m especially proud in the field of health, not because I’m the minister but because of 
the support and the commitment of my caring colleagues to the people of Saskatchewan. And I can say in ending, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that commitment will continue, that that commitment is a serious, solid commitment 
with sensible, pragmatic solutions, and new ideas as how to deliver health care in the 1980s and 1990s. Mr. 
Speaker, we make that pledge to the people of this province and we will keep it. Thank you very much. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before I get into the throne speech debate, I want to take 
this opportunity on behalf of myself and my constituents to extend my congratulations to the new Lieutenant 
Governor, the Hon. Frederick Johnson. I know that members on both sides of this House wish him well as he 
begins to play an important symbolic role in our parliamentary, democratic form of government. 
 
I rise to participate in this throne speech debate with deep frustration, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the frustration felt by 
men and women all across Saskatchewan, but especially the young people of our province, for this government has 
no idea, Mr. Speaker, of the frustration and anger and bitterness that the Devine government’s third throne speech 
has prompted among the citizens of Saskatchewan. For 18 months now they have been ignored by the 
Conservative government, made to pay the price as this government meets the needs and desires of big business. 
The frustrations and bitterness of northern people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they realize that in a concrete, 
positive commitment to meet the urgent needs of northern people, where we have a crisis with unemployment 
running as high as 85 and 90 per cent. Twelve pages of Conservative promises of great things for big business, Mr. 
Speaker, but not one single word about the urgent needs of the unemployed in this province. 
 
But this throne speech is not the first time that the Devine government, with its huge, arrogant majority has ignored 
the North. In December of 1982, Mr. Speaker, I proposed that a special committee of the legislature to include both 
government and opposition members be established to examine the pressing social and economic situation in 
northern Saskatchewan; but that proposal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was turned down by the Conservatives, for they 
were too busy driving all our province into a recession. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 60,000 people unemployed in this province I think we are just about out of that 
recession, and we are now into a full-scale depression. This past August I renewed my proposal for a special 
legislative committee to examine the deteriorating conditions in the North and to make recommendations. Once 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that positive proposal was turned down. The government members seem to have no 
desire to examine firsthand the increasingly desperate conditions of northern people. Two requests within one year, 
both  



November 23, 1983 
 

173 

turned down, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I now notice that there was a request that came in from the Conservative 
government to establish a committee, went before that committee, and that was approved. 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that shows where the priorities of this government are. Their priorities are with 
proposals that come from their own ranks, where we have serious problems, and the serious problems that we have 
in northern Saskatchewan, and getting worse by the day. They ignore that. They say that they couldn’t go up into 
northern Saskatchewan because the proposal that I made was too broad. It’s interesting that the chairman yesterday 
got up in the House and said that the proposals that he was looking for to be brought before the committee should 
be broad in scope. 
 
As I listened to the throne speech the other day, I heard the government boast that addressing the problem of 
unemployment would be its first priority, and it should. With 60,000 people unemployed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
this province — the highest record of unemployed persons in the history of Saskatchewan — 60,000 people 
registered for work on the unemployment roll is the highest in the history of Saskatchewan. A Conservative 
government that has been in power for 18 months. 
 
One has to go back 50 years to really compare this government to any other Conservative government, because it 
has been 50 years ago since a Conservative government came to power. If one was to go back 50 years to 1929 and 
‘30 and just take a look at some of the legislation that they put on the books; just take a look at some of the 
legislation that the Conservative government put on the books in 1929 and ‘30 in their first session. Let me tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, there’d be a lot of members over there I think will just get up and walk out because I don’t think 
they really know the history . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how do we compare the present Conservative government of today? And I say to you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the only comparison that we have is to go back to 1929 to ‘34, because that is the only 
comparison that there is. That’s the only time that a Conservative government was ever in this province. And I 
think it may be some of the Conservative members should check on some of the legislation that was brought 
forward by that Conservative government of Mr. Anderson. Just check it. Check The Education Act and just see 
what happened. You want to check that out. And that was legislation that was brought in by the Anderson 
government, the only Conservative government . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . Okay, and the member from Prince 
Albert said he wants history. I tell you, you ought to take a look at the books, and at the legislation that was brought 
in by the Conservative government, and I’ll tell you history will repeat itself. In 1934, there was another general 
election and the Conservative government didn’t get one seat in this province. And you’re heading down that same 
trail; you’re heading down the same trail, and it’s the only way that we can compare. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not all I heard. No specific plans, no specific proposals, no positive concrete 
commitment to create jobs now or this winter. no acknowledgement by this government that it has increased 
unemployment in the North to a crisis proportion. Communities where unemployment is at an 85 and 95 per cent 
rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Families where both parents are able to work and eager to work but cannot find a job. 
 
Members on the other side feel that I should stop. Well, I just tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have no intentions of 
stopping, and I tell you I intend to get out to the public of Saskatchewan the comparisons of the Conservative 
government of today, and the Conservative governments of 1929 to ‘34. Because I think that the citizens of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know just what kind of a government they’re dealing with, and I think that we have 
to compare them with that last government. That’s the only comparison that we have. And I intend to do that, and 
my colleagues intend to do that also. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, young people eager to be productive, eager to make positive contributions  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
to our economy, and to their community. Young people who can’t find work. The Premier and his ministers like to 
boast about how their big business policies have been good moves for the big oil companies. But they don’t like to 
mention that over the last 12 months the Canada employment centre in La Ronge reports a 43 per cent increase in 
unemployed persons formerly registered as seeking work — a 43 per cent increase in unemployed job seekers at 
the La Ronge manpower centre, Mr. Speaker, in the past 12 months. And that manpower centre in La Ronge, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, takes in all the statistics of northern Saskatchewan. And that, I indicate to you, is a very serious 
problem. 
 
And of course the North is not the only part of Saskatchewan where unemployment is at crisis levels. Across the 
province Canada employment centres in city after city report big increases in the number of unemployed men and 
women registered as seeking work; Moose Jaw, 30 per cent increase in the past year; Saskatoon, a 59 per cent 
increase in the past year; Yorkton, a 92 per cent increase in the past year; Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in Regina, a 
128 percent increase in the past year of unemployed persons. 
 
In Saskatoon, recent history, in Saskatoon, a 59 per cent increase in the unemployment rate ;in the city of 
Saskatoon, a city that in the last 10 years we have saw a tremendous boom in the city of Saskatoon — a 
tremendous boom and an expansion of the industrial areas around the city of Saskatoon. And why, why, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, would we have this type of a boom in Saskatoon? Well, I think one just has to take a look at the 
activity that we had in northern Saskatchewan — the mining industry, the exploration industry that went on in 
Saskatchewan that now has come to just about a complete stop. One just has to take and look at the money that is 
being spent on exploration. Just take a look at it. There is very little money being spent on exploration. There’s 
very little activity being spent on exploration. And there’s just no more expansion of the mining industry in 
northern Saskatchewan. And that has been hard on Saskatoon. And that’s why they are suffering this. They’re in a 
deep recession. There’s really nothing going on. 
 
Has this Conservative government’s policies revealed themselves as failures? As unemployment gets worse, more 
and more Saskatchewan families are being forced on welfare. I’m not surprised, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
throne speech did not explain why Conservative big business economic policies have caused a 23 per cent increase 
in the past year in the number of social assistance cases who are ready and willing to work but cannot find a job. 
 
Government ministers boast about their gifts to the big oil companies but are embarrassed to mention the more 
than 57,000 social assistance beneficiaries in the province of Saskatchewan. They don’t explain how their 
Conservative economic policies have produced a 19 per cent increase in social assistance cases in the North in the 
past 12 months — a 19 per cent increase in northern social assistance cases in the last 12 months. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is a serious situation when a government can give a tax break or a tax holiday to the oil companies of 
$100 million and you take a look at the money that they’re putting into northern Saskatchewan and it is just about 
nil, with the exception of money they’re putting into social assistance. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have now grown accustomed to the Conservative government 
preaching restraint — preaching restraint as it freezes the minimum wage; preaching restraint on wages of nurses 
and teachers and working people across this province; preaching restraint on everyone but itself. They hear this talk 
of restraint but they’ll look around and see the Conservative appointment as chairman of the liquor relations board 
paid $95,000 a year claim that, well, they’re paying him $95,000 a year, Mr. Deputy Chairman, because it’s 
become more a full-time job. 
 
I’m not sure if he has an office or if you could get a hold of him in Regina. But I do have an Order in Council in my 
hand dated October 13, 1983, that one Dennis P. Ball has been put on a retainer fee by the Conservative 
government of Saskatchewan for a total of $7,916.66 a month — a  



November 23, 1983 
 

175 

retainer fee of $7,916.66 a month. Why would the Conservative government stand up in this House and indicate 
that Mr. Ball in on a full-time basis and they’re still paying him a retainer fee? I have never heard, Mr. Deputy 
speaker, of anyone having a full-time job and being paid a retainer fee of such a large amount of money per month. 
And they say that he is on part time. I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he is not on full time but is being paid 
$95,000 a year more, more than the Vice-President of the United States who makes $91,000 a year. 
 
Natural gas rates forced up by 13 per cent; electrical power rates up by 15 per cent; telephone rates pushed up by an 
average of 19 per cent. And I’ll tell you, this is becoming a hardship on not only on all the people of Saskatchewan, 
but it is really hard on our senior citizens. I have had 21 calls so far since the pay station rates have gone up to 25 
per cent. I had a fellow phone me up the other night at 11 o’clock at night,. really upset because he had to pay 25 
cents for a pay phone and he got the wrong number. He was really upset. I said, “Well, maybe you should go and 
see the minister in charge of Sask Tel and phone him up.” But they’re phoning me up, and I tell you it’s tough on 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
These are glaring examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a double standard in this province. SGI rates deductible up by 
43 per cent. Now, your package policy doesn’t cover your windshield. So, if you’re driving down the road and you 
get a rock, you’ve got to have another special policy to get your windshield fixed. It’s not covered under your 
package policy any more. 
 
STC rates gone up by 18.5 per cent. I see that the board of trade in Meadow Lake have written to the Minister of 
Northern Saskatchewan, asking him to supply a subsidy so that the STC bus routes can start operating in and out of 
Meadow Lake to northern Saskatchewan and to other points. I have not seen an answer to that, and I think our 
Minister of Northern Saskatchewan still has not answered that letter, the last that I have heard. 
 
Senior citizens are being hit hard. The home repair grant frozen. It’s a nice time to freeze the home repair program. 
We had that program so that it could create winter jobs repairing senior citizens homes. I have senior citizens in 
northern Saskatchewan who are coming to me on a regular basis, and there’s absolutely no program, no grant 
program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in place in this province to help our senior citizens — absolutely none. 
 
I want to get back to the health care problems that are existing in this province, and in particular, I want to zero in 
on the problems that we have in northern Saskatchewan, problems that are becoming more serious and more severe 
by the day . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Prince Albert wants to know just how far north. Well I 
tell you, right up to the Northwest Territories, Mr. Deputy speaker, where the hospital at Uranium City services the 
trappers from that area who are not only trapping in northern Saskatchewan but up to and into the Northwest 
Territories. 
 
What do they have? They have a hospital with a guarantee that there will be a doctor there for six weeks. That says 
a lot for health care and that gives a lot of security — doesn’t it? — to the many, many people who live in the 
Fond-du-Lac and Black Lake and Stony Rapids and Camsell Portage and Uranium city area, to know that they 
have a hospital and they have a doctor for six weeks. That’s a very serious situation up there. 
 
Another situation that I think is far more serious is the situation at La Loche where we have a brand new hospital, 
and since July of this year they have had the services of a doctor for six hours, 12 hours a day, six hours twice a 
week. Doctors are flown in from Meadow Lake twice a week for six hours and then they fly back, and there we 
have a modern hospital with no doctors to serve it. 
 
I give you a good example what it is like to live up in northern Saskatchewan. I give you a good example of living 
at Garson Lake, a full 35 to 40 miles a way from that modern hospital, and a mother goes into labour and has to be 
skidooed out,. and that’s the only way that they can get  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
out after the sun goes down because it is totally isolated. And you have an emergency like that and the mother is 
taken in over 30 miles of rough road with a skidoo to come into a modern hospital and to be told that, “We have no 
doctor here, so what we’re going to have to do: we’re going to have to put you in an aeroplane, and create a 
medivac, and fly you to Meadow Lake.” And that’s what is taking place. 
 
And what are they doing? They are flying over a hospital with three resident doctors at Ile-a-la-Crosse, and they fly 
right over that hospital and go to Meadow Lake to that hospital another 100 miles further. Or, if the case has to 
come in, and it goes out if the weather is out and the aeroplanes can’t fly and they have to use a van — so what do 
they do? They drive by the hospital in Ile-a-la-Crosse, where they have the resident doctors, and they continue on 
to Meadow Lake. The member from Kinistino thinks it’s a laughing matter. He thinks it’s a joke, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I tell you he better come into northern Saskatchewan and have a look at what it’s like up there, and 
see what it’s like to live in isolation. 
 
Do you know that you have a modern hospital built by the New Democratic Party government and you have a 
Conservative government that has come into power and says, “We are going to make health care our number one 
priority.” And what do we have? Two modern hospitals up on the northwest side and no doctors. All the deliveries, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, all the maternity deliveries from that part of the province are being flown or driven to 
Meadow Lake, driven by a hospital just a few miles away with resident doctors, but they are taken that extra 100 
miles. They are taking that chance to go another 100 miles by air or by ambulance with the individual who is sick, 
when they could have stopped at a hospital 100 miles short, but they don’t do that. They just fly right over the 
hospital or drive right by the hospital at Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
 
And the minister gets up here and he indicates why. “Well,” he said, “we can’t stop at Ile-a-la-Crosse because: the 
doctors in Ile-a-la-Crosse — you can’t trust them. They’d only stay there for three months at a time.” That’s what 
the minister got up and said in question period today. He said, “We can’t leave them at Ile-a-la-Crosse. We have to 
take them the extra 100 miles and take all these chances because the doctors at Ile-a-la-Crosse only stay for three 
months. And I think that the doctors in Ile-a-la-Crosse and the staff in Ile-a-la-Crosse and Sister Dobmeier, who is 
having her problems up there, are going to be quite interested in the statements of the Minister of Health today in 
this House. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when this chattering back and forth gets over I would like to continue on with my throne 
speech debate. I want to start off now on some of the bright spots that are in this province. I have been talking 
about a lot of the problems that we have and I want to talk about some of the bright spots that we have in this 
province. And there are some bright spots. 
 
I want to say to the Conservative members over there that the bright spots are the Key Lake mine that was started 
by the NDP government, where we had close to 500 employees. And I would just like to say to you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, what would happen to this province if the Key Lake mine all of a sudden shut down, and we had 500 
more individuals and family heads that were unemployed, added to the 60,000 that we now have? That is a very 
bright spot, and it’s a progressive move on the part of the government of the day, the New Democratic government 
who owns 50 per cent of that mine. And that 50 per cent is owned by the people of Saskatchewan, and that is 
security, the type of security and economic security and financial security that this province needs. We foresaw 
that, and that’s why we took part and bought the 50 per cent of one of the largest mines in the world — producing, 
making money, creating jobs, spin-offs to cafes, garages, and the like. That is a bright spot in the province. 
 
Cluff Lake is another bright spot, and it was put in under the New Democratic government. There’s around 400 or 
500 permanent people working in Cluff Lake — another example of good planning for the government of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who purchased a 20 per cent interest for the citizens of Saskatchewan, and 
also have one of the highest royalty rates of any uranium industry in the world, paid back to the citizens of 
Saskatchewan. And that is a bright  



November 23, 1983 
 

177 

spot for the province, and I might add a bright spot for the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Another bright spot, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the Nipawin dam, and that was started by the New Democratic 
government, and that is another $600 million investment in Saskatchewan by the taxpayers of this province to 
create the economic stability and security . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . Well, you just have to look at the jobs. It 
sounds like, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it sounds like the Attorney General wants to close down that Nipawin dam and 
shut it up. He indicates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Nipawin dam is a poor, poor investment of the taxpayers’ 
money. Well, I say it’s a good investment of the Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money. 
 
I can remember. The Attorney General is over there spouting off, as he was doing on television last night about our 
nominating conventions or our conventions. But let me tell you, I can remember in 1975 sitting in this House and 
the hon. Attorney General, who was sitting in here as a Liberal, standing up and fighting tooth and nail and the big 
filibuster that went on for months to prevent the purchase of the potash industry in this province. And he still says 
. . . (inaudible) . . . that it was a bad deal. But, when I look at the throne speech, that was one of the bright spots of 
your throne speech. The potash industry is improving. Sales are improving . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . That’s 
right in the throne speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I tell you, when the New Democratic government nationalized the potash industry in this province and took 
over 50 per cent of the production, it was security for the citizens of Saskatchewan. And let me tell you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I haven’t seen any movement by this government to get rid of the potash industry. no, they’re not 
going to get rid of it because it’s money that’s coming in, and it’s economic security for the citizens of 
Saskatchewan, and it would be a disaster for them to destroy it. 
 
These are bright spots, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These are bright spots in the province, and the only bright spots that 
we have, and they were created by the New Democratic Party government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — We had a forward imagination. We looked into the future and we decided, in the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan, that the dam at Nipawin, the potash industry, the increase in potash 
production in this province, was the way that we had to go, and we did that. And we supported small business, and 
we supported farmers, and we used that money. We used the dividends from that potash industry, and the equity 
that was paid back to us. We used that to create a better atmosphere in this province. 
 
We never took $100 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and turned it over to the oil industry. And now what are they 
saying? The only thing that they say is bright in this province is the oil industry. Naturally it’s healthy, because they 
got $100 million boost. 
 
But take a look at the interest rates that we’ve got. They keep harping about reducing the gas tax. Well, I’ll tell you, 
when I talk to the constituents in all parts of this province, they tell me that that was the most regressive move that 
any government ever made. First of all, there is $28 million out of that road tax that went to SGI to keep insurance 
rates down. That $28 million is no longer going to SGI, and what do we have? We have a 43 per cent increase in 
SGI rates. 
 
Take a look at our highway system and our road system in this province, and it’s disgraceful. I tell you, I get more 
complaints on the road system and the highway system. We have areas in this province where we have had opened 
up roads, and put the stabilized base on, ready for the final coat, and what has the government done, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? They have actually gone in, taken out a portion of that stabilized base, stockpiled it, and replaced it with 
gravel. They are going totally the other way. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I have indicated, there is some bright spots in this province: the potash  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
industry, the dam at Nipawin, the Key Lake mining, the Cluff Lake mining, the expansion that should be taking 
place at Lanigan but was put on hold by this government. These are the bright spots. 
 
As I indicated, we have a very serious problem in northern Saskatchewan — a very serious problem — that the 
Conservative government has totally ignored, and has indicated by refusing to even go up there and have a look at 
the problems, that they are ignoring it. And there are many, many ways that we could solve the problems in 
northern Saskatchewan. We could create industry, and we could create jobs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members across continue to say that fine, they’re doing a good job in northern 
Saskatchewan. But let’s face reality. When we have 85 to 95 per cent unemployment, when we have a surface lease 
that we had where the northerners had some protection which was thrown out and being renegotiated, when we see 
the kind of . . . when we see what has really been constructed in northern Saskatchewan, you go into Buffalo 
Narrows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and what have they done in two years? They have completed and opened a brand 
new liquor store. That is in total what they have done, and I think it shows where the priorities of this government 
are. 
 
AN HON. MEMBERS: — You built that. You know that. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Here we are two years down the road and the liquor store is open and they want to give us 
credit for it. I’m looking forward to the opening, I’m looking forward to the opening of the Key Lake mine. I 
sincerely hope you will also give us credit for that. 
 
But I think that this government has to take a new approach to northern Saskatchewan, and I think that they have to 
start putting some money in there. The Minister of Northern Saskatchewan has indicated a month ago that he has 
opened up the economic development loan fund to create activity. That’s a fine time to open it up. When the lakes 
are starting to freeze over and the snow is coming and construction is tough. And what kinds of a jobs are they 
going to create? All the good summer months when they should be producing . . . (inaudible interruptions) . . . Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, if I could get the members on our side and the member from northern Saskatchewan to held back 
I would like to finish my speech. 
 
But to open up the economic development fund in the fall, why did they not open it up in the spring when 
construction season was at its peak, and so they could work all summer. But no, they didn’t do that Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But I tell you, that they take that money . . . We have a large forest inventory in northern Saskatchewan 
that should be utilized. We have tremendous stands of white spruce and poplar, tremendous stands of Jack pine, 
and I think if one goes to the lumberyards today and takes a look at the knotty pine lumber that comes out of Jack 
pine, it could be a big industry in northern Saskatchewan. It’s just a beautiful finishing wood. But no activity. 
 
Commercial fishing. The commercial fishing industry stopped for two months this spring and didn’t know whether 
the transportation subsidy was going to be implemented again or not. Fishermen were sitting around and didn’t 
know whether they should get their nets ready or their boats ready, because the rumour was going around and there 
was no indication that they were going to put the transportation subsidy on again. Finally they did when the 
commercial season was well under way, another handicap to northern residents. 
 
I think that there’s a tremendous possibility to create labour and to provide good housing in northern 
Saskatchewan, and that’s what should be done. Not only public housing but for our senior citizens, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Our senior citizens are having problems in northern Saskatchewan because we have very few senior 
citizens homes. Matter of fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has not been one senior citizen’s home built since this 
government took power. Not one new senior citizens home has been constructed in northern Saskatchewan since 
this  



November 23, 1983 
 

179 

government took power. We had a senior citizens home repair program for the senior citizens. The Attorney 
General, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
MR. DEPUTY SPEAKER: — Order. Allow the member from Athabasca to make his remarks. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I guess I’m getting under the skin of the 
Attorney General. First of all he wants to cancel the Nipawin grant and he says it’s a poor deal. Now he says that 
the senior citizens homes that are completed in northern Saskatchewan were built under the Conservative 
government. I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have not started nor have they finished one senior citizens unit 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The senior citizens home repair program which was very important to northerners and I have a senior citizen that 
came to me three weeks ago and he’s 93 years old, still living in his own home, an active gentleman, but 93 years 
of age. He wanted some home repair work done. He wanted some material, and that’s all he was asking. I got hold 
of the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I was told that there is not one single program 
available to that 93-year-old gentleman. 
 
I was told that there was a study under way, that they were studying the possibility of some new programs for 
senior citizens. But I say to the government in all honesty; if you are studying it, continue on with the programs that 
we had there before until you are going to implement your new one, because there are a lot of senior citizens in this 
province who are suffering because you have cancelled that program while you are studying a new one. And I think 
that’s a wrong philosophy. 
 
It is for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that the Devine government’s third throne speech has been such a 
disappointment, such a bitter disappointment to small business, farmers, working men and women all over 
Saskatchewan. The throne speech gave us the big business agenda. It gave us a rehash of proposals already 
announced last March, but it gave to the citizens of Saskatchewan little else — no concrete plans for jobs this 
winter, no relief from high inflation rates, and not a single positive measure for the northern people. 
 
I know that some government members made short trips into northern Saskatchewan this past summer. I know that 
the Premier has visited Calgary, Toronto, Chicago, Germany, Brazil, China, Japan, in the past year promoting his 
open for business philosophy. A “success story,” Mr. Deputy Speaker, in his words — a success story that has 
created 60,000 unemployed men and women in the province of Saskatchewan, and he calls it a success story. His 
open for business philosophy and his jaunts all over this nation, all over this world, espousing his philosophy that 
Saskatchewan is open for business, come on back home — articles in the Vancouver papers put in there by the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, “Come Back Home to Saskatchewan.” 
 
Sixty thousand people unemployed. And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 60,000 figure, is up to October of 1983. I 
wonder what that’s going to look like in March of 1984. I tell you, it won’t be 60,000, but it will be closer to 
80,000 people unemployed in this province, and it’s a very, very serious situation. 
 
I would therefore urge the Premier to spend more time here in Saskatchewan, to spend some time in northern 
communities seeing at first hand housing conditions, the needs in health care, desperate circumstances of those on 
social assistance, the job crisis, and the handicapped. Perhaps then, Mr. Speaker, he will begin to understand why 
the people of Saskatchewan have reacted to this throne speech with such bitter disappointment. 
 
For the reasons that I have indicated here today, I am sure you will understand, Mr. Deputy speaker, that I cannot 
support this here motion. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
November 23, 1983 
 
 
MR. MORIN: — Mr. Speaker, I’m grateful for the opportunity to speak in this Chamber today. I listened with 
interest to His Honour, Fred Johnson, as he delivered the Speech from the Throne that we’re here to discuss. We, 
in this Chamber, have been accustomed to hearing a different voice deliver that speech. I would like to take this 
opportunity to wish our retiring Lieutenant Governor, the Hon. Irwin McIntosh, a long and prosperous and happy 
retirement. I would wish the incoming Lieutenant Governor, Mr. Johnson, that he may enjoy his office as much as I 
know Mr. McIntosh did, and wish him well in it. 
 
The Speech for the Throne, Mr. Speaker, was the type of speech that the people of the province have come to 
expect from this government. It dealt with the goals of the people of the province. It dealt with their dreams. It dealt 
with a future that those of us who had the courage to stay here and fight for, knew we could always have. 
 
The throne speech was so diverse in its nature that I shall deal with only three areas of it and leave the other many 
areas to my colleagues to touch on. I’d like to deal with the state of the economy in general, with the oil industry or 
the energy sector in this province, and with the impact that the Speech from the Throne and the change of 
government has had on my constituency of the Battlefords. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is quoted on November 18 in the Star-Phoenix as saying: 
 
 The Speech from the Throne is a rehash of old idea: Thursday’s throne speech is the mark of a 

government out of ideas but still committed to the view that big business is going to solve our 
problems, according to opposition leader Allan Blakeney. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll deal with two things in this area. Firstly, I find it hard to believe that the Leader of the 
Opposition can suggest that any of the ideas that this government has brought in, in its term of office, are old ideas. 
Certainly if they were old, he should have been acquainted with them, and I’m sure that if he had been acquainted 
with them, if he’d any familiarity with them at all, he would have introduced it himself and may very possibly have 
still been the premier of this province. 
 
I imagine that the Leader of the Opposition lies awake nights wishing that he had the foresight to think of the 
mortgage interest reduction program. He probably spends a great deal of his time wishing that he had not been so 
hungry for money out of the pocket of the individual taxpayer, out of the little guy of this province, that he would 
have had the thought to roll back the gas tax. And certainly I know that when he compares the program that his 
government had for stimulation of the oil industry, to the program which our government has come up with, he 
wishes that he had the creativity of thought to have developed that program. 
 
When the Leader of the Opposition deals with big business, I will take him to task on that because I will show, I 
hope, in this speech that if any party in this House has an affinity to big business, it is clearly the NDP, and I will 
give many examples to show that. 
 
I’m sure that it may simply be that the last 18 months, when the Leader of the Opposition says that they’re old 
ideas, that nothing has happened in 18 months, that what he’s trying to do is forget the last 18 months. And I can 
understand why he’d want to forget that warm day in April in 1982 when he was so appropriately thrown from 
office. Or perhaps it’s simply been that he’s been so terribly occupied with other concerns that he hasn’t had time 
to watch what’s going on in this province. 
 
Since we took over as government here in Saskatchewan, we’ve been first in a number of areas. We had the first 
mortgage interest reduction program which has since been copied by a number of other provinces and a number of 
states. We were first in size of the tax reduction when we rolled back the tax on gasoline. We have a land purchase 
program that’s again first in the nation  



November 23, 1983 
 

181 

and is being followed all over the place. But I think that another area that we’re first — it doesn’t receive very 
much publicity — is that probably for the first time in history, is there ever anywhere a caucus with eight people in 
it and five of them vying for the leadership of that party? . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . That’s very true. And in 
fact his neighbour, the neighbour of the speech, the gentleman who just spoke from Athabasca, I was quite happy 
to see the member for Cumberland in here today. He hasn’t been here before. and I was quite concerned that 
possibly there was some problem with his health. And in fact one of my colleagues indicated to me that it was in 
fact the case that he was in the hospital. And I was quite, quite distressed by that. And I said, “Well, my goodness! 
What happened?” And they said, “Well, he got stabbed in the hand.” And I couldn’t believe that could be the case. 
And they said, well, sure enough, he was patting the Leader of the Opposition on the back and somebody stabbed 
him. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — The economy of this province and of anywhere revolves around land, labour and capital. And in 
this province, of late, it revolves around marketing. We’re incredibly wealthy, and until now we kept that a secret. 
We were ashamed of the wealth of the natural richness that we’ve been so generously given. 
 
Since the change in government we’ve been telling everyone, our own people, the world, what a great place 
Saskatchewan is. And we’re no longer that best-kept secret that the world often wondered about. 
 
What have we seen happen in the economy since the change in government? Well, what we’ve seen is a 
government that created a great deal of jobs, jobs which everyone in the province said were the priority for them. 
We created 4,200 student jobs in 1983 through the Opportunity ‘83 program. Our small business tax credit 
program created 3,500 jobs. Our labour force has increased by 42,000 people. Through the Build-A-Home program 
we created 7,000 new jobs and we put 4,100 people into new homes, their own homes, homes that they will own. 
 
There’s been an increase of 6,582 new businesses since this government took office. And compare this with the 
opposition’s record. In 1981 they had a net loss in business of 696. During the good years they had an average 
growth of 400. Compare that to 6,582 that we’ve had in our short term of office. 
 
When the other gentlemen were in office we heard boats about the low unemployment rate in Saskatchewan. What 
they neglected to tell everybody was that they drove everyone out of the province. They exported our 
unemployment program. In fact, that’s about all they did export from here. In fact, people were leaving this 
province faster than they could be born and our population in fact declined under their administrations. 
 
What’s happened for the average person in terms of the costs that they face, of their everyday living expenses? 
Well, the price of gasoline again declined. The first year we were in office we froze the utility rates. And if you 
take into account the increases that have taken place this year, authorized by the Public Utilities Review 
Commission, and average them over the two-year period since there was an increase, they are the lowest in 
memory . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . They love me in my riding. I’m special. 
 
The member from Regina Centre says, “Have I been in my riding?” Yes, I have and I’d like to thank him. He spoke 
up there this summer and my popularity bloomed after he was there. I’d like to invite him back. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — Taxes, Mr. Speaker, which in Saskatchewan were the watchword of the opposition when they 
were in government — they were the most taxing government in the  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
history of Canada — had always been among the highest. They were ever-rising, ever going up. Since this 
government has been in power we’ve reduced the gas price — the largest tax cut in the history of the province; 
we’ve removed the tax on children’s clothing; we have removed the tax on agricultural irrigation equipment. And 
what do we have in review then? We have more people working, more people living here, and more people doing 
better than they ever did during the 11 miserable years that we endured the NDP. 
 
But do we hear any positive comments from the opposition? Certainly, to hear them talk, you’d think that the 
people were starving to death on the street corners. and what’s their solution? Well, they call for more militant 
labour. I can understand why they do that because certainly when you look back to their record of 1981 — 416,000 
man days lost to strike — that’s their legacy. Militancy? It’s incredible to hear them talk. 
 
I listened to the member for Regina Centre yesterday as he spoke, and to a number of the other members who said 
time and time again, “The private sector won’t create jobs.” The member for Regina centre said in his address, 
“Show me, tell me, one major paper in this country that has anything good to say about the private sector and job 
creation or about the province.” Well coincidentally, I just happened to be reading the Financial Times which is a 
very prestigious paper — he may not be familiar with it — and on page three of the October 17th issue the headline 
is “Surprising Growth in Private Sector Job Creation,” and I’ll take the liberty to read from the article. 
 
 Economic pundits who thought a sustained, high unemployment rate was the one sure thing about 

the future are being foiled by a surprisingly robust rebound in employment. The strengthened 
employment became most evident in September when 97,000 full-time jobs were added, more than 
half of them in the hard-hit manufacturing sector. 

 
I’ll just pause here for a moment because I think that’s one area that the NDP hadn’t quite taken over yet was 
manufacturing, so clearly it’s private sector. 
 
 The fact that the jobs were full time is particularly encouraging since it shows that firms are 

committed to add head counts and aren’t just making due with part-time staff. 
 
To deal with the economy in general, and the comments that we hear coming from the members down the road 
here, I’d like to deal with interest rates, and I’ll do this but briefly. In his reply to the Speech from the Throne, the 
Leader of the Opposition said . . . (inaudible interruption) . . . Not much. He said, “Is there anything about relief 
from interest rates?” He said that on page 38 of Hansard, November 18, 1983. Now I want you to remember that 
this is the same Leader of the Opposition who, when he was Premier and when interest rates were around the 20 
per cent rate and when he was questioned in this House, said, and I quote: 
 
 We are not in a position to announce any new policies which mitigate the effect of high interest 

rates. Our position is that the first steps to be taken with respect to interest rates ought to be taken 
by the federal government. 

 
This is the Leader of the Opposition, on April 2, 1982, in Hansard, page 1412. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — What date?   
 
MR. MORIN: — April 2, an ominous two years and three weeks before he was so appropriately turfed from 
office. Now, we want to remember that a short two years later, this is the same man that says our ideas are tired, the 
guy that had no ideas about interest rates. He should hear about mortgage interest reduction. He should hear about 
farm purchase programs. He should hear about tax rebates, but I guess he’s been otherwise occupied. 



November 23, 1983 
 

183 

 
Again in his reply to the Speech from the Throne, what did the gentleman have to say? He said “You should go out 
and talk to some small businessmen.” I don’t know if he knows any, but I could recommend a few that he should 
talk to. And again, I’d like to bring us back to his earlier comments made in this House. 
 
I’d like to quote a gentleman who used to be a member of this House, Paul Mostoway, who sat with the NDP. In 
Hansard, on March 9, 1981, he made this comment. He said, The gentleman talks about free enterprise. That’s a 
myth. There’s no such thing as free enterprise.” 
 
I take particular pleasure, Mr. Speaker, in quoting the next gentleman. He said, “Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe in 
free enterprise.” And the gentleman that I quote there on November 30, 1981 in Hansard was a gentleman by the 
name of David Miner who had a short and not particularly illustrious career in this House, and who, I would like to 
say, the people of the Battlefords put out to an early retirement on the 25th of April, 1983. That’s what they feel. 
They say the private sector doesn’t work, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what the private sector’s all about. 
It’s all about work. 
 
And again, on November 21, 1983, ion page 53 of Hansard, the Leader of the Opposition spoke about water, and 
he took the government to talk about what we’re doing with water. Now what’s his record on that issue? And I 
quote: 
 
 We certainly are not . . . 
 
Oh, pardon me. Pardon me. It is not the Leader of the Opposition. It’s a gentleman named Ted Bowerman who I 
believe you’re acquainted with, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I understand that he retired in April of 1982 at the will of the 
people. And Mr. Bowerman’s comment at the time, his comment at the time: 
 
 We are certainly not accepting any responsibility for water treatments. The urban municipalities 

have that responsibility, and the city of Regina recognizes it has the responsibility to treat the water 
and deliver it to its citizens, and that’s the responsibility of the urban municipality. And further (he 
said) it’s the city waterworks system; it’s not our responsibility when talking about a pipeline from 
Lake Diefenbaker. 

 
One of my colleagues here says, “How do you spell hypocrisy in three letters?” Well, a little creative imagination 
could think of that. Well, it could be NDP. I suggest it might be. 
 
In conclusion on the economy then, under the NDP Saskatchewan suffered a net loss in population. In the very near 
future we will top one million people for I believe the first time in our history, and it will happen under our 
jurisdiction. We are up roughly 23,000 people in 18 short months, and that is simply because people are coming 
home; we’re creating a reason for them to come home. We’re creating jobs for them. 
 
In agriculture, under the NDP, in 11 years 8,000 family farms lost, with the abysmal excuse that they were creating 
a land bank to help with intergenerational land transfers. And I understand that their policy hasn’t changed from 
reading their resolutions to their upcoming convention. 
 
And on and on, Mr. Speaker. And again, Mr. Speaker, by coincidence I came across a graph the other day, and it’s 
not published by this government. In fact, it’s published by the federal government, and it’s a graph of 
manufacturing employment as a percentage of total employment, and coincidentally during the period 1971 to 
1982, and it covers all four western provinces, and I would suggest that we’re probably the richest of the four. And 
remarkably, Saskatchewan was the only one of the four western provinces that didn’t have an increase in 
manufacturing, or manufacturing employment. Canada did as a whole; Manitoba did; Alberta  



 
November 23, 1983 
 
did; and British Columbia did. But not Saskatchewan. Now why would that be? Isn’t that incredible? 
 
During this period of time, the 10 years when they were doing such a terrific and incredible job running the 
economy here, they didn’t create any jobs in the manufacturing sector. How could that be? And again the member 
from Regina Centre said, “You never read anything in a major magazine about Saskatchewan.” And again I have 
the Financial Times, October 17: “From Saskatchewan to Washington, Prairie Electronics Company Builds 
Profits.” And I’d be happy . . . His reading material must be rather narrow, but I’d be happy to send this over to him 
if he’d be interested in reading it. 
 
When the member from Regina Centre spoke in this House yesterday, he went on at some length condemning the 
number of new businesses that we had in the province, that 6,500-plus. And he said, “What are they? They all 
employ less than five people.” 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — He doesn’t like small business. 
 
MR. MORIN: — He doesn’t like small business. No. That’s right. And I’d like to let him know just for the record 
that the average business in this province employs 4.64 people — the average business. He wanted big business. 
He was the guy, and his crew of friends, that not only wanted to but did create a multinational oil company. Saskoil 
was not only operating here in Saskatchewan. They’re operating in the Dakotas; they’re operating in Alberta. I 
believe that they’re even operating in the North China Sea. And these are the guys that would try to have us believe 
they care about the little guy. No more. 
 
What about PCS International? And, again, in their convention resolutions, their recommendation is that if, heaven 
forbid, they’re ever returned to power, that they’ll resurrect PCS International — the friend of the little guy. These 
guys all want to be out playing international financial games with the taxpayer’s dollar. They don’t want to risk 
their own money. 
 
When it comes to the energy sector, I’d like to spend a little time just going back and refreshing our mind on what 
we’ve come through. When we look at the energy situation and the energy sector over the past three or four years, 
we have a classical case of golden goose syndrome. That’s golden goose. There are a lot of other gooses that 
they’re responsible for, but only one of them regarding the oil industry. 
 
Not long ago we had a situation where there was increasing demand, where there were ever-increasing prices . . . 
(inaudible interruption) . . . That’s right, yes. Where there were ever-increasing prices, and we had a little thing 
called the national energy program, Mr. Speaker. And what the energy-producing provinces and the federal 
government did is get together, and they looked at the energy sector and they said, “You know, things are going to 
go on and on and continue to get better, and what we will be doing here is we’ll just gouge out a little bit of this 
excess profit, this excess profit that was being used to develop marginal oil up around North Battleford, and in the 
Lloydminster area.” We saw the profits that were being generated in the oil industry, develop offshore oil in the 
Beaufort, in the Hibernia — very expensive areas to develop, and what we saw was more than 100 per cent 
reinvestment of profit in these areas. Well, they didn’t like that and they thought, now here’s a great opportunity to 
grab a little money and continue to pay for the little things that we’ve been doing and losing money on. You know,. 
the members down here claim not to believe in capital punishment, but they do, you know. Capital punishment is 
when the government, their government, taxed your capital to go into business in competition with you, and then 
taxed your capital again to cover the losses that they created in those businesses. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. MORIN: — All during this time, this government quietly pocketed this money and went  



November 23, 1983 
 

185 

along squandering it. And what did these people do, these guys who like the little guy, who care for the little guy, 
even if they don’t care for business that employ 4.64 people? Did they roll back the tax rate? Did they reduce the 
utility rates? Never thought about it. Just threw it away. 
 
You know, it appears that governments are an awful lot like people in that people have a tendency to live up to 
their income, and in fact it’s been said that if people didn’t live beyond their income, there’d never be any progress. 
Well, their government certainly learned to live beyond their income, and learned to tax the population of this 
province pretty excessively in order to pay for their follies. 
 
During the mid ‘70s, we saw high prices for the commodities that we produce, and the government found creative 
ways to spend the money. At a time when oil revenues were running around 27 per cent of the total revenue that 
the government earned, what did they do? Well, they sure didn’t roll back taxes. They used it to double the size of 
the civil service. They used it to increase the size of the provincial budget 3.5 times while they were in power, and 
during that whole time we had a little inflation, but we had inflation of 55 per cent, not 350 per cent. And yet that’s 
the way they spend money. We’ve heard the opposition brag about the terrific job they were doing, but we haven’t 
heard them be honest enough to admit that all they really did was ride the tide of a buoyant economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk at length about the change in the attitude of the oil industry here. I would like to speak 
at length about the changes that has meant in the economy in general. And I see that the clock draws near 5 o’clock 
and because I’d like to go on for some time, I would beg leave to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 5 p.m. 


