






















































Hansard: May 25, 1983


(2556) 2557 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 25, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to introduce to you, and through you to the 
House, members of the building trades who are here today, who were on the front steps. Appropriately 
enough, Mr. Speaker, the lights have been turned out in the government galleries. I say appropriately 
enough — this government has sought to keep these people in the dark, and I assume this is a symbolic 
way of doing it today. I know you’ll want to join me in welcoming them today to the House. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
HON. MR. CURRIE: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to introduce to you, and through you to the members of 
this House, some visitors from St. Dominic Savio School in Regina. They are presently sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery. There are 24 Grade 8 students, along with their principal and chaperon, Mrs. 
Vanderlind. I hope that you young people will find your visit interesting and educational. I shall be 
meeting with you immediately following question period in the rotunda for pictures and following that, 
in the members’ dining room for refreshments. 
 
I would ask the members on both sides of this House to join with me in extending a cordial welcome to 
our guests. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. HOPFNER: — Mr. Speaker, it today give me great pleasure because it’s the first time that I’ve 
had visitors come all the way from my constituency which, I would think, is the furthest travelled 
distance than any of the other members on the government side, and today I would like to introduce 
through you and to you a group of five, along with 10 adults, accompanied, I would believe, with the 
adults, as well as the children, the chaperone of Mr. Milton Toews from Neilburg. This is a unique 
situation because this is a school, a private school, and the students are of grades 4, 6, 8 and 9. And I 
would just like to say that I have not been, at this particular time, able to visit their school but I would 
like to inform them that I will be visiting them in the future and I would like to ask the members of the 
government side as well as the members opposite to give them a hearty welcome to Regina and this 
legislature. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Unemployment in Saskatchewan 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2558 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Labour and in his 
absence, I will address that question to the Deputy Premier. Today, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Deputy 
Premier, on the steps of the legislature, a goodly number of Saskatchewan construction workers gathered 
to voice their concern about the efforts of your government, or the lack of efforts of your government to 
create jobs. In several of the building trades, the unemployment rate is running between 50 per cent and 
as high as 75 per cent and I’m glad the Minister of Labour is here so that I will . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Start over again. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Speaker, I will indeed start over again and address 
this question to the Minister of Labour. Today on the steps of the legislature, Mr. Minister, a large 
number of construction workers were on hand to voice their discontent about the efforts of your 
government to create jobs, or the lack of efforts of your government. In several of the building trades, 
unemployment is more than 50 per cent. In April, the statistics indicated that 59,000 people in the 
province were looking for jobs, an increase of 26,000 over last year. Do you, Mr. Minister, agree that the 
job crisis is the number one problem facing the economy of Saskatchewan today? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, certainly I’d have to agree with the member opposite that the 
job situation is number one in Saskatchewan, and also in all of Canada. It’s not just in Saskatchewan. 
It’s a problem that we’re facing across the entire nation. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Since we are going to make this province 
different from other provinces as it is reported, my question to you is this: why have you not persuaded 
your colleagues to give a few less concessions to the oil companies, or a few less in salary payments to 
their high-paid staff, and spend a little more on construction jobs which would create assets which we 
need, and jobs for people who badly need jobs? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, as a government I think we have done a great deal in this 
province to this point in time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — All I have to look at is the fact that the Nipawin dam is on the go. We’re 
going with the gas distribution system for the farmers. The oil patch is working again. The fact that 
we’ve given some relaxation to royalties means that the oil patch is working instead of sitting idle with 
holes in the ground with nothing coming out of it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, a further question. Is it the policy of your government to 
promote stability in the construction industry by assuring fair wages and full employment for the corps 
of construction workers who built so many projects in this province during the last 10 years —mines and 
other projects — and who are today without work? Is it your policy to provide some stability at fair 
wages for this group of workers? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, all I look at is the unemployment in Saskatchewan compared 
to the rest of the country. We’re at 7.5 per cent when all the others are in the double-digit figures. And as 
far as construction is concerned, all you have to do is fly 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2559 

over Saskatchewan and see all the number of brand-new houses that are getting built in all the various 
cities of the province. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Housing is up. 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — It’s up tremendously. We agree that there’s problems out there, but you’re 
not going to be putting out money just to build great big projects that . . . What do we know is the 
purpose of them? You’ve got to have the investment; you’ve got to have the continuing thing 
afterwards, not just make-work things that’s going to last for three or four weeks. And that’s what we’re 
working on. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, supplementary to the minister. Could the minister 
speculate on the possible use of a rehabilitation centre in Regina, or a provincial lab building in Regina, 
which could be built with the people who are now unemployed? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, our government will be looking at all the areas where we can 
do construction work that’s meaningful. And the areas that we need specific buildings, if it’s in the 
budget, we’ll be getting on with the job. But we can’t just keep creating jobs like painting fences and so 
on. You’ve got to have some long-term thing that gets you started on, and we are doing that right now in 
our budget. There are many capital projects that are on the drawing list. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister can tell the House and the people 
who are unemployed just how many jobs have been created directly for construction workers by your 
last fall Open for Business Conference? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t have that figures at my fingertip; I’ll get them for you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Will you, Mr. Minister, at least agree that up to now, the open for 
business approach has failed, and it has resulted in a . . . Will you agree that your policies have resulted 
in a decline in non-agricultural jobs, a decline in construction employment, a decline in new investment, 
and an absence of major projects? Will you at least agree to that? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I will not agree whatsoever to the member opposite that this 
government hasn’t done anything as far as jobs are concerned. If you look at the unemployment drop, 
the last figures I’ve had — and I’ve been away for a couple of weeks — is that we’ve dropped 2,000 on 
the unemployment at the end of March, plus an additional 14,000 people coming into the province. And 
if you can do both of those, then I’d say our government is doing something. 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask a question to the Minister of Finance and I’d like to 
ask him directly. What has been the government’s reaction and their whole program response to capital 
project restraint, as a government? Could you elaborate on that, Mr. Minister of Finance, with respect to 
jobs? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, the budget introduced had a nine-point program with regard to 
job creation — a nine-point program with regard to job creation — including $1.9 billion being spent on 
capital projects. That’s almost as much as the federal government is spending entirely across the entire 
nation with their $2.4 billion project. It’s three times larger than the province of Manitoba is spending 
with regard to 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2560 

its project. And I ask the member opposite . . . He always talks about a deficit. ‘No, you can’t have a 
deficit, you can’t have a deficit; no deficit, no deficits, than you.’ But he wants to spend dollars and 
more and more and more dollars to create capital projects. 
 
He also wishes to have, Mr. Speaker, a situation by which he doesn’t want to have wage guide-line 
programs — shouldn’t have that. The increases should be 12 per cent and 14 per cent — not 7 as we’ve 
brought in. We believe that is responsible but we don’t believe that we can follow his project of talking 
out of both sides of his mouth, Mr. Speaker, on the one hand wanting a smaller deficit, on the second 
hand, increasing spending by 15 and 20 per cent. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you. A question to the Minister of Labour. Mr. Minister, I was outside 
the building, in front of the front steps and listened to a speaker speaking to a demonstration. One of the 
speakers indicated that you, Mr. Minister, had been invited to speak to the delegation, and you were not 
present to speak, Mr. Minister, my question is: why lavish these pearls of wisdom on us and not share 
them with the demonstrators outside the building? 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to disagree with the member opposite. I have not 
received any invitation to speak to the group outside. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Minister, were you aware that there was a demonstration outside 
of unemployed people? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, yes, this morning I was advised. I just got back from a trip, 
and I was advised that there was some demonstrations this morning, but no one asked me to come and 
speak. And I would suggest that there are a number of the trade groups here that I have already spoken 
to them on several occasions. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, you knew they were there. You knew they were unemployed 
people. That’s your responsibility as a minister. Were you in any sense curious about what they were 
saying? Did it ever occur to you, you might want to wander out and listen to what they had to say about 
something that’s your responsibility? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’m meeting with them on an ongoing basis. Any time that 
they wish to come into my office and see me, we will sit down with them and, as I said in the past, I 
have already done that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, will you just at least have the dignity to admit that you were 
afraid to go out and meet them, and you did not want to hear what they had to say? Will you admit that it 
was fear . . . Will you admit that it was fear and not stupidity which kept you from that delegation? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is no. I’ve got an open-door policy and I’ll speak 
to them any time that they want to come and speak to me. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2561 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I am curious . . . new question, Mr. Speaker. I am curious 
about your open-door policy because it is my understanding that you and other of your cabinet 
colleagues have cancelled meetings with trade unionists who want to talk to you about The Trade Union 
Act, and have postponed it until Monday. Is that accurate? Have you postponed meetings with trade 
unionists from this week until next week? 
 
HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. The group were here several weeks ago. 
Who went out into the rotunda and talked to them out there? I did. And as I said previously, I’ll speak to 
the group any time they wish to come in and see me. 
 

Proposed Water-slide Park 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the Minister of Economic Development and 
Trade. Mr. Minister, you were asked on page 2339 of Hansard whether the water-slide scene park to be 
constructed near Regina would in fact by proceeding, and at that time you indicated: 
 

. . . ‘When the weather warms up.’ I have no reason to believe that it won’t proceed. I have been 
informed that there was apparently some problem at one point on finance, but it’s been resolved 
(and) as I understand it . . . it’s going ahead. 

 
Can the minister confirm whether that is indeed accurate? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, as a matter of fact, yes. I can. I had a meeting today at 1:30 
with the principals of the water-slide. And contrary to the news report that the member is quoting from 
or referring to, the project is far from being dead. The project, as a matter of fact, will very likely go 
ahead, but it may be late for this year. It'’ possible the construction could start this year, however, and as 
I indicated to the member earlier, there has been some finance problems and work is being done in this 
area at this time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to ask the minister whether in fact any new 
investors have been found in respect to promoting the project — any new investors. 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, It’s not for me to indicate who they’re looking for for 
investors. The individuals are from the private sector. The individuals are private entrepreneurs and they 
have indicated that the investors are still interested and still very much anxious to see the project move 
ahead, and whether or not they have new investors or the same ones is something that I can’t answer. 
You’d have to ask the principals involved in the project. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — One further supplemental. At the time that you advised the House that it was 
proceeding, were you assured at that time that the finances were in fact in place and would be 
proceeding? When you indicated to this House that it would be proceeding, that I can read to you your 
answer, as I have, you indicated that: 
 

. . . ‘When the weather warms up.’ I have no reason to believe that it won’t proceed.’ 
 

At that stage, when you indicated to this House that it was proceeding, can you indicate 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2562 

whether the finances were in fact available and that the principal investors were proceeding with the 
project? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, Mr. Speaker, he answered his question, that’s right. I had no reason 
to believe that it wouldn’t proceed at the time, and that hasn’t changed. At that time I had no reason to 
believe that it would or that it would not proceed. As of today I have no reason, again, to believe that it 
will not proceed based on the conversation, discussions I had earlier today. As I indicated, I don’t know 
whether it will proceed this year. Hopefully construction . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
If you had been listening you would have heard me say it a minute ago. Take the wax out of your ears. 
Mr. Speaker, as I indicated, I don’t know whether it will proceed this year or not. Hopefully they will 
begin construction on it this year providing further problems don’t come about on the financing. I’m not 
going to lay out the program or the plans for the member until it’s firm and finalized, and if he wants to 
wait until that time, I’ll give him further details at that time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — A new question to the minister, Mr. Speaker. I would have expected that the 
minister, when he was giving information to the House, would in fact have had the facts. I want to ask a 
new question. In respect to the water-slide park, it’s indicated the park is put on hold because of lack of 
investors. And one Mr. Bill Hicke had this to say: 
 

If we build it this year, I’ll be the most surprised guy in North America. The Saskatchewan Securities 
Commission gave investors an extension to get the financing in place, but the group wasn’t able to get 
the money together (Hicke said). 

 
And what I want to indicate, this is immediately after the minister advised the House that it was in fact 
going to be proceeding ‘as soon as it warmed up.’ I want to ask you: how does that square with the 
answer and the misinformation that you gave us in the House? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I gave no misinformation to the member in the House. 
I gave him the information as I had it at the time. When I heard the report last week —the news media 
report on the project being put on hold with problems — I contacted two of the principals and had a 
meeting with two of those principals today in my office. And the members have indicated . . . Those two 
members have indicated to me that they are quite anxious to proceed with the project. There are still 
problems, and they are business men. They understand these things, and I have offered our assistance 
whatever way we can help, including financing if necessary. So, my department acted in a proper 
responsible way, Mr. Speaker, in contacting these individuals when it was discovered and learned that in 
fact they were putting the project on hold. We’ve made contact with them. We’ve discussed it today. 
The project is hopefully going to proceed, and is certainly not dead as the member indicates opposite. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Supplemental. I have here a release by the minister which Mr. Minister, in part says 
that: 
 

Construction will being early 1983 at an estimated cost of $2.5 million. Expected completion date is 
July 1, 1983. 

 
Now, when you make these press releases, do you in fact have the information? Is it firm, or is it just 
some public relations and a statement which has no basis of facts? I mean, this is a statement that you 
made to the people of Saskatchewan and in the press 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2563 

release, that it would be the completion date, July 1, 1983. Is that press release inaccurate, as most of 
your statements? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, based on the information that I had at the time, that was 
indeed very accurate. But the members opposite can’t understand sometimes that plans do change in 
business, in government, and for the purpose, Mr. Speaker, of doing a little research on this, I’m going 
to take notice of that particular question today so that I can research the number of projects that they 
announced that we’re still waiting for. I know a few of them. 
 

Omissions from New Travel Guide 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — A question to the Minister of Tourism and Small Business. I would like to 
ask the minister: in light of the fact that the new hotel and motel guide which was released recently 
includes about 345 less communities than the Saskatchewan Travel Guide of 1982 — and doesn’t 
include such insignificant towns, I suppose he would say, as Batoche, Dinsmore, Lampman, Midale, 
Unity, Uranium City, Tisdale, Whitewood — can the minister inform me whether the motels and hotels 
in these communities have closed down since 1982? Or what is the reason that you have chosen not to 
include them in your new booklet which is put out this year by Sask Travel — the 345 communities — 
why are they not included this year? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, the hotels association . . . My understanding is that the hotels 
association has been asking for a number of years for a rating system to come into effect in the hotels 
business. What we’ve adopted is what they have asked for, and each hotel and motel operator in the 
province was asked to rate themselves according to a certain scale that was set out there. Those that 
responded — and that was very clear to all of them through their own membership in the hotels 
association as I understand it — and it was very clear to them if they responded to that, they would be 
included, and if not, they wouldn’t be, and that’s where it is. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Minister, are you saying that these 345 communities are no 
longer a part of the promised tourism boom which you and your government have talked about so 
much? This is not an insignificant group of towns —345 towns in a brochure which is not only used in 
the province but in the United States and other provinces. I think that the phone calls we are getting 
would indicate they’re not pleased at being left out, and would you consider redoing the booklet and 
including these 345 towns in the brochure, which is spread throughout Canada and the United States? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, I would be very interested, Mr. Speaker, in the number of calls that the 
opposition member suggests that he has had, because I don’t believe that he would have had very many, 
if he had those. We have been monitoring it very carefully. It was certainly something that we came up 
with, that we were concerned about at the stage of printing. The hotels people in the province have said 
this is the route that they would like to go. We have said to the hotels people, ‘This is the route we will 
go. We’ll give it a try and see what happens.’ And that’s where it sits. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question for the Minister of Tourism and Small Business. 
Talking about tourism, is it possible that you’re familiar with the condition of the Red Coat Trail, and 
consequently don’t include the towns along 13 highway, or why is it that all these towns that have that 
nice new red sign — and the sign looks good — are not included in this list of towns? Is that the reason 
why you’ve ignored them? If it’s not the Red Coat Trail, then maybe it’s at Willow Bunch that you don’t 
want people to 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2564 

come down and visit the museum and the little park down there. At St. Victor they’ve got a park, and 
hieroglyphics and Indian antiques that are worth seeing. And those are not included. Why are these 
towns left out? 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I gave the answer to the hon. member’s colleague. I would 
suggest that your question would be better put to the hotels and motel operators in the communities that 
you suggest, because they, through their association, agreed to the method that we have used, and if they 
chose, as individual hotel operators, not to be involved in it, that was totally up to them, and that’s where 
it sits. 
 
MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Minister, I think that is the weakest argument I’ve ever heard. Here we have a 
minister that’s printing a hotel guide, and is putting out a book on hotels and motels, and is he telling 
me, are you telling me that a small one-man hotel operation like the Lafleche Hotel, or a small hotel like 
the Wood Mountain hotel, or a small hotel like the Willow Bunch hotel, has to read all this mail that 
comes out, and because they didn’t qualify you wipe them out of the book? Is this what you’re saying — 
that they need all this additional red tape, and have to fill forms to qualify? Why didn’t you send a form 
out and say, ‘Those of you that send your names, that don’t want to be in the book, well, we’ll leave you 
out? Why didn’t you do it the other way? Why didn’t you do it that way? But why make them apply to 
get in? And it looks to me as though Mossbank . . . I could go down the list and every town in my riding, 
Mr. Speaker, has been left out of this book. And I think it’s ridiculous. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the method that we went to was one that was under a 
good deal of discussion for a good period of time, at least two or three years — has been for about two 
or three years. So it’s not brand-new. The hotels association has been asking for this. The one-man hotel 
operation that you speak about is probably a member of the hotels association that has been asking for 
this on their behalf. We have said, ‘Yes, we’ll go ahead with that. We’ll see what happens.’ You will 
find that if there is a hue and cry from hotel owners out there, which I don’t believe there has been 
because we haven’t heard of it so far — one or two calls about all — I would suggest that next year 
there will be a much bigger motel and hotel guide, and I will also say one more thing, and the one thing 
we have heard from hotel owners in this province is that this hotel and motel guide is more complete and 
a better nature than any one that has ever been put out before. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 33 
 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, there were a few questions which I neglected to ask when we 
first started out. One was a list of your personal staff. And it could be that the previous line of 
questioning has given that information to us. If not, would you send 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2565 

me across a list of your personal staff in your office, along with the salaries that you pay to them? And I 
would also like a list of the increases that they have received since they have been taken on. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’ll undertake to send that over as I did in the Department of Finance, and 
any increases that they have according. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wasn’t quite clear whether or not . . . I thought 
a list had been asked for. I didn’t know whether salaries were included, and increases in salaries. 
 
On another issue, of a similar nature though, I wonder if you could give me the salaries of your top 
officials in your department. That would be the people who would be with you here today. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We would undertake to deliver that just as we did in The Department of 
Finance. I believe we did that last time in estimates for Public Service Commission. We’ll do that again. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — On the issue of people who have been dismissed, I wonder in the list that 
you gave out the other day, the name of Julie Campbell, who had been the administrator at, I believe the 
Wolseley — Indian Head or Wolseley — the Wolseley hospital, I guess it was, the nursing home; can 
you tell me whether or not there is an appeal in process? I don’t want the details of it, understand that, 
but I would like to know whether or not there is an appeal process under way in regards to that 
dismissal. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, there’s an appeal in process, received April 22, 1983, and I’d wish not 
to comment any further than that. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Can you give me that date again? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — April 22, 1983. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes, on a similar issue the name Sharon Young will be known to you as 
the individual who was transferred from P.A. to Regina and, in questioning in the House, the minister, I 
believe of government services at the time, said no appeal had been launched. And I wonder whether 
that is still the status of this individual, or whether an appeal has been started by the individual, and if 
that case has been heard and, if so, if you could tell me the outcome of the hearing. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, that particular person is in scope, and therefore it’s a grievance as 
opposed to an out of scope. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — But can you inform me whether a grievance has been filed and, if so, if it 
has been brought to some sort of a reasonable conclusion? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — She has filed a grievance, and I understand it’s not bee resolved at this point 
in time. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, there’s been a good number of grievances and that sort of thing 
happening in the past year. I wonder if you have a list of active grievances which are before you at the 
present time. I don’t want a lot of detail, but can you give me the 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2566 

numbers in the two areas? You mentioned there’s the two different areas, and if you’ll give me a list of 
those that are pending before you at the present time. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised that there’s approximately 387 in total, of which between 200 
and 250 are holdovers from the previous administration, grievances filed against the commission when 
they were in government. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, yesterday I had asked with respect to 
dismissals in respect of which settlements had not been arrived at, and it was suggested that that 
information might be available a little later. And I’ll ask now whether you have that available. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the total number of OCs terminated was 77. 
The number settled is 70. The amount of severance payment is 1.27 million. The average severance is 
18.151. 
 
The ones that have not settled and suing are: Harvey Abells is suing; Kenneth Neil is suing; Louis Roy 
is suing; Paul Dudgeon is still negotiating; Maura Gillis has agreed to severance payment and waiting 
for release of the other seven; Howard McMaster is still negotiating; Robert Sass has agreed to 
severance payment awaiting for a release of the other seven. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, when you say ‘waiting for release of the 
other seven,’ I don’t quite understand that and would be pleased if you would make that a little clearer 
for me. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — As I understand, we’re just simply waiting for his release to come back to us 
and that would finalize the situation. I’m sorry if I misled you there. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So that, in effect, you have three or four that are before the courts . . . 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Three before the courts and two still negotiating and basically two have 
settled. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, there are from time to time stories about 
additional dismissals, and I am now referring to one of about two months ago, perhaps two and a half 
months ago now, which quotes the minister as saying that . . . He talked about 1.3 million in severance 
payments, etc., and he said: 
 

The figure could grow with the possibility of more dismissals in a major reorganization of government 
expected to be announced within a month. 

 
We now have had what I take to be the major reorganization of government then being referred to, and I 
should say this is dated March 2. Could the minister indicate whether or not there is a likelihood of a 
significant number of dismissals arising out of the reorganization? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay. With regards to dismissals arising solely out of reorganization, 
apparently they haven’t really had any. I suppose you blend that in with the budget and certain areas 
being worked on with regard to the budget, and there has been some people that have been terminated 
because of their particular program being chopped. 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2567 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, does the minister have a figure of the 
number of employees who were displaced by reorganization or budget cuts and who did not find 
alternative employment in the government sector? And I am now referring to employees who are within 
the ambit of the Public Service Commission and not inquiring about power corporation and other 
Crowns, unless the minister happened to have that information available. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I am advised that as a result of the budget — and that’s where all of them 
are attributable to, is the budget — a total of 487 positions of which 385 were vacant positions, and 
therefore no person suffered as a result of that. The encumbered positions was 102. The breakdown of 
that was union positions were 65 and management positions were 37. So that’s a significant, I think, 
proportion relative to previous budget cuts that were taken out of the management side as opposed to out 
of the in-scope side. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, does the Public Service Commission 
have any responsibility for superannuation administration, or is that all over in Revenue and Financial 
Services? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s under PEBA and that now reports to the Minister of Revenue and 
Financial Services. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I might have asked this question on item 
1. I note that with respect to items 1, 2, and 3, there are some relatively significant, in relative terms, 
increases in staff — 7 and 4 and 2, or perhaps 12 people in all in those three managerial areas of the 
Public Service Commission, and I know that the contrary there are eight fewer positions in 
communications. Does this come about because of a reorganization, or are there in fact more people 
engaged in administration and employee relations and staff training as that was done a year ago? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s primarily a reorganization. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Items 3 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 7 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, special programs unit I note is new, and 
I believe you advised us yesterday that that was the heading under which the persons formerly employed 
by the women’s division of the Department of Labour were employed. Can the minister outline who are 
the people who serve the special programs unit, and what are their functions? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay. With regards to the special program dealing with — it came over 
from Labour — with regard to the women was Twigg, Edwards, Bickley and Coombe, with two 
vacancies. Department Services is Hodgins, Kimbley, Wall and Ryan. 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2568 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, what sort of functions do they perform? 
You’ve already indicated that they carry on the affirmative action programs. Do they carry on any other 
functions on behalf of the commission? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, it’s primarily affirmative action dealing with women, dealing with the 
native employment within government, and dealing with the employment within government of the 
handicapped. That’s primarily their function. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Vote 33 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
PROVINCIAL AUDITOR 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 28 

 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I don’t know whether the minister 
wishes me to go on now, but I want to ask about the staffing of the Provincial Auditor and the reasons 
for the decision to reduce the staff by five. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay, the question, as I take it, so Mr. Lutz can hear the question, is: what 
was the reason for the reduction of the staff in the Provincial Auditor’s office by five positions? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Right. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials, please? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — This is the Provincial Secretary . . . Provincial Auditor, sorry. And Mr. 
Bucknall and Mr. Fred Wendel. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Thank you. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — How was it arrived at is the normal way. I suppose the auditor went to the 
treasury board, and the treasury board looked and said, ‘Well, they can probably get by with fewer 
positions.’ And I suppose that’s how it was arrived at. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, the Provincial Auditor, in the course of 
his reports over the last several years, has placed some emphasis on the fact that his agency was not 
overstaffed, if I might put it at its lowest. In fact he indicated that his people were under a good deal of 
pressure with respect to the performance of their duties with 72 people. I wonder whether the minister 
would comment on how it is proposed that the job be done with five people less than the previous 
number, which as I recall the Provincial Auditor’s comments, he did not feel was in any sense 
overstaffing. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — My understanding and recollection was that with the reorganization of 
departments, etc., that that would in fact be sufficient. I would tend to want to answer that question more 
so this way, if I could, Mr. Chairman, is that in the 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2569 

event that the Provincial Auditor would see that number of staffing is inappropriate, then I think its 
number one, within his mandate, and probably within his obligation, to in fact bring that to the attention 
of this legislature in his report. I would hope that that be the case, that he would bring that to the public 
accounts committee, and hopefully the public accounts committee would make in their report to this 
legislature that there was in fact not enough, that it was understaffed, and use that mechanism. I find it 
rather uncomfortable sitting here trying to defend and look for advice from the Provincial Auditor with 
regard to this whole question. And I think it better coming from him through that committee then 
through me to the finance committee. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I am inclined to agree with the 
minister’s last comments. It is clearly a little difficult to direct questions, and the Provincial Auditor 
finds himself in a small conflict of interest. He really wishes to argue for what he, doubtless, considers 
to be adequate staff to report to the legislature, and on the other hand he wishes to be a diligent public 
servant in a sense serving the minister of the Crown through whom he reports — I don’t say that he is 
responsible to, but through whom he reports — and therefore wishes to supply information which would 
be helpful to the minister. There’s a little bit of a conflict there. 
 
I would therefore take the minister’s comments to be an invitation —that may put it too strongly —but 
an indication that the minister and his government would take no objection to the Provincial Auditor 
including in his report a provision with respect to staffing, and his comments on the adequacy of 
staffing, and in effect set out in his report in a way to invite the public accounts committee to address 
that question if they felt that it ought to be addressed, and if the Provincial Auditor had indicated that in 
his judgement it should be addressed. I take that from the minister’s comment and I would ask him to 
make a brief statement. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think that’s exactly what I said. I think that in my experience in the public 
accounts committee one of the first questions one asks of the Provincial Auditor is, ‘How is your staff 
component this year? Do you have enough people to in fact get the job done?’ That question I would 
think would normally be asked. In any public accounts that I’ve been involved it has been asked, and it 
should then be reported back to the legislature if that fact is not appropriate. If Mr. Lutz finds that 67 
positions is not enough, then certainly I as Minister of Finance would be prepared to do what I could do 
to ensure that his staffing did not come to the point of weakening his office, that he couldn’t effectively 
do his job. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, it would occur to me that a major 
reorganization of government is going to mean more work rather than less for the Provincial Auditor, at 
least for a year, until all of the accounts were reorganized on the new basis. It may well be that the result 
would be accounts which would be more easily audited. It may well be the other. But that is at least a 
possibility. But it seems to me that the reorganization, per se, would put extra pressures on the auditor, 
and I therefore am surprised that a substantial governmental reorganization would be accompanied by a 
reduction in the staff of the auditor in this year. I’m not suggesting — we could argue that another time 
— that it might not produce long-term economies. I would have thought that there’s no way it could 
produce the need for fewer staff this year, when a whole number of accounts have to be blended and 
reorganized. 
 
I want to ask the minister a question which I earlier opened up with him, and this had to 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2570 

do with the role of the Provincial Auditor and the role of the private sector auditors who are auditing 
Crown corporations. And the question I ask now is: are there any other agencies of government that are 
audited by private sector auditors other than some of the Crown corporations which report through the 
CIC, or to CIC? Are there any other but some of the commercial Crowns? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised that they do not do the community colleges; some of the legal 
aid — I think they do two legal aid clinics; and some of the local housing authority under Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation. Other than the . . . And then the five resource Crowns: potash, uranium, oil, 
minerals, and forest products. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m always unclear as to the role and the responsibility of the Provincial 
Auditor with respect to agencies such as the Western Development Museum, or such as, let us say, the 
community colleges. And I’m wondering whether the auditor assumes it to be his responsibility to either 
— let’s say, take the audits, the community colleges —either audit the community colleges or supervise 
the audit in a very general way in the way that he supervises in a general way the audit of the five 
resource Crowns to which we referred. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Under the new legislation that this legislature passed, the legislation now 
provides the auditor with setting the rules or the guide-lines by which a private sector auditor would do 
the audit. That applies not only to the Crown corporations, but to the community colleges, the legal aid, 
and the housing authorities, as well as the Crown corporations. So those rules or guide-lines now would 
be imposed by the Provincial Auditor on the outside auditors doing that work. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, how is it determined what is a 
government agency? I take it, say, a union hospital board is for these purposes clearly not a government 
agency. A community college, which is somewhat similarly organized but not the same since the board 
is appointed by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council unlike the hospital board, is, I take it then, a 
government agency. Western Development Museum, I guess, which has a board appointed by the 
Lieutenant-Governor, will be a government agency, I assume. Do we have a way of determining 
whether or not the Provincial Auditor is responsible for what I might term the fringe agencies who are 
financed basically by grants from the province, but have other sources of income, e.g., tuition fees in the 
case of the community college, or entrance fees in the case of Western Development Museum? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I suppose what the hon. member is asking me for is to further define 
the definition in the definition section of The Provincial Auditor Act, which goes through and sets out 
what a Crown agency is. I find that it’s somewhat of a difficult legal interpretation for me to make. I 
suppose that what we would see is common sense within those rules would apply. If there became a 
dispute with regard to that question, ultimately I suppose the courts would have to be the people that 
would determine in that grey area as to what is and what is not. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I’ll put it this way. The distinction of the 
division is to be made in accordance with the provisions set out in the new Provincial Auditor’s act, and 
at least up to now no difficulties are anticipated in deciding on which side of the line a particular 
grant-receiving agency falls. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I am advised by Mr. Lutz that they haven’t at this point in time found any. I 
suppose that’s not to say that it’s not possible that they will not down the 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2571 

road, and I suppose we’ll have to cross that bridge when they come to it, with regard to that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to address a couple questions to the minister, and I know, Mr. Minister, 
that you have established the new auditor’s act, and dealing with the estimates here. And I would just 
like to ask you: since you are establishing an act of the legislature for the auditor, why you did not in 
fact go another step to introduce comprehensive auditing as an area that you had a great amount of 
emotions in it; so much emotions, that I recall as chairman of the public accounts committee, that you 
resigned from it — resigned from the committee. 
 
Here you have an opportunity to put your commitments into action, and I wonder whether it’s a new 
realization that you can say one thing while you’re in opposition, at the time when you never expected 
being in the government, and now suddenly when you have the responsibilities placed upon your 
shoulder that you are indeed shying away from an area which you were so, apparently, deeply 
committed. I ask you: why the hesitancy, now that you could indeed present a comprehensive auditing? 
You have indicated to us that another Tory government in Ontario has it, the federal government . . . 
 
Recently, there was an editorial in the Leader-Post indicating that indeed to dismiss it, that 
comprehensive auditing does not have a role to play and does not indeed contribute to better 
accountability, should not be dismissed as you apparently are dismissing it now. And really what I want 
to say is it’s a very strange reaction from a minister who was so totally committed to comprehensive 
auditing, and committed to what we have heard so often, ‘open government.’ 
 
What concerns me now is the attitude of your government, Mr. Minister. We’ve heard so much about 
comprehensive auditing, and the need for it, and the accountability that it would give. We’ve heard so 
much about having television in committees of public accounts and Crown corporations, and the 
openness and the need for the openness of government. And now I fear what is happening is that there is 
a new realization or reluctance on your part, to in fact take a step forward which you in fact were 
propounding so strenuously in the past. And all I can say is that either it was an act on your part when 
you were chairman, and resigned on what you indicated was a point of principle . . . and so I would ask 
you to enlighten the public as to what is your stance in respect to the implementation of comprehensive 
auditing? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Number one, back in history when I resigned from the public accounts 
committee. I along with the then member from Moose Jaw North, Mr. Skoberg, a member of the NDP, 
and the vice-chairman of the public accounts committee — the resignation did not happen because the 
government did not proceed with comprehensive audit. The reason for the resignation of both myself 
and Mr. Skoberg was because of the fact that the committee, through the majority of the government at 
that time, would not allow the committee, through the majority of the government at that time, would 
not allow the committee to hear the views of various people with regard to comprehensive audit. 
 
What we were concerned about, both Mr. Skoberg and myself, was not the comprehensive audit, 
because Skoberg was against comprehensive audit. The concern was that the committee was not being 
allowed . . . After it had agreed, it was not then being allowed because of the majority of government 
stepping in and saying, ‘No, you cannot call J.J. Macdonell as a witness to this committee. No, you 
cannot call the late Robert Andras to this committee’ But I felt that it could serve the committee well to 
hear the views of people that had brought in that particular program. I might indicate that since our 
election, I’m aware of the fact that the public accounts 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2572 

committee has in fact called now the Auditor General of Canada, Mr. Dye. It called in fact myself, as 
now the Minister of Finance, before that committee. What I resigned for, and the reason John Skoberg 
resigned, is because of the inability of the committee to be able to hear witnesses. 
 
The member talks about irresponsible statements, and finally found the reason for his questioning. He 
sees the opposition’s role, I take it — from what I could read into what he is saying — that they have a 
licence to be irresponsible. That is what I understood him to say — that he can be irresponsible — and I 
guess I finally had an admission from the member opposite that his statements have, in the last while, 
been irresponsible, and I wasn’t of the mistaken view that I was the only guy that thought that way. I’m 
glad that we both think now the same with regard to that particular issue. 
 
With regard to answering the question on comprehensive audit, there are two or three different forms or 
definitions of comprehensive audit. I wonder, prior to answering that question, if you could define for 
me what you mean by comprehensive audit and then I can try to answer the question. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I think, Mr. Chairman, not to delay the disagreement over facts, I think that what I 
was saying in respect to the minister is that, in my view, he was acting in one way while he was in 
opposition, that is advocating a comprehensive auditing, and now that he is in government when he has 
the opportunity — the power — to do something, he is sitting on the sidelines and is being hesitant. And 
what I am saying is that one can draw from that conclusion that what he was saying in opposition was 
really just whistling in the wind, not expecting to be ever in the position of power to implement it. 
 
More importantly, in respect to comprehensive auditing, you know, if you want me to spend an 
afternoon in defining it . . . But I think you were in the committee and it dealt with the accountability of 
comprehensive auditing. You have called in some of the so-called experts. The disagreement that we 
had in the past, when you took your candy and went home from the committee, at that time it wasn’t a 
question of calling witnesses in respect to comprehensive auditing. It was a question of the timetable, 
and who would come first, and in what order, and that was the basic disagreement there. But I think that 
I’d like to ask the minister: is he in fact prepared to proceed with comprehensive auditing? And I would 
ask him to outline what he intends and means by the terminology of comprehensive auditing as it would 
apply. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The reason I was asking that question . . . I guess I forgot that you were in 
the committee at that time, as well. Lloyd Johnson, who’s no longer with us, as well . . . He was the 
member from Turtleford. His comment with regard to comprehensive auditing was as follows: 
 

When I was a boy going to school I went to a comprehensive high school, and I think that was a 
great mistake made by governments, and I was against comprehensive high schools, and I’m against 
comprehensive auditing. 

 
Now, I’m just wondering if your definition was the same as that member when he was sitting on the 
committee. 
 
With regards to the question of what have we done with regard to the auditor, I suggest that, number 
one, that we have made a large number of steps towards improving the lot of both the public accounts 
committee and the Provincial Auditor. We have opened the 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2573 

public accounts committee up to the media. I think what we’re finding in that media is exactly what I 
used to say when I was in opposition: that you would have it open up for a few weeks, and you would 
have a lot of media attention to it, and then it would slow down and there would be very, very few media 
people covering the public accounts. That’s still my view, that you’re probably going to find that type of 
situation. That’s the experience that every other jurisdiction across the country has had with regard to 
the opening of public accounts. And I think that the step has been made. It was a step resisted by the 
previous administration for a variety of reasons that were not valid. But that was their position. 
 
We now have introduced into this Assembly and passed through this Assembly unanimously a new 
Provincial Auditor act — something that the Provincial Auditor has been calling for for a number of 
years within this jurisdiction. And in that act we’re also setting out various new rules governing the 
Provincial Auditor, one being that the auditor’s report will now be tabled through the Speaker as 
opposed to being tabled through the Minister of Finance. The salary of the Provincial Auditor can no 
longer be set in the closed doors of cabinet office where the views of cabinet with regard to their favour 
of disfavour of the Provincial Auditor could have a bearing on what his salary increase would be. That is 
now outside of the power of the cabinet any longer. I suggest there’s been many improvements made 
with regards to that. I suggest that we have as good an act as anybody across the country at this point in 
time with regard to comprehensive audit. 
 
Why I ask for the definition of the member opposite — my understanding and interpretation of the act is 
that should the Provincial Auditor at this point in time wish to make comment with regard to the 
economies or to the effectiveness of a given program within that definition that the accounting 
community would understand provincial auditing to be. With the independence firmly established now, I 
believe that he can make moves with regards to that area. Whether or not we should increase the staffing 
component of the Provincial Auditor, as the Ottawa people have done, to three- or four-fold of what it 
was before, one has to ask oneself, ‘Has that been an effective vehicle in Ottawa with regards to that?’ 
 
I asked several members of that committee when I . . . I think if you read the verbatim of the public 
accounts committee held last summer as to the effectiveness of comprehensive audit in the Ottawa 
model, It think many members of the committee were of the view, once they heard the opinions or the 
definitions or the explanations of the present chairman of the public accounts, or the then-chairman — I 
don’t know whether he still is or not — of Mr. Dye, of a couple of other people, they were not really 
impressed with the concept to increase that number of staff component to do a particular new system of 
audit, would in fact pay dividends, and that the five-year period in the federal government has not been 
near successful as many people hoped it would be. And I suppose from that point of view, I would, to a 
degree, have amended my views with regard to that concept. Now I believe it can be moved in, I believe 
the Provincial Auditor can do some of that type of work right now, and certainly his mandate. I believe, 
is strong enough now that he can comment on areas that perhaps otherwise before he would have been 
reluctant to comment on. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, certainly the minister is hedging as much as possible to avoid the answer. And 
what I want to ask you is: have you a timetable for the implementation of comprehensive auditing, 
including the necessary staff complement for the auditor to carry it out? Have you a timetable? 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2574 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Do we have a timetable? I suppose — . . . You know, I don’t have the 
ability to sort of dictate whether this particular stuff goes through or doesn’t go through. So you’re 
asking me as to when I would see it coming in. I would say, if I can be as definitive as possible, I would 
say that you will see comprehensive audit in this province before the government changes, and a new 
government replaces this one. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — All I want to comment and close it, that you should start acting fast. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, with respect to the issue of 
comprehensive auditing, as the minister well knows, there are three or four definitions — all of them 
more or less similar — but one of them involves the government setting out in its budget papers, or other 
documents, the objectives it seeks to achieve. That’s one approach to comprehensive auditing. And then 
the auditor, when he is commenting upon the effectiveness and getting good value for the money — 
which are the standards against which he presumably does his commenting — has the government’s 
view of the objective sought to be achieved set out for him. Certainly the auditor doesn’t want to get into 
the business of deciding whether a particular objective should be pursued. That’s not his function. His 
function only is to say: given that that’s the road you decided to go down, did you get down there with 
the minimum cost and the maximum effect? 
 
I am asking the minister whether or not he is giving any consideration for any agencies of government to 
set out the objectives in a sufficiently precise way so that the Provincial Auditor could measure the 
efficiency and the effectiveness of the expenditure of the moneys voted in achieving the objectives so 
defined by the government and the legislature. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There is a government-wide approach right now to try to come to grips with 
the whole question of productivity. And I think as the hon. member will know, that is, that can, in the 
public sector, sometimes be a difficult creature to get one’s hands on. Nevertheless, it’s still, I think, a 
laudable area to try to pursue, and I think by the very nature of productivity one has to basically come to 
that very determination of what is this program really designed to do, set out the objectives and how are 
we getting to it and how can we get to it more effectively and deliver that more effectively. 
 
And I think that’s . . . I would hope that would be a goal of all governments across this country, given 
the tight economic times, given the budgetary situations, the deficit situations — I would hope that all 
would seek ways of doing that and interchange any areas that have been effective or less effective for 
various people. We hope to pursue that. It’s not something that can be done overnight or it’s not 
something that can be done with a whim. We do have a committee that’s headed by Gordon Dirks but 
also most of the senior deputies are participating in and trying to grapple with that problem. 
 
So a long about answer to the hon. member’s question is that I believe that the productivity gauge, if you 
like, will start to do that, and from there perhaps we can proceed further into gauging productivity or for 
the Provincial Auditor to comment on productivity and productivity gains. I think it’s a worthwhile 
exercise for the public servant to be able to have that type of a mechanism by which he can gauge 
himself. His counterpart, I suppose, in the private sector can be judged easier on the basis that what did 
the bottom line of the balance sheet or the income statement say at the end of a given fiscal period. 
That’s more difficult for government to do, particularly for areas in 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2575 

what we might call the softer areas of Health, Social Services, Education, that type of thing. 
 
So given that, we are trying to come to grips with that problem, trying to define those areas. But having 
said that, it’s an area that requires a great deal of work, a great deal of thought and probably a great deal 
of debate within the public sector. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I wish the government every good 
fortune in defining, in arriving at productivity measures, particularly on the soft side, and this is not to 
suggest that it shouldn’t be tried. I’m just saying that it is really more difficult than appears at first blush. 
And indeed it is in the private sector and any large organization as well. It’s easy enough to assess the 
performance of the entire organization, but for a given segment of it, whether the PR branch of VIA Rail 
is carrying its freight will be a judgement call as opposed to an arithmetic measurement. The question I 
ask the minister is whether or not the work in arriving at productivity measures has proceeded to the 
extent anywhere, anywhere in anything that could be called the soft-side area, to the extent that the 
government will be publishing measures of output — if I may put it this way? The government can very 
easily measure the inputs. Productivity is getting the most units of output for the least units of input, in a 
crude oversimplification. We don’t have any difficult measuring the inputs; there’re not too many. We 
have lots of difficulty measuring the units of output. And I’m wondering whether in any area we have 
reached the stage where the government can indicate how it’s measuring the units of output of the 
Department of Education or any agency of the Department of Education. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I suppose you’ve identified the same thing that I referred to as the 
difficulty of a problem that would say the billion-odd dollars that you allocate to the Department of 
Health, is it being delivered in the most productive way to the people? You know, on that one you could 
go around and chase your tail for a long time, and the same with Social Services. I suppose it becomes 
easier in a program like a $3,000 housing grant program, where you see a fair significant take-up by it. 
Those types of things are easier to measure and gauge — more difficult in the area of health care, and 
the soft-side areas that consume two-thirds of your budget as well. It’s a difficult problem, and it’s a 
problem that has to be done with a certain degree of care. 
 
Certainly, I think, if we come upon a system that works better, and is innovative in a given area, we 
would probably be prepared to share that with as many people as we possibly could. But until such time, 
I don’t know of any . . . And I’m not on that committee. I don’t know of any intentions at this point in 
time to do any publishing with it. I would hope some time down the road they would, though. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 28 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

THE SASKATCHEWAN ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY 
 

Ordinary Expenditures — Vote 44 
 
Item 1 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2576 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yeah, the officials of the Saskatchewan Assessment Authority are Nick 
Rudrick, Don Bennett, and Laura Joorisity. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I wonder if the minister would give us a 
statement on the present state of reassessments, and more particularly . . . I will give a statement, and it 
will assist the minister in knowing what I’m talking about. There have been, in many instances, people 
upset about reassessments, and we’ll come to that in a moment. One of the reasons why they’re upset is 
that there has been a long interval between the reassessment and the last time they were reassessed, with 
the result that the changes in the evaluations are startling — sometimes three and a half, four times what 
the previous figures were, and perhaps even more than that. I’ve got some figures of that order, and that 
comes about because of the long gap. 
 
A few years ago, the hope was expressed that we could get on a 10-year cycle for RMs, and with that in 
mind, some additional staff were added; the assessment authority was set up. 
 
The first question . . . I’ll ask a few questions along this line, but the first question is: are we catching up 
or falling behind? Are we narrowing the gap, so that the reassessments are going to be on a cycle of 12 
years or 14 years, or are we in fact widening the gap, so we’re looking at 17 or 18? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I am advised that they are approximately 75 per cent completed — the 
reassessment in urban Saskatchewan — and about 60 per cent in rural Saskatchewan. Their hope would 
be to get on to the next assessment in 1985. 
 
I agree with the member opposite that the problem has been a long-standing problem. Exactly how we 
come and resolve and arrive at this one, I suspect that the hon. member made reference to the concern, 
being it’s been so long since they’d been reassessed. 
 
I think if really you got down to the biggest concern is that the person out there that owns property, he 
just doesn’t like the idea of seeing his taxes go up. Quite frankly, he couldn’t care less whether it was 
reassessed last year or 50 years before that. He is concerned that taxes are probably too high. And quite 
frankly, the gentlemen and ladies in assessment authority have, I suppose, one of the most thankless jobs 
in all government, to go around and put assessment and value on property so that local government can 
assess property taxes. 
 
It’s been a long-standing problem, I suppose, that hasn’t got any worse. I suppose the question could 
also be asked: has it got any better? And I would probably say, other than that the computer system that 
hopefully would be up and running this year will expedite things a bit — and I don’t take credit for that 
— but it hasn’t probably improved that significantly over the way it was run under the previous 
administration. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I think that under the previous 
administration there was an improvement in later years from bad to not so bad, and I’m not suggesting 
that all was well. I’m just suggesting that steps had been taken, and perhaps I can ask the question this 
way: you suggest that there’s going to be a new cycle started in 1985, if I understood what you’re 
saying; what is anticipated with respect to that cycle? More particularly, when you reassess an RM or a 
town in 1985, when will it have last been reassessed? What will the gap be? What will the cycle be? 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2577 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — The previous cycle was started in ’74-75, and if we’re able to complete the 
remaining 25 in urbans and the remaining 40 in rurals, that would be a 10-year cycle. I understood both 
from the hon. member and from the local governments involved that they would be happy with the 
10-year cycle, or that that would be at least a targeted area to try to shoot for. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I am pleased to hear that, because 
I think that at least up to now, the view of SARM and SUMA has been that a 10-year cycle was all that 
the situation would require. And I then ask the minister: do I understand him to say that it is believed 
that when the work is done between 1983 and 1985, by 1985 there is every prospect we would be on a 
10-year cycle for both urbans and rurals, or close to it, give or take a year — it’ll take a year. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would say that would be true, give or take a year. And for the hon. member 
from Quill Lakes, we’ll try to get it done as fast as we can, but I can’t give ultimate commitment it will 
be done at such and such a date of such and such a year. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I haven’t had many complaints, but the 
ones I have had have been shrill, if I may put it that way. And it’s never been clear to me why it should 
matter very much whether people had their property reassessed so far as municipal taxes are concerned, 
or school taxes are concerned, providing the entire area is reassessed. But clearly in Moose Jaw two or 
three years ago, whenever that dust-up was, it did have an effect and it had an effect because the relative 
assessment of commercial property and residential property was changed. 
 
In the course of the reassessments, is it frequent that the relative position of commercial property and 
residential property changes significantly, or are they all revalued about the same? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Apparently the market ratios are reflected into that with regards to a city, 
and I’m fully cognizant on the problem you have. The people in Saskatoon say that Moose Jaw is 
assessed this way and it’s wrong; and Moose Jaw are saying Saskatoon is assessed this way and it’s 
wrong; and never the two do meet. And I suspect never will they meet probably, that we come to a 
system that is satisfactory to all, other than to say that everybody seeks after that compromise situation. 
As I say, the people of the assessment authority obviously have a very difficult job, and I’m sure every 
time your phone rings with a high shrill they have 10 to 15 of them the same way. So, as I say, as a 
function of government it’s not one that you end up with a lot of bouquets on. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have an area that I’d like to explore here a bit, and 
this has to do with the relative assessment in a city like Regina of downtown business property versus 
suburban business property. And I have had occasion to look at some of those figures and the figures are 
really quite startling, or they startled me at least. I took the 18 block Hamilton Street in Regina and I 
took all of the properties fronting on the 18 block Hamilton Street from the lane on the back of the . . . 
on the east side of the 18 block to the lane on the west side. And I added up all of the assessment for 
both land and buildings — and there are some valuable buildings there — and I found that to be greater 
than the combined land and buildings assessment of the Northgate shopping centre, the Southland 
shopping centre and the Golden Mile shopping centre combined. 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2578 

It struck me . . . And I was doing this in order to try to ascertain one of the reasons why suburban 
shopping was so attractive from the point of view of the business person, i.e., why he sought the 
suburban location, and why he was able to get a great tract of land out there with parking and still not 
have a very, very high tax. I thought, well, great horns and spoons, if you can have an acre of land in the 
city limits you must be paying an arm and a leg. Not so compared with the downtown land assessments 
and building assessments. I’m now speaking from memory and could be wrong, but it seemed to me at 
that time that the old Simpson building at the south-east corner of 11th and Hamilton, land and 
buildings, had a higher assessment than the Golden Mile shopping centre, all in. Those struck me as 
really curious, and encouraging a certain suburban development and militating against downtown 
development. 
 
I wonder whether or not the minister can advise whether or not any of the assessment practices which 
are now being introduced had the effect of placing a higher assessment on what is proving to be valuable 
suburban commercial land and a relatively lower assessment on downtown commercial land. I’d expect 
the downtown land to be a good deal higher per square foot still, of course, but not it must be many, 
many times higher per square foot — many, many times. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised that they’re in the final stages of addressing that reassessment in 
the city of Regina, and that one might recognize that problem that you raised, and that one might expect 
to see some corrective measures being done to address that situation. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I am pleased to hear that since I think 
that it’s important that we don’t, by the accident of assessment, direct development in a particular way, 
to a major extent, when we are proceeding with other policies in the other direction. No one objects to 
some urban shopping centres. They perform an excellent function. We would certainly wish them . . . If 
they weren’t there we would need some measures to get them there. But to the same extent, we also 
need a downtown core. And they are competing merchants frequently, and there ought to be some more 
equity — as I would term it equity — in the relative taxes they bear. And the downtown location simply 
does not command the commercial advantage which it did when we were thinking in these terms years 
ago. The shopping by car with a parking lot is a very substantial commercial advantage now, and 
accordingly that, I think, ought to be reflected in the value we put on the properties for assessment 
purposes. 
 
I change the subject now and ask one other question — one other kind of question. And this may not be 
properly addressed to you, and if it’s not, I know you’ll advise me. This has to do with the situation, 
particularly in school units, when a portion of the area is reassessed and the other is not, and someone 
arrives at something called an equalized assessment on which school grants are calculated and other 
grants which are based upon assessment. There’s some of that with respect to municipal grants as well. 
They have an equalization factor, and they will depend upon the taxable assessment available to 
municipalities. And for those purposes there must be a comparability. 
 
And I am asking whether or not the assessment commission is the agency which attempts to arrive at 
what the education people say to me as equalized assessment, as between one rural area of the province 
and another rural area of the province. I’m not now talking about an attempt to equate rural with urban 
assessment. I’m aware of that insoluble problem, or theoretically impossible problem. But one rural area 
with another 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2579 

rural area, one of which has been recently reassessed, and the other which has not. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The basic authority for that is Rural and Urban Affairs and Education 
delegate down to Saskatchewan Assessment Authority, who collectively sort of tries to come to grips 
with that particular problem. The problem pointed out is clearly a problem we’re facing today. And how 
you, I suppose expedite the problem, is the . . . I suppose the simplest solution would be if all the 
boundaries were the same. In a nice utopian world, we could get it all done at one time, but I don’t think 
that will come to place for a while. We try to develop a formula that works the best as we possibly can. 
We try to get the rural areas, where possible, to fit within that school unit area, and being assessed at a 
given time. That’s probably the only workable solution at this point in time. But other than that, it’s a 
problem the hon. member raises, and the equalization formula becomes difficult to work. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — But it is the assessment commission which says, all right, this half or the 
north half of Ajax school unit has reassessed, and the south half has not. On average, when it was 
reassessed, it moved up the assessments by 2.8 times, so then we’ll move the lower half up by 2.8 times, 
and go whatever method is used, but some method of coming up with an equalized assessment. It’s the 
assessment authority that does it? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — May I compliment them, if I may say so, because with respect to school 
grants, I’ve heard remarkably few complaints from people who say that our school grants are not . . . 
‘We have been diddled because were reassessed and the others weren’t’ . . . once it’s explained on the 
equalized assessment. There’s lots of problems with respect to rural and urban, that the town. . . The mill 
rate is too high or our assessment is . . . the town pays too much or too little. There’s no way to solve 
that because the town people always argue that they’re paying far too much for the value of their 
property compared with the value of that rural property — and rural people always say, ‘We’re paying 
far too much for school purposes. On a per capita basis we’re playing twice as much as the towns.’ And 
there’s no solution to that, and there never will be. But the other is at least theoretically possible. And I 
was wondering who was doing it. And it will get progressively less of a problem if the cycle gets 
shorter, and particularly if land doesn’t go up in value so fast as it did in the 1970s. So perhaps we’re 
going to get our way out of this one. Are there any particular problems in this area? Do you anticipate — 
I’m asking a different question now — do you anticipate problems of the kind that arose in Moose Jaw, 
because of what amounted to a fairly sharp change in the relative value of the commercial property and 
residential property? Are you anticipating that happening in any other city. More particularly, are you 
anticipating it happening in Regina? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I suppose, in response to that, it’s difficult to assess just exactly what that 
impact is going to be. The officials from the department, along with Mr. Embury, the Legislative 
Secretary, to my office, has been meeting with both the cities of Saskatoon and Regina and trying to 
collectively see how it will impact, and where the problems might be and not be, and how they could 
deal with those given problems. So try to, I suppose, anticipate the problem and hope to alleviate some 
of the problem if that’s possible. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, a short question. When do you expect 
that this problem may become apparent in Regina? 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2580 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — It probably won’t happen this year. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, I have a couple of questions, Mr. Chairman. In respect to having the 
Saskatchewan assessment authority under the Department of Finance, I was wondering whether in 
reorganization whether you have anticipated a move from the Department of Finance, say, to Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs, or to the Urban Affairs and a branch in the Rural Affairs; or ha sit been 
working out satisfactorily under the Department of Finance? I was just wondering whether you had any 
anticipation of a change. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There isn’t a lot of ministers lining up to take it. I understand the history of 
it was that it was in Urban Affairs, and then they were bickering with Rural Affairs, and they were 
bickering with Education, and ultimately it was moved to Finance because they were the great soothers 
of all problems in government, and therefore Finance ended up with the problem. No, I would say that 
we hadn’t given any thought to allocating it to a different minister at this point in time, and those 
decisions tend to be made by the Premier, and I think if he’s going to make that type of announcement I 
would tend to wait and see what he says. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Just in respect to the problem of carrying it out within that 10-year period that you’re 
indicating, have you analyzed and determined the staffing needs of whether it should be increased for 
the work of the assessing? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yeah, we’re looking at that question now as to whether or not our staffing 
is, in fact, sufficient or not, and we haven’t come to a final resolve whether or not there should be more 
staff to it or not; so I think we would be probably coming to resolve on that problem within a month’s 
time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — And you indicated that in the rural you had about 60 per cent completed. I was 
wondering if the minister could provide me — and not today — but a list of all the RMs which have, 
indeed, been reassessed; the year in which they were in fact reassessed, and to provide me with a list of 
the 40 per cent of the RMs which are not to date assessed. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We can provide that. They don’t have it with them, but it’s something they 
can prepare and send to you. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 44 agreed to. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 

Resolutions 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, I move: 
 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain expenses 
of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1984, the sum of $1,954,081,630 be granted 
out of the 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2581 

Consolidated Fund. 
 

Resolution agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — From the heritage fund: 
 

Resolved, that toward making good the supply granted to Her Majesty on account of certain 
expenses of the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 1984, the sum of $476,074,000 
be granted out of the Saskatchewan Heritage Fund, which is eight-twelfths making twelve-twelfths. 
 

Resolution agreed to. 
 
The said resolutions were reported, and by leave of the Assembly read twice and agreed to. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Sandberg that Bill 
No. 54 — An Act to amend The Business Corporations Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the 
next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. McLeod that Bill 
No. 58 — An Act respecting Local Government in Northern Saskatchewan be now read a second 
time. 
 
MR. YEW: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the opportunity to speak in second date 
regarding Bill No. 58 regarding local government for northern Saskatchewan. As all members review 
this bill, and the government’s different policies and programs for the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
I believe it is important that we recognize the unique features of the North, of northern Saskatchewan, 
and how it has developed. First we must recognize that geographical features of the North are different, 
and so then its settlement patterns and economic bases are as unique. 
 
These facts of course, Mr. Speaker, were fully recognized by the NDP government, the former 
administration, and for 11 positive and productive years that government followed a coherent 
development strategy for northern Saskatchewan. And that development strategy, Mr. Speaker, 
produced results. There were many major improvements in health care facilities; many, many new 
educational facilities and programs; roads, bridges, air fields, and communication systems to break down 
the barriers of social isolation for many of those communities were developed under the former 
administration. And development of responsible political organizations at the local municipal level as 
well were developed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A strategy for development, Mr. Speaker; a strategy for financial commitments with political 
commitments; a strategy with results, positive results. 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2582 

The approach of the Tory government opposite, I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, is a very different one. To be 
sure, they talk about a vision for northern Saskatchewan. They talk about development. They talk about 
programs for the North, but clearly, Mr. Speaker, it’s all talk with little action —with very little action. 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives told the people of Saskatchewan, and the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, that they had a new vision for northern Saskatchewan. They talked about a very new 
economic development plan. Unfortunately that new vision has turned out to be a nightmare for the 
people of the North. The Tories have cancelled plans for a new hospital for La Ronge. They have cut 
back severely on all new transportation projects. They have not moved at all to settle outstanding treaty 
land entitlement claims. They have abandoned, Mr. Speaker, the previous administration’s stringent 
surface lease land policies which sought to ensure northern employment in northern projects. Their new 
surface lease agreement at Rabbit Lake is poor and is weak. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, this Tory government has abandoned the people of northern Saskatchewan and 
has betrayed them. In his second reading remarks on this bill, Mr. Speaker, the minister made three 
major points. He spoke of economic self-sufficiency for the northern people; he spoke about 
consultation with Northerners; and he spoke of northern local government responsibility. I should like to 
talk very briefly, Mr. Speaker, on each of these issues. 
 
First, the minister claims that this policy is to make northern people economically self-sufficient. Now 
clearly, Mr. Speaker, no one can disagree. No one in this House can disagree with that as a worthy goal, 
but has this policy worked? I say no. I say that this Assembly cannot deny the fact that it hasn’t worked 
so far. So far it has meant a complete failure, Mr. Speaker, and there are now far more people in the 
North dependent on welfare than ever before. Unemployment has sky-rocketed 30-some-odd per cent 
than was there by the former administration. The open for business policy has failed for northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Second, the minister spoke about consultation. Again, this is a noble goal and no one can deny that, Mr. 
Speaker, but I should like the minister to explain to this Assembly, to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, to all local governments in the North, just how extensively he has consulted on this bill 
now in front of us, Bill No. 58. Has he explained to northern people how this bill differs from the earlier 
bill introduced in December? Has he consulted with them about those revisions, and the reasons for 
those revisions? Did he circulate draft copies of this bill in northern Saskatchewan before introducing it 
in here last week? 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke about the importance of responsible local government in 
northern Saskatchewan — once again, a very noble goal. The minister seems to forget, Mr. Speaker, that 
for anyone to have real, meaningful responsibility, whether it be a provincial government, a local 
government or a private person, there must be the means to act. In order for a local municipal council to 
be responsible and to act responsibly, it must have the means, the financial means, the economic base, to 
be responsible, in fact. That, Mr. Speaker, is where we see this Conservative government at its worst. 
 
Take the concept of northern revenue sharing, for example. In theory, it’s an excellent idea, an idea 
developed by the NDP government when it as in office. But while this Tory government, Mr. Speaker, 
talks about revenue sharing, they cut back on funds available at the same time. In the NDP’s last budget, 
for example, Mr. Speaker, there 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2583 

was more than $6.5 million budgeted for northern revenue sharing — more than $6.5 million, Mr. 
Speaker, for northern local governments, for northern communities, not counting any capital project 
funds. As soon as they took office, however, Mr. Speaker, the Tory government cut back that $6.5 
million to only $4.9 million, a cut of 25 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Even in this most recent budget, Mr. 
Speaker, there is still only $4.9 million for revenue sharing, a long ways short of the 6.5 million 
budgeted by the former administration more than a year ago. 
 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, we clearly see that when this government talks about responsible government for the 
North, it is just that — talk and no action. This government refuses to provide a truly adequate financial 
base for effective responsibility by Northerners in their own local governments. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would therefore like to make three final points. As all members of this 
Assembly know, northern people need a new legal framework for northern local government. That 
process was started many months ago by the former administration, by the NDP government, and that 
positive features of this bill were developed then. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I must stress that the people of northern Saskatchewan resent the way that the 
minister has prepared this latest bill without consultation with those that are affected. They resent the 
government using its delay tactics as blackmail in order to have the bill passed quickly at the end of a 
long session. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to the government opposite, the people of northern 
Saskatchewan need leadership by a positive committed government. Because of their inaction, their 
neglect and their poor policies, they are feeling helpless and abandoned by this government. 
 
The Conservative Party misled the people of the North last year, Mr. Speaker. The Conservative 
government should not be betraying those people now They need an economic base, just the same as 
every other community in this province. And it is with these comments, Mr. Speaker, that I indicate that 
I shall be supporting this bill in principle at this stage, although there are questions which will better 
wait until the committee takes into account the final reading. With that, Mr. Speaker, I thank you. 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would just say in very brief comments to close debate on second reading, Mr. Speaker, a couple of 
things in reply. As the hon. member from Cumberland has said, there can be some much more detailed 
discussion in committee of the whole. I would say that as far as his charge about us not consulting and 
not providing copies of the bill to the local elected people in northern Saskatchewan, Bill 61, as it was 
known in the last session (the hon. member is very aware of this), bill 61 which is in essence the same 
bill and there are some changes, and we can go into those. We will go into those changes in detail later. 
But that bill was distributed widely to all locally elected government officials in northern Saskatchewan 
at that time. 
 
What I have been hearing from local elected people in northern Saskatchewan is: introduce the bill as 
quickly as possible once the amendments that are necessary are incorporated. They have been 
incorporated; the bill has been introduced. So I find it really surprising from the member representing 
that area of the province to say . . . 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2584 

Certainly, some of his criticisms are some of the same criticisms that he’s made for some time, and they 
relate very little to this particular bill. 
 
But I would say that as far as to say that there’s been no consultation, the consultation that we’ve had 
has said to us, ‘Introduce this bill as quickly as possible.’ One other very short point, he mentions that 
the former government budgeted —I think he used the word ‘budgeted’ — $6.5 million for local 
government in the North. We have said $4.9 million in this particular budget, and this particular bill will 
provide for a revenue-sharing formula, but will provide $4.9 million to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the things that’s very, very important to remember here is that the regional government concept 
that was a part of what the former administration saw as a part of local government in northern 
Saskatchewan is conspicuous by its absence in this bill, Mr. Speaker, and for very good reason. Because 
I, as Minister of Northern Saskatchewan, and we, as a Conservative government in this province, see no 
reason whatever for the regional government concept that was suggested by my predecessor and that 
member’s former employer in DNS, who thought that the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan and the 
government had to have control through the regional government concept, and maintain control over 
local government autonomy. That’s not what we see. It’s conspicuous by its absence, as I’ve said. And 
of course the $10 million that was provided for that — it was the $10 million or thereabouts provided for 
regional governments — that is no longer necessary because the concept goes by the board. 
 
And with those very few remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill 
No. 51 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act be now read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I want to add a few words to the debate on this bill — the 
bill dealing with the Oil and Gas Conservation Act and amending it. It will be, I think, a convenience to 
the House if I add a few words on The Public Utilities Companies Act in the course of my remarks, 
since they are linked. 
 
The Oil and Gas Conservation Act is being changed to provide authority under that act for the regulation 
of the wellhead price of natural gas, and that authority is being removed from The Public Utilities 
Companies Act. It has by and large not been used since the great bulk of natural gas sold in this province 
has been purchased by the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. And that has been purchased outside the 
ambit of The Public Utilities Companies Act. I have not checked whether or not the relatively small 
amount of gas that is sold from the Steelman field is covered by The Public Utilities Companies Act. 
But even there I think the act is not being used to regulate the price at which the gas which is found in 
solution and is taken out of the oil down in the south-east corner is produced in association with oil 
production. I’m not sure that that is marketed through The Public Utilities Companies Act. 
 
So what in effect we’re dealing with is the issue of who should price the natural gas which is sold at the 
wellhead by producers, now to the Saskatchewan Power Corporation very largely, but perhaps in the 
future to other purchasers. 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2585 

The Public Utilities Companies Act provided a method whereby a board — in this case the board which 
we know as the Local Government Board, I think acting under some other name, but the same people 
and organization — set the price. And the effect of the new bill is to say that there will not be a board 
but that it will be set by order in council. And the effect of that, Mr. Speaker, is to set a pricing 
mechanism whereby the person who must take the price (who is the purchaser, the price-taker, to use the 
minister’s words) must accept the price set by the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, and will not have 
any opportunity to make any representations. 
 
It is the precise reverse of the public utilities review commission. The government opposite takes the 
position that, let us say, the price of natural gas which is sold to the consumer ought not to be set by the 
Crown or the governor or the cabinet or the Lieutenant-Governor in Council, but should be set by a 
public utilities review commission — a commission to which representatives of the public can make 
presentations, and which board performs something of a quasi-judicial function. At least it hears several 
sides — the provider of the service, the consumer of the service — and sets a price. 
 
And that was the arrangement under The Public Utilities Companies Act in so far — or it would be the 
arrangement — in so far as natural gas was sold to anybody other than the Crown. This is now being 
swept away, and the arrangement is going to be that natural gas that is sold — the price is going to be set 
by the Crown and not by any independent board. It is, as I say, a precise reverse of the position of the 
government with respect to the setting of the retail price of natural gas. 
 
I don’t know why the government takes the view that when it comes to the retail price of natural gas it 
should be an administer or tribunal where both producer and consumer, or buyer and seller, can make 
their case and it can be set by an impartial board. But when we’re talking about the wellhead price of 
natural gas, quite the reverse is true, and whereas we now have a public utilities review apparatus for 
setting that price, that shall be swept away and it shall now be done by the Crown. 
 
I am baffled as to know the reasons for it. In the current circumstances it will make no particular 
difference. Since the purchaser has been, by and large, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation, the vendor 
of natural gas has been effectively in the position of selling to the power corporation at the price that the 
power corporation was willing to pay, or not selling his gas. That was his effective position. Now it’s 
going to be his legal position. He will simply have to sell at the amount set by the Crown. I think that in 
principle it’s a bad bill; in principle, I think it’s not a good idea to say to a producer of natural gas or oil 
or potash, or any other commodity, ‘Thou shalt sell your product at the amount set by the cabinet, 
period.’ 
 
There is no talk of having any opportunity to appeal to any tribunal and certainly no talk of being able to 
bargain in any effective way, for the Crown is simply going to set the price. This by the government 
opposite which wants to get rid of regulations and certainly they . . . and this is the bill brought forward 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Souris-Cannington suggests that he had used arguments 
similar to the one I’m using. He is now indicating that all his arguments then were faulty. And judging 
from the arguments that he has advanced more recently, I can understand why he would reach the 
conclusion that his arguments then and now are faulty. 
 
The point I wish to make is that in principle it’s a bad idea to pass a bill which says that 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2586 

any producer of natural gas must sell his product at the price set by the Crown. And I’m surprised that 
members opposite don’t think that’s a bad idea in principle. I’m surprised that members opposite would 
say that any producer of a natural resource would necessarily have to sell the product at the price set by 
the Crown without any board, without any opportunity to make a case, without any ability to explain to 
the Crown or the cabinet what his costs were, and what he needed in order to get a fair recovery. 
 
I do not think that the consequences will be earth-shaking since at least for the foreseeable future the 
circumstances are likely to be that natural gas will continue to be sold largely to the Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation. But to the extent that that is not true, the bill produces an improper and undesirable 
result — a result whereby the producer has removed from him the opportunity to make his case before 
the public utilities companies . . . under The Public Utilities Companies Act, before the local 
government board, and must take the price set by the Crown. 
 
Therefore, while I think it is a situation which may not arise in the immediate future, since I think that it 
is unlikely that there will be large export sales of gas in the immediate future, I find the bill to be 
unacceptable in principle, and I propose to oppose the bill. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the 
next sitting. 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that Bill 
No. 50 — An Act to amend The Public Utilities Companies Act be now read a second time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I am similarly going to oppose Bill No. 50, an Act to amend 
The Public Utilities Companies Act, the act which takes away from producers of natural gas the 
opportunity to have their price set, not by the cabinet, but by a body which has some semblance of 
impartiality. And it is not in any way a derogation from the esteem with which the cabinet is held, to 
suggest that it is not an impartial body. It doesn’t purport to be a quasi-judicial body setting prices in 
accordance with the principles which would be applied under The Public Utilities Companies Act. 
 
I have put forward my arguments more extensively, Mr. Speaker, in the earlier debate on the act to 
amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act, and accordingly, will not repeat them here except to say that 
the procedure under The Public Utilities Companies Act was a fairer and more reasonable procedure, 
from the point of view of the gas producer, than the new procedure, and accordingly, I will oppose the 
bill. 
 
Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and referred to a committee of the whole at the next sitting. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Property Improvement Grant Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Finance: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 59, An Act to amend The Property Improvement Grant 
Act, be discharged, and the bill referred to the 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2587 

standing committee on non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Senior Citizens School Tax Rebate Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the 
Minister of Finance: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 60, An Act to amend The Senior Citizens School Tax 
Rebate Act, be discharged, and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 62 — An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to announce that this government intends to further 
restrict acquisitions of agricultural land by non-resident individuals and non-agricultural corporations 
under the provisions of The Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act. This will serve as notice that 
amendments will be effective as of today. This is being done to ensure that non-resident persons and 
non-agricultural corporations do not involve themselves in activities inconsistent with the proposed 
amendments before this Assembly has had time to consider this matter. 
 
The government will be asking the legislature to approve amendments to The Saskatchewan Farm 
Ownership Act intended to forestall the use of limited partnerships as a vehicle for the acquisition of 
large tracts of agricultural land by non-resident persons and non-agricultural corporations. The 
amendment this government is proposing also includes a provision which provides the Saskatchewan 
Farm Ownership Board with the authority to recommend the laying of an information for an offence 
against the provisions of the act within a period of two years following the day of an alleged offence. 
This additional protection is essential to ensure that our land is, and remains, owned an d controlled by 
the people who rely upon the agricultural industry as a means of livelihood. 
 
Our rich and abundant supply of agricultural land is our most important resource and forms the basis of 
our most important industry. The use of our land and the development of the agricultural industry has 
been largely responsible for the prosperity we enjoy today, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan 
and this government will not stand by and watch the ownership and control of our agricultural land, 
gradually or otherwise, shift into the hands of individuals and companies to be used only as a 
commodity. 
 
Since May 6, 1980 the farm ownership act allows purchases of agricultural land to a maximum of 10 
acres by non-residents of Saskatchewan and corporations that are not primarily engaged in agricultural 
production. Land legally acquired and held by non-residents of Saskatchewan prior to May 6, 1980 does 
not have to be disposed of under the provisions of the farm ownership act. Non-agricultural corporations 
that acquired agricultural land prior to May 6, 1980 are required to dispose of the land held in excess of 
10 acres before January 1, 1994. 
 
To ensure that farmers can maintain their farmlands and pass those lands on to their 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2588 

children and relatives, exemptions are provided in the act. The farm ownership act provides the farm 
ownership board with the authority to grant exemptions to non-resident individuals and non-agricultural 
corporations in cases where circumstances justify a lenient approach. We have discovered, however, that 
the limitations imposed by the act do not contemplate the interest of limited partners in a limited 
partnership which owns or has an interest in agricultural land in Saskatchewan. Consequently, Mr. 
Speaker, non-resident persons and non-resident agricultural corporations are unrestricted in their ability 
to invest in agricultural lands in the province through the use of limited partnerships, and therefore are 
able to speculate in agricultural land. 
 
We have also discovered that the current six months limitation of action under The Summary Offences 
Procedure Act has resulted in the jurisdiction being lost in several cases where violations of provisions 
of the act have occurred. 
 
Methods of obtaining interest in agricultural land by non-eligible individuals and corporations include 
title transfers, agreements for sale, options to purchase, and lease agreements. Interest required, other 
than by title transfer, are often difficult to detect and have resulted in violations occurring that have not 
come to our attention prior to the expiration of the six months limitation of action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, permit me to cite examples which indicate a keen interest in the speculative value of our 
farmland by non-resident individuals and non-agricultural corporations. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — How things change. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Effective March 31 . . . And we said the same thing when we were over 
there. Effective March 31, 1974, non-resident individuals were permitted under the act to have or 
acquire an aggregate land holding in Saskatchewan not exceeding 15,000 assessed value for municipal 
taxation purposes. Non-agricultural corporations were permitted to have or acquire an aggregate land 
holding not to exceed 160 acres. Amendments effective September 15, 1977, reduced the minimum 
allowable limit for non-resident individuals from 15,000 assessed value for municipal taxation purposes 
to 160 acres. The 160-acre limitation on non-agricultural corporations remained unchanged. 
 
In 1977 non-residents acquired title to 139,652 acres. In 1978 it was 121,058, and a further 108,058 in 
1979. In 15 rural municipalities surrounding Regina, Indian Head and Weyburn primarily foreign 
individuals acquired title to lands in excess of 53,000 acres — 53,000 acres of some of the most highly 
productive grain-producing land in Saskatchewan. In addition, Mr. Speaker, foreign-controlled 
corporations have acquired title to another 10,000 acres in these same municipalities. The amendments I 
am proposing will prevent further land acquisition by speculative interests through the use of limited 
partnerships. The amendments I am proposing will also provide a sufficient time period to commence 
court proceedings against individuals and corporations found deliberately violating the act’s provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government feels that it’s not sufficient to restrict interests of non-resident individuals 
and non-resident agricultural corporations who wish to invest in Saskatchewan farmlands, by means of 
limited partnerships, to the current 10-acre maximum. 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2589 

We believe that non-residents and non-agricultural corporations participating in limited partnerships 
should not be allowed to acquire interests in agricultural land in Saskatchewan. A limited partnership 
may be established with a general partner who is a resident person, or an agricultural corporation and an 
unregulated number of limited partnerships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, should the investor be allowed to acquire a 10-acre interest in agricultural land, 
conceivably 100 could acquire an interest in 1,000 acres, 200 could acquire an interest in 2,000 acres, 
and so on, through investing in a limited partnership. Thus the entire capital of the partnership may be 
provided by non-eligible individuals or corporations, should a 10-acre maximum interest in agricultural 
land by allowed. 
 
Where non-resident persons, or non-agricultural corporations, invest in a limited partnership, which own 
or acquire land in this province, the control of the land will be in the hands of persons or corporations 
who will not be spending a major portion of their time in the area of production, and will not be 
spending a major portion of their income in this province, income which has been generated by 
Saskatchewan agricultural industry. The proposed amendments, Mr. Speaker, will prevent extensive 
involvement by non-resident persons and non-agricultural corporations in the agriculture land market 
through the use of limited partnerships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are the custodians of a rich and abundant supply of land, land 
which will generate food production for the world, both now and in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are not the only amendments that will be offered to The Saskatchewan Farm 
Ownership Act. These are the amendments that we are offering now to plug up an existing hole, to 
comply so that the spirit of the act can in fact be enforced. Our Premier has indicated in the past that he 
has some concerns with the act, particularly as it relates to the definition of ‘resident,’ and they will be 
dealt with at some later time. I therefore, Mr. Speaker, move second reading of a bill to amend The 
Saskatchewan Farm Ownership Act. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Speaker, I only want to say a couple of words on this, and I will be 
adjourning the debate so my colleague from Assiniboia will have a chance to speak on this bill. But it’s 
interesting how times have changed, and part of the reason I want to adjourn it, as well, is to search the 
record for what I believe will be some interesting comments made, possibly not by the Minister of 
Agriculture, but others of his caucus, when they were in opposition when the farm ownership act was 
originally brought in, and the limits were not the acreage that it is now, but were 160 acres. I believe, at 
that time, there were some statements made that will make interesting reading and interesting listening, 
because I think that there was a little opposition to restricting the land to 160 acres that could be owned 
by foreigners and non-residents. 
 
And I just want to take time to search the record for words of the now Minister of Justice to see whether 
or not he will be in agreement, and it’ll be interesting to see whether he’s in the House for the vote on 
second reading of this very important closing of a loophole. And I’m glad that the minister — and I want 
to say sincerely — I’m glad that you are closing this loophole and also glad that you had those notes 
written down, because I’m sure they would not have flown from your lips had they not been entrenched 
on a piece of paper. 



 
May 25, 1983 
 

 
2590 

For these reasons, Mr. Speaker, I beg leave to adjourn the debate to another day. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 63 — An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move, seconded by the Minister 
of Finance: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 63, An Act to amend The Rural Municipality Act, be 
discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 64 — An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing Act (No. 2) 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 64, An Act to amend The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Act (No. 2), be discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 65 — An Act to amend The Western Development Museum Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 65, an Act to amend The Western Development Museum 
Act, be discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 66 — An Act to amend the Statute Law 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, by leave of the Assembly, seconded by the Minister 
of Finance: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 66, An Act to amend the Statute Law, be discharged and 
the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 71 — An Act to amend The Exemptions Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, with leave of 
the Assembly: 



 
May 25, 1983 

 
2591 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 71, An Act to amend The Exemptions Act, be 
discharged and the bill referred to a standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 72 — An Act to amend The Homesteads Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, with leave of 
the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 72, An Act to amend The Homesteads Act, be 
discharged and the bill referred to a standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 74 — An Act to amend The Small Claims Enforcement Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 74, An Act to amend The Small Claims Enforcement 
Act, be discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 76 — An Act to amend The Regulations Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the Minister of Finance, by leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 76, An Act to amend The Regulations Act, be 
discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:52 p.m. 


