






















































Hansard: April 11, 1983


783 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 11, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Chairman, it is my pleasure this evening, with leave of the House, to 
introduce a group of 14 boys who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery, and who belong to the 40th Cub 
Pack, that has its headquarters at Marion McVeety School. Their leader is Pat Lawson. On behalf of the 
members of the legislature, I wish to welcome this group of young boys to this session. I wish to inform 
you that I shall be pleased to meet with you at 8 o’clock for refreshments in the cafeteria downstairs. I 
would ask the members to please join with me in welcoming the 40th Cub Pack to this House this 
evening. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CONSUMER AND COMMERCIAL AFFAIRS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 4 
 

Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, when we adjourned at 5 o’clock, I was in the process of trying to 
establish from the minister in charge of the liquor commission what he thought the increase in alcohol 
consumption would be. He mentioned that he didn’t think it would be a great deal. But can you give us 
some idea, from the studies and review that you say you have done, what kind of an increase you’re 
looking at, and whether or not in your opinion that is an acceptable increase in light of the statements 
made by the Minister of Highways, for example, that we should be going quite an opposite direction? 
I’m just trying to get clarified what the opinion and what the policy of this government is in regard to 
alcohol consumption in this province. It’s a little difficult to have it both ways when you’re in 
government. You were able to do that in opposition very easily, but now that you’re in government, I 
think you owe the people of the province an unequivocal line of thought and policy on the consumption 
of alcohol. Either you’re in favour of increasing it, or you want to assist people in avoiding the problems 
associated with alcohol consumption. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the member opposite’s question is highly speculative. We don’t 
know how many additional special vendors will be added out there until the amendment is passed. And 
when it is passed, the applications for special vendors will have to be dealt with one at a time, and when 
the amendment is passed, we may add one special vendor in the ensuing year; we may add two or we 
may add six. We may not add any; it all depends. So, his question is speculative. I cannot give him an 
answer to that question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, in amending the act, the minister certainly must have availed 
himself to the information that was around as to how many people had  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
784 

applied for, and whether or not there was a need to amend the legislation. What I’m asking him in his 
office as minister, how many more liquor vendors he expects to have over the coming year, if the 
legislation is, in fact, introduced and passed through this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — It’s impossible, Mr. Chairman, for me to even hazard a guess on this. I can tell 
the member opposite that we have many, many applications, probably more than a hundred. I haven’t 
counted them one by one, but there are many, many on hand at the office of the liquor board. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister would outline the criteria by which he will 
be issuing new liquor vendors in this province once the bill is passed. Can you tell us what criteria you 
will follow in setting up the issuing of new liquor licenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the final criteria has yet to be drawn up. When we discuss the 
legislation in committee, I will answer any questions in detail at that time. But, I’ll tell you that the 
criteria will be much stronger than their criteria is. At this point in time, there are some special vendors 
in rural Saskatchewan that are as little as six miles apart. That doesn’t make a great deal of sense to me 
— to have one vendor in town A and another in town B, six miles apart. That was their criteria, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, it seems ridiculous to think that, if it was too lenient before under 
the previous administration, you would now come in here and say you’re going to pass legislation to 
expand it. How can you criticize the former government for being too lenient, and say how we’re going 
to solve that problem of leniency is by having more? Can you justify how you need legislation to 
increase the numbers if there’s already too many? I know that Conservative logic is a little different 
from mine, but I still have a hard time understanding how you’re going to solve the problem of having 
too many liquor vendors by increasing the numbers. Can you explain. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, socialist logic is that you don’t listen to the folks out there. 
Socialist logic is that you impose your views upon them. We’re not going to impose our views upon 
anyone in Saskatchewan. We have received many letters and applications from folks in rural 
Saskatchewan who want special vendors. We have said to them that we will amend The Liquor Act 
allowing them to vote in their own communities. Them, to vote in their own communities as to whether 
they want a special vendor, or not. It’s gone on before. They’ve voted as to whether they want licensed 
dining rooms; whether they want licensed restaurants; whether they want beverage rooms; and whether 
they want clubs or whatever. There have been local option votes all over the province. We’re saying that 
they should have the same opportunity out there to vote on special vendors if they so desire. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, earlier on I asked the minister to clarify a point about liquor 
consumption in the province, whether he thought it would go up or not. And I believe just prior to 5 
o’clock he said that he assumed or that he thought it would go up slightly, and I was asking the question 
of how much earlier on, and he went on to explain that he didn’t know how many liquor vendors were 
going to be open. But the question, the original question was: how much do you think liquor 
consumption will go up as a result of relaxing the liquor legislation and the liquor outlets and vendors in 
the province of Saskatchewan? 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
785 

Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I can’t speculate on how much consumption will go up because 
we don’t know how many special liquor vendors, additional vendors, will be granted at this time. They 
had made allusions before that we were going to put licenses into corner grocery stores and every town 
and on every corner of every town and city in Saskatchewan. That is totally false. We do not propose to 
do this in any way, shape or form. What we’re saying is we want to give a service to people of rural 
Saskatchewan — a service where they want it. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the minister must, in establishing what he predicts to be revenue 
for the sale of liquor in terms of taxes for the government, must certainly predict an amount of 
consumption, otherwise you would not possibly be able to establish a budget. What I’m saying is, on 
what basis did you predict your revenue income in terms of liquor; what kind of consumption did you 
base that on? A constant from last year or an increase? And if it’s an increase, what amount? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the liquor board’s estimations of revenue for this year, 1983-84, 
have not taken into consideration the addition of any extra special vendors in the rural areas. They’re 
making the assumption that consumption will increase in direct proportion to proximity of, or additional 
special liquor vendors. I would like to know what studies they have to prove that that will be so in this 
place, in this province of Saskatchewan, at this time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I asked the minister a question on what volume of alcohol 
consumption his revenue income was estimated and I still didn’t get an answer on that. Is it last year’s 
consumption or an increase? That seems pretty simple. And all you have to do is ask your officials what 
number it was based on and tell me. And that’s pretty straightforward. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the liquor board is expecting a decrease in consumption in 
Saskatchewan, and of course in sales, as indeed right across the country distillers, wineries and 
breweries are expecting a decrease in consumption. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Is this a trend that has been going on in the areas that you’re talking about over 
the past number of years? What are you basing this on? Can you give me a background on what you 
would base that kind of a prediction on? Give me a bit of a history or the study that was done that would 
indicate that alcohol consumption in Saskatchewan will decrease next year, just so I have an idea of 
where you’re getting your answers from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — One document we have received, and I’m sure that the opposition received it 
when they were in government, was an erosion document prepared by the Saskatchewan Brewers 
Association that showed that beer consumption has decreased considerably in the last year or so. 
Distillers also project that consumption of spirits is going to be down across the country. Wineries on the 
other hand, I believe, indicate that their volume will either hold the line or increase slightly. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, if you are predicting a reduction in the amount of alcohol 
consumed, can you tell me why you’re also predicting an income revenue of about 39 per cent in the 
amount of money you intend to raise from the sale of alcohol, at the same time as consumption is going 
down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — That estimation, Mr. Chairman, would come from the liquor 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
786 

board’s new markup policies. We have indicated that we are going to raise an additional $9 million this 
year through increases in prices for beer, wine, and spirits, and the new markup policies would account 
for the projected increase. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — So you’re saying the markup price that people in Saskatchewan will have to pay 
will be in excess of 40 per cent, because if you’re predicting a drop in consumption and you show an 
increase of I believe it’s about 39 per cent, then you must be predicting that your increase in take by the 
government for this group of people will be in excess of 40 per cent of liquor in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I would take notice of the hon. member’s question, Mr. Chairman, and get 
details from the liquor board to him so that they can explain where the projected increases are coming 
from. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, Mr. Chairman, that seems like a very elementary question when you have 
your officials with you. I can hardly believe that the people sitting around you don’t know where the 
revenue from liquor is coming from or where it’s going to, but I suppose if you don’t have the answer 
you don’t have the answer. But I would expect that before we get finished this line of questioning, and I 
would hope that you would be able to give it to me before we finish up here tonight. 
 
But another question I would like is if you would give me the numbers in terms of actual consumption 
of alcohol in the province that would have gone through your operation last year, and what you predict it 
to be in the different areas for the coming year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I’m sure the hon. member is aware that I don’t have any 
officials form the liquor board here with me today. It was not indicated that the estimates today would 
be on liquor board questions, and they know very well that I do not have my officials here with me 
today. They are wasting the time of this House at this time, Mr. Chairman, and they know that very well. 
We were here to discuss Consumer and Commercial Affairs estimates, not liquor board. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I find it interesting, and I’m sure the press will find it interesting, 
that doing estimates is now a waste of time in the province of Saskatchewan, as well as social service 
groups doing a job is a waste of time and taxpayer’s money, but simply because you don’t have answers 
to the questions, Mr. Minister, is not a good enough reason to say that we’re wasting time, and what I 
would like to tell you is that you were well aware that we would be dealing with the liquor board 
commission because you received a letter from our caucus, from the member from Regina Centre. And 
if he has the letter with him I would ask him, if he would, to read it into the record so you will know and 
the rest of the people here will know that you full well that we would be dealing with this. You’re 
simply making an excuse now for the reason that you do not want to give out the information because 
you’re not very proud of it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s asked a question. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Did you ask him a question? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Sure he did. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
787 

Mr. Shillington: — I will leave it then until the minister answers the question. I’m waiting to hear the 
minister deny that he received notification from me that this would be discussed. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — I was trying to get from him to confirm that he did not know that we were going 
to be dealing with issues related to liquor. Are you really attempting to tell this House that that is the 
truth, and that you did not receive a letter from our caucus saying that we would be asking questions? Is 
that what you’re trying to tell us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, there is no vote in the blue book on liquor board, liquor 
licensing items. We were not prepared to answer questions on the liquor board this evening or today. 
Out of courtesy I’ve answered all their questions, without my officials being on hand. I’ve had my 
officials from Consumer and Commercial Affairs here, sitting in their chairs, since 2:30 this afternoon. 
They’ve pandered the time of members of this House while they could be going through the estimates of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. I can’t understand why they don’t get on with the business at hand. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I find it hard to believe that the minister did not know we were 
going to be dealing with liquor when we sent him a letter last week, when we dealt with it this afternoon. 
To say that this evening he didn’t know we were going to be dealing with this is simply unbelievable. 
And the fact that there isn’t an estimate in the blue book, I can tell you that on page 8 there is a revenue 
under Saskatchewan Liquor Board, of 125 million, that you are responsible for collecting, and if you 
think that that is not an important part of your job, then you should get a job description from the 
Premier, because that is part of your job and you are answerable for the actions of the government in that 
area. And what I would like to know is — again you still have not answered my question — whether or 
not you were informed that we would be asking questions on liquor. 
 
You are attempting to tell the House that you were not aware of it, and that we’re wasting time. That 
simply is not true, and I want you to tell me whether or not you received a letter from our caucus telling 
you that we would be asking these very questions. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Perhaps we can assist the minister somewhat. When we dealt with your estimates 
here in February, you expressed astonishment that we might have any questions to ask on liquor. And 
you didn’t deal with them that night, and we never did get around to dealing with this particular issue. 
 
I do not normally make a point of writing each minister, writing Mr. McLaren and saying, ‘Now, I’m 
going to be examining you on the following subjects.’ I don’t normally make a point of that because it 
isn’t necessary with any other minister. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Well, the Premier. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, it seems to be a problem with the Premier as well, but apart from you two, 
that usually isn’t necessary. Most of the others know what they’re responsible for. 
 
Because it had been a problem in February, I made a special point of writing you on Friday. I phoned 
your executive assistant, Mr. Minister, and I left word with your office 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
788 

staff. I then phoned Mr. Pederson’s office and I left word with his staff. In addition, I wrote you a letter, 
Friday. You came today, and you got the letter, and I really want to hear the minister tell me he didn’t 
get the letter because I know darn well he did. You got the letter. What more do you want? You 
shouldn’t need any warning at all. You should know what you’re responsible for. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We started this afternoon and tonight he could have had his staff here. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Exactly. We started at quarter to 4. You knew five minutes after we were into our 
estimates that you were going to be responsible for it. Why don’t you get your staff? You had all kinds 
of warning to get your staff. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have a proposal to make to the minister who seems woefully unable to prepare himself 
for his estimates, notwithstanding the fact that he gets warning of what we’re going to be discussing. If 
your officials aren’t here, and if you can’t deal with this particular portion of your estimates, we’ll deal 
with the rest. We will adjourn your estimates and allow you to return with the officials of the liquor 
board and then liquor licensing commission. 
 
Now, if you’d prefer that — I see my colleague’s nodding — if you’d prefer that, the opposition will 
agree to that, deal with the rest of your estimates and adjourn it — and come back on the issue of the 
liquor board and the liquor licensing commission. And if you’re getting . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, according to the business of the assembly as listed today, the 
estimates which I was to deal with were Consumer and Commercial Affairs, Co-operative and 
Co-operative Development and Saskatchewan Research Council, and I have all those officials present 
and ready to deal with estimates in those areas. 
 
The liquor board and the liquor licensing commission do not have a vote in the blue estimate book. They 
are brought up in public accounts with the media present, if that’s what the opposition wants. Now, 
further to that, I have instructed one of my officials to contact the liquor board officials to see if they can 
get them here before the evening is too late. And, then indeed we will deal. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is the minister telling us that you would prefer to leave the question of the liquor 
board and the liquor licensing commission and go on with the rest of the estimates until your officials 
come? If you do, I think that is a courtesy which we would extend to you. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He doesn’t have his officials here. Wait til they get here, then you can backup 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s what I’m suggesting. And, if that’s what he wants, we’ll do that. That’s what 
I’m suggesting, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I would be prepared to go into the estimates of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, at this time, Mr. Chairman, and answer any further questions pertaining to the liquor board at a 
later time. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
789 

Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, just on a point that has been raised here, I want to indicate that the 
minister indicates what is on the agenda — Consumer and Commercial Affairs. I want to say that, 
previously the minister of industry and commerce was in here, and that other subvote was CIC or Sedco, 
and at that time he indicated, too, that he wasn’t going to be responsible for answering any questions in 
relation to it. The chairman ruled, at that time, that we were entitled to pursue questions relative to the 
area covered by the minister. And, I think that applies in the case with the Minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs. 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman: — I think that’s been settled. He’s going to be bringing his officials for liquor 
board a little later on, so we can go on with the rest of Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Before we move on, away from liquor board and licensing commission, I think 
there has been an insinuation by members of government, that somehow we’re not following the agenda 
that was given to us today. I would like to inform the assembly that in talking to representatives of the 
government this morning, my staff wee given a list, and I would like to read it for you so we’re all aware 
of what we were given as the agenda for today. And, it goes like this — estimates for review: 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development; Consumer Affairs; Office of Rentalsman; Rent Appeal 
Commission; Provincial Mediation Board; Saskatchewan Research Council; Liquor Board and 
Licensing Commission; Saskatchewan Securities Commission — just so the minister is aware what is 
involved in his domain and that we can get on with this, so that he is ready for all of these when we get 
to them, so we don’t get into this problem, later. 
 
This is what we received from the government, therefore, with the limited staff we have, we prepared for 
it, and I find it hard to believe that the government, with, at its disposal, unlimited numbers of people 
cannot be ready for estimates. And I would very much appreciate then when we’re given lists like this, 
we can move ahead with them. Because traditionally the sessions in this House have lasted 40 or 50 
days. We are now on day 16. . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Chairman, the member for Regina South says that 50 or 60 days . . . I happen to have here a list of 
the number of days in sessions. The 18th Legislative Assembly, province of Saskatchewan, first session 
‘75-75, 46 days; second session 1976, 40 days; third session 1976-77, 56 . . . 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman: — I think, member from Shaunavon, I think this has no bearing on it now. I think 
the problem has been solved. I think we can carry on with the consumer information. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — What I’m saying, Mr. Chairman, if I could just be allowed one moment, is that we 
anticipate when we’re given a minister’s area of responsibility, that we don’t have to check each 
particular area before we go into it; that when a minister’s estimates are called, we move ahead with 
them and complete them. And I would hope that that would be the way we arrange estimates because 
otherwise it gets very, very bogged down, both for the officials of the department as well as for the 
opposition. I think in fairness I agree that we should follow the agenda that’s set out by the government. 
And that’s what we were trying to do. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Chairman, if I can simply respond to that. I think the  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
790 

tradition in the House has been, for example when the minister of industry and commerce has his 
estimates, at the end of those estimates you would go to some subvotes that happen to exist, whether 
they be Sedco, CIC, and certainly that was clarified while we were in opposition that we had the right to 
ask questions on that. 
 
Now what would normally happen here because liquor is a revenue source and, as you know, is handled 
in its own particular commission, it does not show in the blue book. Now the tradition has been that it 
would come up following the going through of the process. The normal process that one would go 
through would be for this particular minister to do consumer and corporate affairs, then to do Co-ops 
and then go back and finally pick up the process that allowed him to have questions with regard to the 
liquor board which also falls within his jurisdiction. It’s something that the government will respond to, 
is responsible for, even though it’s not found in the blue book, and that’s because the tradition has 
developed that way. 
 
When we called the estimates today, it was for consumer and corporate affairs to be followed by Co-ops. 
We would then proceed further with the right to deal with liquor board and to deal with the Rentalsman 
and whatever else came through that in the process afterwards. The initial call was for Consumer 
Affairs. 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman: — I think the point has been taken. I think there is really no . . . 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, a point has been made but one that is not accurate. In dealing with 
this subject earlier today, the case was attempted to be made by the minister that he was not responsible 
to this Assembly for liquor commission or liquor licensing. That’s the point and case that we are trying 
to make. It’s not simply as the Minster of Finance is trying to say here, that he doesn’t have his officials 
with him and he wanted to leave it to the end. The Minister of Consumer Affairs questioned whether or 
not he was responsible for that area and whether we had the right to ask questions. It took a ruling for 
the Chair, I would inform the member, to make it legitimate that we had the right to establish questions. 
This is no previously arranged nice commitment that the government is making to us. The minister 
refused in the initial stages of estimates. Mr. Chairman, the debate here and the argument is not with the 
Minister of Finance, who helps prepare the list in the House agenda. The argument is with the minister 
responsible who attempted today to tell us that he was not going to answer questions. The Chair has 
ruled on that and I agree that we will be asking questions and we do agree that we will come back to it 
later. 
 
But I don’t want any indication left to this Assembly or to the press that it was our responsibility for the 
fact that we’re not dealing in the proper order, or that the minister is unaware of his responsibilities as he 
tried to explain to this House earlier today, at about 4 o’clock when it took a ruling form the Chair to get 
him to answer questions on the liquor licensing commission. And I think it’s important that that point be 
made here, because it’s not simply a matter of priority; it’s a matter that the minister was attempting to 
not answer questions on liquor licensing commission. 
 
Mr. Vice-Chairman: — Order! I think we’ve discussed this already and I don’t see any point in 
belabouring the situation. We already have decided that Consumer and Commercial Affairs is going to 
be on the agenda. The minister has said that he would be willing to bring the liquor board in later on, so 
I think we could get back to the business at had, and it’s Consumer and Commercial Affairs and get on 
to item 1, administrative services. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
791 

Mr. Shillington: — We’ll get on then with your estimates, Mr. Minister. The member from Regina 
South is being extremely provocative, but I’m going to ignore him. 
 
I want to deal in general terms with your estimates, Mr. Minister. Your department was slashed in a 
manner which I think merits some comment from you. It was an 11 per cent budget cut, by my 
calculation, and a 13 per cent staff cut. And I’m wondering what it is about today’s market-place that 
you feel makes it so much easier for the consumer to deal with the problems of the market-place and 
why he’s less in need of protection now than he was last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, it’s evident that the Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs is going along with the times of restraint. There have been cut-backs in governments, in public 
service, in business right across the country. We have reduced our budget by some $613,000 from the 
1982-83 estimates. The member for Regina Centre indicated the position cuts, and it’s only indicated 
that some positions had to be cut to accommodate the budget cuts. It’s as simple as that. 
 
In times of restraint we have to streamline, we have to make cut-backs, we have to make people very 
productive in these times. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, that is just nonsense. Your department is not going along with 
the times. There was a 7 percent increase in the budget. Your budget sustained an 11 per cent decrease. 
And I ask you why your department was singled out for such savage treatment at the hands of the 
Minister of Finance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Are you trying to tell the people of Regina constituency to pull more out of 
their pocket to fund the civil service in Saskatchewan? Do you want your constituents to pay more taxes 
than they are now? This government has held the line, and we intend to hold the line. We intend to 
practise restraint, and that is what we are doing. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Why, Mr. Minister . . . Let me repeat the question . . . I might say that the minister’s 
badly in need of some instruction. The process of dealing with estimates is not one whereby the 
government ministers ask the opposition members questions. The flow is the other way around. I ask 
you again, Mr. Minister: why was your department singled out for such treatment? Every single subvote 
has been cut in terms of staff. Every single subvote which delivers programs has been cut. So I ask you, 
Mr. Minister, why is it that the Department of Consumer Affairs is thought to be so much more 
superfluous than other departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, when the questions don’t make any sense, I’ve got to answer 
them with a question. And the hon. member’s questions are not making any sense at all. So I answered 
them with a question, if that’s what he wants to know. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Why the cut, Mr. Minister? Why the 11 per cent reduction? Why the cuts in staff on 
every single subvote which delivers program services? I’ll let you go ahead. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we have not cut any programs in the Department of Consumer 
and Commercial Affairs. We are providing the same services with fewer people, and with 620,000 fewer 
dollars. If that doesn’t make sense, I don’t know what does. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
792 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, if you have developed the magical formulae for delivering more programs 
with fewer staff and fewer budget, why don’t you share this genius with some of your other colleagues 
who apparently needed an increase in budget to accomplish the same function? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, every department in this government was asked to play its part 
in restraint. The Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs indicated that we could cut back in 
staff and that we could cut back some $613,000 and still provide the same services that were provided 
last year. The consumer of Saskatchewan will be protected and protected well by the Department of 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, are you admitting that you were overstaffed on March 31st, 
1983, before the staff cuts came into effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, of the 21 man-year reduction that’s indicated in the blue book, 
13 of the positions have been vacant for an average of 11.6 months. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, you said you were going to do the same job with fewer people. 
You admit you’re going to have fewer people. The logical conclusion from that is that you were 
overstaffed as of March 31st, and that’s what I’m asking you to confirm. Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we found ways of doing more with less. It’s as simple as that. 
Businesses all across the country have had to find ways, and governments have had to find ways, of 
doing the same amount or more with less. It’s a sign of the times, if you will. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that comparison is ludicrous. A business which has cut staff has done 
so because of falling sales. Has your work load decreased? Are you getting fewer complaints this year 
than you were last? Is there less demand for the services of the department this year than last? That’s the 
only basis upon which you can fairly compare your cuts with the cuts of a plant or a retail outlet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve increased in efficiency and effectiveness in the 
department. We’ve reduced turnaround times for issuance of various types of certificates. Example: 
certificates of incorporation or registration have been reduced from four to six weeks average to around 
one week, and that is just one of the ways that we’ve improved efficiency. We’re offering an 
over-the-counter emergency service where clients need to obtain a certificate of incorporation on the 
same day. In such emergency circumstances, a certificate can be issued in as quickly as a half-hour. 
That’s a much better service than that government prompted the department to provide when they were 
in power. And we’re doing this, Mr. Chairman, with 21 fewer positions than in 1982-83, and with 
613,000 fewer dollars. Now tell the people of Saskatchewan that is not running the department in an 
efficient way. You tell your constituents that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I can well imagine why the turnaround rate for registering 
companies takes one week now, because who is registering companies in Saskatchewan? But that has 
very little to do with the question that was asked. . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . The Minister from 
Regina South will know, and for sure you won’t need as long to register a company in Saskatchewan 
because it will be such a  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
793 

novelty since last April 26th. 
 
But the question to the Minster of consumer Affairs: were the number of complaints you have received 
. . . Have the number of complaints gone down or up since this time last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, consumer complaints have actually gone down slightly in the 
area of consumer complaints. But in the area of bingos and lotteries, for example, they’ve gone up. So 
there is a balance there; there are actually not many more this year or any less than there were in 
previous years. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, that’s quite an answer: there’s not many more or many less than 
there were at this time last year. I knew that when I asked the question. What I wanted to know is: is 
there more or less combined complaints than there was last year? That was the question and it still is. I 
know there could be more, there could be less; I just happened to have that idea before I asked the 
question. What I wanted to find out from you is: is there more or less? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the consumer complaints, that is the consumer complaints of all 
types, in 1982 were 3,262. In ’83 — 3,019. To March 31st — 3,019. That’s a reduction of 
approximately 8 per cent. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, just on a point of clarification, you’re saying that between January 
1st, 1982 and March 31st, there were 3,262. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The first figure I announced, Mr. Chairman, was fiscal ‘81-82 — to the end of 
March 31st, ’82 — 3,262. To the end of March 31st, ’83 — that’s for the fiscal year ‘82-83 — 3,019. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to go through some individual 
subvote items, then. The Rentalsman has been reduced in staff, if I could find it. The Office of the 
Rentalsman has been reduced one staff. It was reduced from 21 to 20 in this fiscal year. It went from 24 
to 21 in your last budget, so this cut comes on the tail of yet another one. Your earlier cut must have 
caused some difficulty, because when the officials were before the public accounts committee they 
related some difficulty in being current. Now you’ve cut it again. I ask you about this particular cut. 
What was it about this particular subvote that caused it to merit a cut in staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the one position referred to in the cut-back from 21 to 20 
positions was a position of a research officer, and that function has been filled by another branch within 
Consumer and Commercial Affairs. In regards to cases, we expected to have the backlog cleared — up 
to the end of December, ’82 — to have all of these cases investigated by the end of April . . . this week, 
pardon me. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well that’s a curious answer, Mr. Minister. You indicated that you hoped to have 
the applications which you had received to the end of December cleared up by the end of April. It is my 
understanding that these applications have to be dealt with within a three-month time period because 
that’s the notice required on the act. You are admitting, it seems to me, that you aren’t dealing with them 
in a timely fashion. If you aren’t dealing with them in a timely fashion, what are you cutting staff for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the Rentalsman indicates that all the rent  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
794 

review cases and rent increase cases are current, but matters pertaining to security deposits and ruling on 
other disputes have all been investigated and will have been investigated by the end of this week, and 
will be current at that time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I understand the definition of current is that you will have dealt with all the 
requests received prior to December 31, 1982, by the end of this week? Is that what you’re telling us 
current means? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes, that’s true. That’s on everything other than rent review and rent increases. 
That is always current, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, surely, Mr. Minister, you’re not suggesting that if you’re three and one-half 
months behind in dealing with those applications, you’re current? Surely your goal is to deal with them a 
little faster than three and one-half months, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, this government inherited a terrible mess, a terrible backlog of 
cases when we took over in May 1982, and there is a good reason why we have had to in effect work our 
fingers to the bone to get to the position where we are now, and in short order . . . Well, we have the 
situation well in hand now. I don’t know why the minister for Regina Centre is harping on this situation. 
It is well in hand now, and under the guidance of our capable Rentalsman we are providing the service 
that the people of Saskatchewan want. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The minister from Regina Centre, as you so aptly styled me, the minister from 
Regina Centre is in receipt . . . As you know, Mr. Minister, I am in receipt of a lot of complaints about 
the whole system of the Rentalsman. . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . The complaints are . . . I don’t 
need to table them. Your minister’s got them, and he knows that full well because I write to him directly. 
And if the minister wants to deny that he’s been receiving correspondence from me on this subject, I’d 
be delighted to hear that, but I don’t think he’s going to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No I don’t think 
he has. The Minister of Highways is unable to contain his stupidity, but the Minister of Consumer 
Affairs is not denying it. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have been receiving complaints, and surely, Mr. Minister, a year is soon enough to tidy 
up what you call a terrible mess. And are you suggesting that you’re going to run consistently three and 
a half months behind, on dealing with your applications? Is that your idea of tidying up something and 
running it current? And if it isn’t, how long is it going to take you to deliver decent service to the tenants 
of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, by the end of April I am informed that all matters in the three 
offices of the Rentalsman in Saskatchewan will be current — that is, by the end of this month, all 
matters in the three offices will be current, and any delay will be because of hearings or investigations 
that are going on at this time. The turnaround time now is three to six weeks. That is adequate. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So by the end of April, you are going to have it to the point where you’re going to 
be three to six weeks behind. Well, frankly, I’m from Missouri, Mr. Minister. I tell you, Mr. Minister, 
I’m from Missouri on this, because I recall being in these estimates a month ago, and I would swear you 
told me that you were current at that time. I don’t have Hansard with me, and I’m not going to make an 
issue out of it, but  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
795 

when you tell me, ‘Oh, don’t worry, we may be three and a half months behind now, but we’re going to 
shave that to 40 per cent by the end of the month.’ I’m from Missouri. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to ask you what rate of return you are allowing landlords on their equity. You’ll 
recall this is kind of an old movie. I tried to cover this ground with no success in your estimates in 
February. When you allow an increase to a landlord in the rent, what do you consider to be an 
acceptable rate of return on the landlord’s investment or equity? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Now, Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member from Regina Centre, we don’t 
base rent increases on equity of investment. We don’t base rent increases on equity of investment; 
they’re based on the four main factors as contained in the rent control formula that was devised by the 
opposition when they were in government. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, what is the average of the rent increases currently being granted to 
landlords? What’s the average currently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — 13 to 14 per cent. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I say to you, as I said before, that your formula needs some sort 
of adjustment if it’s producing increases of 13 to 14 per cent. I know, from our previous discussions, Mr. 
Minister, that you can’t say that a landlord’s cost of operating an apartment block have gone up by an 
average of 13 to 14 per cent. I know you can’t say that, because you don’t have that sort of statistical 
base. Mr. Minister, if you’re allowing increases of 13 to 14 per cent when the rate of inflation has sunk 
far below that, then I suggest your formula needs some adjustment so that the increases bear a little 
closer relationship to the type of increases being granted to everyone else, except the crown corporations 
which are in a class by themselves. Everyone else is making do with under 10 per cent. And I would ask 
you, Mr. Minister, how do you justify those increases in a day and age when everybody else is being 
asked to make do with inflation minus one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Now, Mr. Chairman, the member for Regina Centre is quite aware that the rent 
control formula was devised by them when they were in government. And they know that rent control 
legislation was brought into effect in this province in January of 1976, at the request of the federal 
government, to complement their legislation on mandatory wage and price controls. At the same time, 
mortgage interest payments were considered in establishing rent increases of those landlords in financial 
difficulties. The rent increase formula was changed in 1978 by them, and mortgage costs were no longer 
directly passed on to the tenants. Rather, an economic factor is included in the present Quebec formula, 
which passes through, over time, increases in mortgage rates. This protects tenants from significant 
one-time increases in rents. 
 
They also, Mr. Chairman, moved away from rent control in all other centres in Saskatchewan, other than 
Regina and Saskatoon. They know very well that hey were moving inexorably away from rent control. 
No matter how often, how loud they stood up on the summit, or the pulpit, and preached that they were 
the saviours of renters in Saskatchewan, they were moving away from it. We have said, Mr. Chairman, 
as the new Government of Saskatchewan, that we are committed to rent control legislation. We will be 
committed to rent control legislation in the future. We are going by the formula that they devised. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
796 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, I wonder if it’s ever occurred to the minister that the formula may have 
become a tad outdated? When we were in office I don’t recall receiving the volume of criticisms that we 
are now, with respect to the level of the increases. That started last year, by my experience. 
 
Mr. Minister, you can’t justify 14 per cent by the general level of inflation. You can’t justify it by 
suggesting that that’s within your guide-lines of inflation minus one. You cannot relate it to the 
landlord’s costs. You cannot relate it to any particular return on investment. How do you justify a 
formula which produces 13 to 14 per cent? And don’t give me the ballyhoo that it was the formula 
which we had. It was the formula which we had, but it wasn’t the subject of the complaints it is now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, of course I’m concerned about the average increases of rents in 
Saskatchewan. As I have indicated in earlier estimates, we have now compiled a great deal of 
information on rent control from both sides — the renters and the landlords, the developers — and we 
are in the process of putting all of this information together and to see how we can make this formula 
more equitable to both sides. And again, I am very, very concerned with the rent increases that are 
shown on the averages in this province. 
 
We are looking at other ways to stimulate the building of multi-unit buildings in the province of 
Saskatchewan so the vacancy rate will increase. And thereby rents will be held down through a natural 
process, in the free marketing process rather than in the controlled process — it just has proven over and 
over and over again that it just doesn’t work. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, you are not going to suggest to this Assembly — and I am not 
going to treat that last comment as serious — that you’re going to rely on a natural market process to 
control rent. You know and I know that the level of vacancies is such that that will not happen. I’ll do 
you a great favour and ignore that remark and treat it for what I assume it was — a silly, facetious 
comment. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said you are compiling this statistical data and you’re going to review it. You’re going 
to make it fair to both sides, more equitable to both sides. I ask you how you’re going to do that because 
you canned your research officer. Who’s going to do that? And don’t tell me it’s going to be policy and 
planning because they’re next on my list and their staff is cut. So I’m curious, Mr. Minister. Are you 
going to do this yourself? Or is the individual in your department who didn’t have the wits to pass on my 
comments Friday that we’re going to be dealing with liquor, is that person going to do it? Who is going 
to do it, with the reduction in staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we do have a policy and planning branch in the Department of 
consumer and Commercial Affairs which are handling quite nicely all the statistical data that we need. 
And they are putting together the information that we need to make adjustments. I’m also informed that 
they, the opposition, when they were in power, cut one research officer 2. They cut the position and used 
that position as an assistant to the minister. They made him and EA. We don’t take people from the 
department and make them EAs to the minister here. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, there’s no suggestion of any cut in the estimates. I happen to have the 
estimates with me. There’s no suggestion of any cut. But I think, Mr.  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
797 

Minister, it’s a good deal less relevant to talk about what the former administration did than to talk about 
what this administration is doing. You are a year into your term of office. And if you cannot discuss 
your own activities, then I suggest that is a very lame performance. 
 
I ask you, Mr. Minister, who’s going to do it? Policy and planning have been reduced by 20 per cent. 
You’ve cut 20 per cent of staff. It’s one staff but it’s still 20 per cent. You tell me that your research 
capacity in your Rentalsman’s office was cut. You cut the research officer there. I ask you: who’s going 
to do it? . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yeah, well, we’re getting to the . . . This province is getting a 
look at what productivity means. It means a sharp deterioration in services, Mr. Minister. That’s . . . You 
people are going to have to put out a new dictionary because you are redefining the English language. 
When you say an increase in productivity, what you mean is a deterioration in services. When you mean 
streamlining, when you say streamlining, you mean cutting. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just streamlining it a bit. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s right. . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Well, the Minister may have lost track 
of my question. I was attempting to straighten out the Minister of Rural Development, and the Minister 
of consumer Affairs may have lost track of my question. I ask you the same question. Who’s going to do 
it? If it’s going to be policy and planning, what activities are they going to drop? Because they’ve lost 
staff. So if they’re going to do this, what activities are they going to drop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the department has a director of policy and planning to do 
research. We also have a regular research officer 2, and two part-time. That makes four people. Four 
people can handle the research that is needed if they’re put on the vital issues of concern to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and of course within the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs such as rent 
control issues. We have four people; they can handle it quite adequately. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, what issues are not vital and what issues are they being taken off of if they’re 
going to do this one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The rent control is quite vital. And I can’t give the hon. member a line-up at 
this time of what others aren’t, but we know that rent control is vital. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I really want to go back to the rent control formula. And the minister indicated that he 
was taking a look at it and was going to make modifications to the formula, as I understood him, which 
in fact would be more equitable both to the tenant and to the landlord. Would you enlighten us as to 
what you had in mind? Are you going to increase it for the landlord and call that more equitable for the 
tenant? Or are you going to decrease it, the amount of increase, and help the tenant and call that 
equitable for both? Could you outline (I mean this is rather a strange pronouncement) as to how you are 
going to achieve more equitable situation for both tenant and landlord in respect to modifications of the 
formula? Would you mind sending some light forward on that unique statement that only you could 
make? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, when the studies are complete, the package is complete and 
presented to me, it will be forwarded to the members of this Assembly in due course. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
798 

Mr. Koskie: — With respect to the formula, Mr. Minister, you say you’re using the same formula that 
was used by the previous administration. Obviously, if you looked at the record, that during the time that 
the formula was in use, there were modifications in it, one to meet the very high interest rates which 
were being encountered by the landlord. And adjustments were made. Certainly what has happened in 
the last year, when the interest rates were at the highest, there was a 13 to 14 per cent increase. Now the 
interest rate has gone down substantially, and the inflation rate. And you start blaming the increase that 
you granted of 13 to 14 per cent on the formula. Why haven’t you changed the formula to reflect the 
improved condition of the landlord? Or are you paying off your political debts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I’m asking the member for Quill Lakes to be patient. The 
formula will reflect the interest rate decrease over time. It will reflect that. The same way higher interest 
rates did not suddenly appear. So we will be making these adjustments in due course. We’re working on 
the problem created by those members opposite. It’s their rent control formula. We are dealing with it. 
We will deal with it in due course, but it will be equitable. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — There is a large portion of the rental accommodation that is not under rent control. Is it 
the intention of the minister to extend the rent control to the post- 1976 apartments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, they were the ones that were moving away from rent control 
when we came into office on April 26th. Now they’re asking us to extend it. You now, you can’t have it 
both ways. What do you want, extension of rent controls or removal of rent controls? You were moving 
away; now you’re asking us to extend it. I’m telling you that we will be making adjustments to this 
formula so that the people of Saskatchewan can live with it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’m not particularly concerned with you going through a recitation of what was in the 
past. Today we’re in estimates to ask you what your policy is, and what direction you’re going. And 
again, I repeat to you: are you intending to extend rent control to those units that are not presently under 
the controls? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — That will be indicated to the members opposite in due course. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Have you, in your review to date, made any indications as to the possibility of 
proceeding with that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — We are reviewing it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to ask further: has there been any adjustment in respect to the damage deposit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — No. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What is it at, at the present time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — It’s the same as before, $125. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to go on to a different area. Getting back to the liquor board. I want to deal 
with planning and policy for a moment, Mr. Minister. You have  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
799 

reduced this. I want to know what it was they were doing before, which was (and my apologies to the 
member) superfluous, that they’re not going to be doing, because you’ve cut out 20 per cent of their 
staff. 
 
And Hon. Member: — That’s the third time you’ve used that word today. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, it’s a good word. 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re trying to teach you guys. . . 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s right, that’s right. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can pronounce it now. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m told if I use it 999 times you people might come to understand it. 
 
Mr. Minister, what is being cut from their activities? You reduced the staff by 20 per cent. What’s being 
cut from their activities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we cut one position in the policy and planning branch, and of 
that one position cut we brought in two part-time people to job-share, as it were. And of those two 
part-timers, one has expertise in the computer field and one has expertise in the insurance field. So 
again, the policy and planning branch is capable of doing any job we ask of them at this time. It isn’t as 
large a branch as it was before because it falls into line with restraint that is being practiced by this 
government at this time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I just want to be sure I understand the minister. Are you telling me that the 
two part-time people are going to be sort of working half a day each so that you in fact have had no staff 
reduction, just a change from five full-time people to four full-time people, and two half-time people? Is 
that what you told me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. I want to go on the film classification: her you’ve cut the staff in half. I’m 
going to listen with some fascination, Mr. Minister, to see how these people are being more productive. I 
assume they’re doing one of two things: they’re either watching two films at once, or they’re running the 
same film twice as fast. And I assume that that is the increase in the productivity. I’d ask you to confirm 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we have reorganized the film classification board. There was 
one permanent position, that is the director. We intend to bring in a part-time committee. Now, the 
advantages of this is that it will give us a broad representation from the public, from the people of 
Saskatchewan, and their views will represent the views of the people of Saskatchewan as a whole on 
classification of films. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Would the minister run that past me with a little more detail? You are going to have 
a committee which is going to view the films and do the work that the staff did? Would the minister run 
that past me with just a bit more detail, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Well, I’m informed that last year, Mr. Chairman, the film classification board 
reviewed 174 films on the average of three hours in length, and  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
800 

that is a total then of 522 hours of work. And, on the average, we expect about 1,700 hours. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, the minister is saying that they’re only viewing half as many films and that’s 
why they’ve only got half as many staff. Is that what the minister’s telling me? I’m searching here for 
my annual report, and I have it. Let me see if I can quickly . . . Ah, haha . . . Films viewed in all 
categories — 1980-81 there were 359 films in all categories viewed; 1981-82 there were 326. Are you 
telling this Assembly that last year they only viewed 175, and that the number they viewed was half as 
many? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Well, Mr. Chairman, in 1981-82 there were 326 films reviewed. So far this 
year, 174, to March 31st, 1982-83. Another factor in there is that the Chinese Film Society used to send 
in at least 90 films a year. They are no longer doing that, Mr. Chairman, so that accounts for the fewer 
numbers of film classifications at this time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This day has not been lost, as I’d thought. I’ve learned something. You’re telling 
me that the Chinese Film Society was sending in pornographic films and that you people were reviewing 
them? Tell me, were they in Chinese or in English? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — They had English subtitles, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, how many Chinese porn movies did those people get to enjoy in the film 
classification board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — We were concerned with the violence aspect of the movies, Mr. Chairman. 
There were no explicit sex scenes portrayed in these films, from what I understand. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, how many, Mr. Minister? That would still leave you with . . . Okay, assuming 
there’s 90 which you’re not viewing, that would still leave you, if the numbers remained the same as last 
year, approximately 235 to 240. Why the dramatic drop to 176? Are there fewer films coming into the 
province? Are there fewer films coming into the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The factors that explain this then, Mr. Chairman, are the major film 
corporations. Instead of having to have each and every one of the films they send into the province to be 
classified, they’ll send in 10 prints, or maybe 20 prints; we only have to classify one. We only have to 
classify, view one and charge for one. Also, another factor is that many of the films being shown now in 
theatres across Saskatchewan, and across the country, run for longer terms at the theatres they’re in. 
They may run for several weeks or several months, depending on the popularity of that film, so that 
accounts for the numbers. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I didn’t understand your answer, Mr. Minister. What do you mean when you 
say the major film corporations will send in 10 prints and you only have to view one? I don’t understand 
that, Mr. Minister. What are you doing different than what you used to do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — All right. Let us use ‘Bambi’ for an example, Mr. Chairman. If they sent in 10 
copies of ‘Bambi’ to the province of Saskatchewan, we would view one and charge for 10, but we would 
only have to view one. Thus we would . . . 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
801 

Mr. Shillington: — But a serious comment: surely the minister is not suggesting that before, if you got 
10 copies of ‘Bambi,’ the poor rascals would sit through it 10 times and watch each print, on the 
assumption of one might be different. Surely, Mr. Minister, that’s not a serious comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, where we used to charge per print, now we charge in a lump 
sum for a package of prints, not in an individual basis any longer. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, you sure have, Mr. Minister. I initially started out this charade by asking you 
how they were doing twice the work with half the staff; watching two films at once or running them 
twice as fast. We now are talking about how you are charging for them. I’m frankly surprised to hear 
that’s relevant to the reduction in staff. I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, and I’ve assumed that you haven’t 
changed your procedure so that you’re not watching ‘Bambi’ 10 times. 
 
I want to know why the work-load has decreased so dramatically that you only need half the staff. I have 
no idea what the minister is telling me, whether the minister is telling me that your statistical base has 
changed, and that therefore these figures are going to be different, that you’re counting them different 
because you used to count ‘Bambi’ 10 times, or what you’re telling me. I just really wish that you would 
clarify what you’re telling me, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, in the year ‘80-81, the film classification board had to review 
359 films. In ‘81-82, it went down to 326, and ‘82-83, down to 174 — smaller numbers, less hours, 
fewer hours needed, fewer films because we review one film instead of the whole package. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Surely the minister didn’t look at ‘Bambi’ 10 times. Surely, the fact that you’re 
only charging them for one, instead of 10, is irrelevant to the present discussion. I am asking you how it 
is that you are getting by with half the staff, I’m not asking you how you’re counting the films. How are 
you getting with half the staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — It’s a matter of efficiency, Mr. Chairman, in that we’re viewing fewer films 
than we have in previous years, because of the methods I have described. So, it only makes sense, and 
rather than having enough employees there, in effect, on the board, to view some 1,700 hours, as we 
have indicated we only need enough employees to view some 450 hours. Why should the people of 
Saskatchewan pay to employ people for work that is not there? The work is not there any more, thus the 
reduction in staff. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is the minister telling the Assembly that you had excess capacity and that these 
people only worked half days beforehand because you had twice the staff you needed? Is that what 
you’re telling the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, and they have been assigned other work to do. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — How many hours did they spend reviewing films in 1981-82? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — 326. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And how many hours did they spend viewing films in 1981-82 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
802 

then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I’m sorry, I misunderstood you to ask . . . The first question you asked was 
‘81-82. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m sorry; then ‘82-83. I’m trying to get a comparison. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — ‘82-83 — 174; ‘81-82 — 326. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And the difference is accounted for by the deletion of the Chinese films. Is that 
what I understand the Minister to say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — In part, yes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It’s the rest of it that I’m having some difficulty with. I don’t understand where the 
rest of the delegations have come from. Mr. Minister, I don’t understand the 10-prints, one-viewing 
comment. I just can’t follow you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, again, we had the capability of providing 3,400 man-hours with 
two people. Last year in ‘82-83 all that was needed was 1,044 man-hours. We had the capability for 
3,400. All that was needed was 1,044, thus we don’t need that number of staff. We’ve gotten two 
full-time positions to one full-time with part-time staff. And previously the criticism of the film 
classification board that it was too narrow in scope. We had two middle-aged males as it were, and I’m a 
middle-aged male, and I think that my, probably, view of classification would be quite narrow as 
compared to the broad spectrum of people in this province — older people, younger people, men and 
women, those who work and those who don’t, and so on. So now we have the opportunity with one 
permanent employee and some part-timers of having input form the public into classification and we’re 
also increasing productivity at the same time. With these part-timers we can add women, we can add 
seniors, we can add younger people; we can get a broader perspective in the whole area of film 
classification. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, would you describe for me the function of the committee? Does the 
committee actually view films? Is it an advisory committee? What is the function of the committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we’re using the same criteria as has been used in the past in 
classification of films. No change. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m sorry. The minister didn’t understand my question. What does the committee 
do? Is it advisory? Does it view the films? What function does that committee serve? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The committee views the film, reviews it and makes a decision as to how it’s 
going to be classified. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The committee will review all films that the . . . They’ll be present when all films 
are being viewed, are there on a selective basis, or what’s the intention? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — They’ll review all the films, Mr. Chairman, that are submitted to the 
classification board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I’m sorry, I missed the minister’s comment. I was engaged 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
803 

elsewhere. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — They will review all the films that are submitted to the classification board. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. Can you give us the names of the people who are on the committee, if you 
have appointed anyone to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the same people are on the board till May 31st. The director of 
the board is Lawrence Hartt. We have not made any selections yet for the future when the part-timers do 
come in. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What will the rate of pay be to what you call the part-time people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, at this time it still hasn’t been determined. We’re looking at 
options, and we don’t know what the rate or the per diem will be at this time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to move on to a different subject, if I might. I want to run over a series of 
items here. There was a cut in the staff of insurance and real estate. Is that because of fewer agents being 
licensed? What’s the explanation for the reduction there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The deletion there, Mr. Chairman, was a research officer 3. We have the 
capacity now, with the planning and policy people that we have in place, to serve any needs of the 
insurance and real estate branch. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You cut out a research officer. Is that what I understood you to say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes, research officer 3. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — And who’s going to be doing that? Who’s going to be picking up that load? The 
same policy as the planning group that you cut earlier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I won’t make the obvious comment, Mr. Minister. 
 
Communications. As I understand the aim of your communications section, its aim is preventative –the 
maxim that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure — and I gather that this section is being 
reduced. I wonder how you justify that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Again, Mr. Chairman, the matter of restraint comes into play here in that with 
fewer people we can provide the same quality and the same amount of services that we have in the past. 
We’ve changed direction slightly in that instead of sending people out to go face to face with groups or 
individuals who need consumer advising or information, we’re providing material and direction either 
through a brochure, over the telephone, or by letter. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Of course, you always provided the informational material and the information over 
the phone. Are you telling the Assembly that the decrease in activity will be a lack of availability of 
speakers when requested for organizations? Is that what you’re telling us, that you’re not going to be 
doing that you used to be doing? 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
804 

Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Again, we’re sending out self-explanatory material, Mr. Chairman, and this 
material can be used broadly by many groups out there. And over the years, there has been an expertise 
that’s been developed out in the public at large. School teachers and what not in the community can 
provide direction and information that they have acquired in the past. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I’m going to leave this, Mr. Minister. It’s obvious that you are cutting back in 
the area of communications, and that means you’re cutting back in the area of prevention. And I say to 
you that you are being penny wise and pound foolish, because an ounce of prevention is worth a pound 
of cure. Some money spent in communications and education will result in a great deal less demand on 
your department elsewhere, and this is just being penny wise and pound foolish to cut back in the area of 
communications. 
 
With respect to education and extension, are there any of the projects there that have been ongoing that 
are going to be discontinued? I think, for instance, of the money management program. Are there any of 
the ongoing programs and activities which will be discontinued in the area of extension and education? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Well, the answer to your question is no. I do agree that an ounce of prevention 
is worth a pound of cure, and it is more efficient to provide materials, self-explanatory materials, to 
consumers out there, rather than sending out one person from the Department of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs to talk to two or three or half a dozen or a dozen people, which is very expensive. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I’ve made my comment on that, Mr. Minister. I think you just . . . 
Efficiency’s the wrong word. You are being a great deal less effective when you don[t provide the 
personal contact. And that is not efficient; that’s inefficient. When you’re less effective in the area of 
communications it means you’re less effective in the area of prevention and self-help, and that is not 
efficient; that’s inefficient. 
 
I asked you specifically about education extension. Any of the ongoing programs such as the money 
management program being discontinued in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The money management program will not be discontinued. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Are any of the other ongoing programs being discontinued? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — No. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is the Consumer Times being continued with the same frequency as it was before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. The Consumer Times is still going out with the same 
frequency that it has in past years. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Can you give me the number of incorporations for 1982-83? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — 3,120. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Down from 3,054 in ‘81-82. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
805 

Insurance and real estate, Mr. Minister. Have there been any prosecutions against any firms or 
individuals in the ‘82-83 year, and have there been any calls on any bonds? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — There have been no prosecutions. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Any calls on any bonds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — There have been no calls on bonds in insurance and real estate. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay, the next subject I want to deal with, Mr. Minister, is the provincial mediation 
board. A fairly drastic reduction in staff — I’d appreciate your comments on it and why that occurred. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, there were two councillors that were deleted. One had been 
slated to go to Prince Albert and one to Yorkton. The decision was made not to open offices in those 
locations. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That accounts for two staff. What about the balance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The debt co-ordinator that is indicated as deleted was to be in the Saskatoon 
office. That position was deleted and the debt co-ordinator for Regina is now handling the business that 
occurs in the Saskatoon office. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s three. Are there not four positions deleted, Mr. Minister? Five, none the less. 
Where are the other two? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The other two positions indicated in the blue book have been transferred to the 
administration branch in the department. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — But, Mr. Minister, the administration branch went down by one position. How do 
you transfer two people to administration and still lose a position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we deleted three positions in administrative services, and added 
two, for a net of one. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, in a period when increasing numbers of people are having trouble 
managing their financial affairs, and are having trouble with debts, how do you justify cutting 25 per 
cent of your staff? Surely this is the period of time when I would think you would need all your staff, 
when increasing numbers of people are having increasing numbers of financial problems. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, it can be accounted for by the fact that banks and credit unions 
are getting more and more involved in money management these days. Therefore, government s don’t 
have to be so involved as they were in the past. It’s again part and parcel of restraint, and part and parcel 
of letting people do for themselves what they should be able to do for themselves, instead of having the 
big brother attitude of the previous administration. Banks and credit unions are getting more involved in 
money management. They’re providing more materials, and they’re providing counsel nowadays. They 
can do it just as well, or better, than government. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, that is unadulterated nonsense. That is  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
806 

unadulterated nonsense. I deal with a bank and I deal with a credit union (and it’s the Royal Bank and 
the Sherwood Credit Union) and I have not seen any difference in their activities over the last year. I 
know that there are increasing numbers of people who need assistance. The suggestion, Mr. Minister, 
that they ought to rely on their own devices, surely begs the question. By the time they stumble through 
the door of the provincial mediation board, their own resources have proved to be inadequate, and 
they’re in financial trouble, or they wouldn’t be there. People do not wander in at the provincial 
mediation board saying, ‘Listen, I’ve got a series of opportunities coming, and I want to know if they’re 
going to get me into financial problems.’ That’s what they do at a bank or a credit union. But that’s not 
what they do at the provincial mediation board. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How do you know? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — When they come through the door of the provincial . . . Because I was involved 
with the department for some years, that’s why. When they come . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — An excellent job. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I did an excellent job, that’s right. 
 
When they come through the door of the provincial mediation board, they are having difficulties, and 
they have normally exhausted other sources. In a time when increasing numbers of people are having 
increasing financial problems, how do you justify gutting this branch? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I’ll reiterate what I said earlier, Mr. Chairman, that the banks and credit unions 
are providing this information free of charge to people out there. I belong to two credit unions and have 
for many, many, many years. I’ve also had accounts at various banks across the province, but most of 
my largesse is with credit unions now. I find that you can go into credit unions in this province — 
Regina, Saskatoon and anywhere — and you can find literally racks and racks of pamphlets giving you 
information on any money matter that you want to dwell on. If that’s not good enough for you, you can 
go to a loan officer and get that information also. So we’re moving out of the business of providing 
services that can be best provided by free enterprise in the province of Saskatchewan. Not your 
socialistic, Big Brother, big hand on the poor heads of the folks of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I’ll tell you what you’re doing. You’re in the business of getting out 
of assistance to the poorer people in this society. This is what we’ve been talking about all day long. 
That’s what we’ve been talking about all day long, Mr. Minister. 
 
The provincial mediation board does not assist the well-heeled. It, by and large, is a service provided to 
the poor, and to the lower-income people. And the suggestion that somebody who is trouble over his 
head is going to walk into the Sherwood Credit Union, pick up a pamphlet and obtain the advice and 
assistance he needs, just defies belief. It defies belief that you actually believe what you just said that 
somebody who is in trouble over his head can go read a pamphlet and get out of trouble. Now surely, 
Mr. Minister, you’ve got to have a better explanation for us than that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Going back to the member for Regina Centre’s own words, ‘An ounce of 
prevention is worth a pound of cure.’ That’s indicated that the people of  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
807 

Saskatchewan, when they go to banks and credit unions and get the material, the brochures, and what 
not on money management., that they can prevent these problems from occurring. And indeed, looking 
at statistics from the provincial mediation board for ‘81-82, that is up until the end of March 31st, ’82, 
there were 3,010 interviews and investigations on money management in Saskatoon and Regina — 
that’s 3,010. 
 
Now let’s go ahead to the year ‘82-83 ending March 31st, just a few days ago. The numbers there, for 
interviews and investigations in money management, were 2,147; that’s 900 fewer than the previous 
year. It must mean that the banks and credit unions are supplying a service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. If you want to look at orderly payments of debts, the total for ‘81-82 was 266. The total 
for ‘82-83 to March 31st was 239. That’s a minus 30 factor. Can you understand the number? Watch my 
lips. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I’m going to leave the subject, Mr. Minister, but this government should be 
ashamed of itself, in a period of economic difficulty, for withdrawing services to those who are having 
financial difficulty just makes no sense at all. It’s like in the middle of a plague withdrawing medical 
services. It’s the same thing. The need has never been greater. The reason why there are fewer requests 
this year than there were when the NDP administration was in office was because when the NDP 
administration was in office we did everything we could to provide assistance to them. You have been 
doing everything you can to avoid giving them any assistance under this nonsensical theory that free 
enterprise — the banks and the credit unions — are going to rush to the assistance of those who are 
having financial difficulty. Banks and credit unions may be able to provide some assistance to people 
avoiding financial difficulty, but they are not in the business of assisting people who are in financial 
difficulty. 
 
I say, Mr. Minister, I am disappointed to hear that you are extending your free enterprise philosophy into 
this area. What you’ve done, Mr. Minister, what you’re saying is, ‘Socialism for the rich; free enterprise 
for the poor.’ And I’ve said that before, and this is an illustration of free enterprise for the poor — free 
enterprise for the poor. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to go on to the question of lotteries. There were some changes in the area of 
lotteries, and I want a comment from you. The changes in the lottery regulations made it possible for 
political parties to hold raffles and other related sort of activities. I think that makes sense, Mr. Minister. 
It was going on anyway. It was impossible to prevent, even if one thought that it should be prevented. So 
to the extent that you’ve made it possible for political parties to get licenses, I think that’s probably just 
recognizing reality. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: did the change in regulations accommodate 
any other groups who heretofore could not get licenses? Political parties are the ones I know who were 
allowed in, but was any other group allowed through the gate with those changes in regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, it wasn’t a change in regulations that allowed political parties to 
hold raffles. It was a change in the government’s definition of charitable — what was a charitable 
organization and what wasn’t. And prior to April 26th, the Department of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs, licensing and investigation branch, the branch that covers charities, changed its policy to define 
a political party as well as a union being charitable. Therefore, they were allowed to hold raffles. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. As I said, Mr. Minister, I have no quarrel with . . . I wasn’t aware that unions 
were also allowed. I have no quarrel with either. I think most groups were doing it, I think, probably, not 
to anyone’s great detriment. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
808 

Mr. Minister, the Culliton commission I gather was funded out of your department. I saw that in the 
answers which you gave to my questions of last time. And I want to say, Mr. Minister, I want to thank 
you for your timely response to the questions put to you. I think I got my answers back form you quicker 
than anyone. And I want to thank you for that. 
 
In the answers which you gave me, you indicated that the Culliton commission, I understand, was 
funded out of your department. Could you tell me, have you received Mr. Justice Culliton’s report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the Culliton commission was set up by the previous 
administration to look at rate structures for public utilities in Saskatchewan. He was working on his 
report last spring. On April 26th, however, with the change of government, the new government 
indicated that a public utilities review commission would be set up. And thus the need for the Culliton 
report was not carried . . . It was no longer needed. It was not carried through with. Thus, no report has 
been filed by Justice Culliton. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I thought Mr. Justice . . . I understand, Mr. Minister, that Mr. Justice 
Culliton is doing two reports: one on freedom of information, one on the public utilities review 
commission. With respect to his report for freedom of information, is he being funded out of your 
department or is that being funded out of the Attorney-General’s department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — It’s being funded out of the Justice Department. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The last subject I want to deal with, then, is the Saskatchewan Research Council. In 
the answers which you gave me, there was a very large number of lay-offs. There were some 19 or 20 
lay-offs. Do I assume from that that their activities are being cut back, or is this being privatized and 
funded out of the private sector, or how do you account for the relatively large number of lay-offs at the 
Saskatchewan Research Council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, I have my research council officials somewhere in the building. 
I will deal with Saskatchewan Research Council when I can call them in. No problem. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to make one comment, and then that’s all the questions I have, Mr. Minister. 
It is something that I’d ask you to look into and review with this policy and planning branch of yours 
that’s been reduced. It has to do with The Land Contracts (Actions) Act which I understand is an act 
assigned to you as minister. 
 
Heretofore it had been universally assumed by the entire legal profession that when you borrowed 
money on the security of land, you could not be responsible for any deficit or deficiency. All that the 
lending institution could do was to take back the land. As a result of a decision last year in the courts of 
this province, the act has been largely emasculated. Now, unless the person from whom you are buying 
the land took the land as security, you can be sued for the difference. That means if, as in the case in 19 
out of 20 cases, or 99 out of 100, you borrowed from a bank or a credit union, you can now be sued for a 
deficiency, and thus borrowers and mortgagors in this province have lost, as a result of that decision, a 
very significant bit of protection which they once enjoyed in this province. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
809 

I am not particularly expecting much of a response this evening. I would just urge the minister to take 
this matter under review and give consideration to amending The Land Contracts (Actions) Act and The 
Limitation of civil Rights Act, I guess, and give mortgagors the protection in the future which everyone 
heretofore assumed they had. 
 
As I say, you may or may not want to comment on it. I just urge you to give that some consideration, 
and with that I have no further questions on subvote 1. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You have here, heartening change. Here, you have an increase in funding for this. I 
just would appreciate a brief explanation for the relatively generous increase in funding. I assume it 
relates to the work-load, but, I’d just appreciate your explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve increased the numbers on the rent appeal commission 
from five to 10, to accommodate the work-load. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 to 13 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 14 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Chairman, I wonder if the minister could tell me what good fortune you’re 
assuming this year with respect to this morass? What good fortune are you assuming you’re going to 
have this year, that you didn’t have last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we’re digging into that issue and keeping it covered well. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I think, Mr. Chairman, we should now adjourn this, unless the liquor board officials 
are here. I think we’d adjourn this to a subsequent day, at this point in time. Perhaps the officials are 
here, I don’t know. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Go on to the next one. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, deal with Co-ops next. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — We’ve adjourned this, as . . . (inaudible) . . . official here at this time and with 
your leave, we’ll bring them in tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — We’ll adjourn this and deal with it tomorrow and deal with Co-ops. Deal with 
Saskatchewan Research Council next, actually. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Is it agreed that Co-ops and Co-op Development will be next on the agenda? 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
810 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, I just asked the Acting House Leader why we wouldn’t deal with the 
Research Council next. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

CO-OPERATION AND CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 6 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — The estimates before the committee is Co-operation and Co-operative Development, 
page 24. Would the minister introduce his officials please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, thank you. The officials here from the Department of 
Co-operation: to my right, the deputy minister, Mr. Dale Folstad; to his right, the director of 
administration, Mr. Don Trew; and behind me, Mr. Al Mulholland, the director of examination services. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would tell me if there has been any changes in the 
staff in your office? I here assume that there is no division between Consumer Affairs and Co-ops, and 
just ask you about your staff generally. Has there been any change in the staff in your office either in 
personnel or in rate of remuneration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I assume you are referring to the minister’s office. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — As it pertains to Co-operatives, I have one executive assistant, John Gibson, 
who is salaried at 30,000 per annum. And, he is the only one that is administered by the Department of 
Co-ops. One assistant secretary, at . . . (inaudible) . . . You need the salary of the assistant secretary? No. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I want to say, generally, Mr. Minister, that this department was not as badly 
savaged as some of the others, and I’m pleased to see that. I’m pleased to see that if you allowed 
consumer and corporate affairs to go down with the ship of your mismanagement, at least Co-ops does 
not seem to have been quite as badly treated. 
 
Mr. Minister, in administrative services there are two fewer positions, and I am wondering what that 
relates to. Why are there two fewer positions in administrative services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, as part of our reorganization of the structure of the Department 
of Co-ops, we had in total four fewer positions in administration, but we then add on the two that are 
employed in the minister’s office, making a net of two fewer positions in administration. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do I understand that the staff which you just gave me the information on — that’s 
additional staff which you didn’t have in ‘82-83? I’m sorry. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes. Is that 
additional staff which you didn’t have in ‘82-83? Surely the EA and the assistant secretary would have 
shown up in last year’s estimates, 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
811 

as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The assistant secretary’s position was temporary before, and it was made 
permanent just recently — at the beginning of the year. And the executive assistant that I referred to, 
John Gibson, was only two weeks ago, transferred from the jurisdiction of Consumer and Commercial 
Affairs to the jurisdiction of Co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — So, it was not a new staff person in your office, but simply a transfer from funding 
his position our of consumer and corporate affairs, to funding his position out of Co-ops. Is that what I 
understand the minister to say? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — That’s true. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Then the four fewer positions this year than last year, where were those positions 
lost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, we announced the restructuring of the Department of Co-ops 
way back in December, and at that time the hon. member had requested complete details of the 
reorganization, which we provided to the hon. member and, I believe, the hon. Leader of the Opposition, 
through his chief of staff, one . . . Grant Mitchell? . . . Grant Mitchell, yes. And the reorganization, of 
course, became effective March 31st, 1983. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. Co-operative development: you have eight fewer positions there. Would you 
tell me what the eight positions are and where are they physically located in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — In co-operative development, positions abolished included a co-op 
management adviser 1 — Regina, ditto for Saskatoon and ditto for Estevan, a research officer 5, a 
research officer 3, a research officer 2, and another research officer 2, and also three temporary positions 
were deleted. However, we added two new positions, and they are: administrative officer 3 and a 
research officer 4, for a total of eight positions. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Why the decreasing emphasis on co-operative development? Surely the 
co-operative principles are as sound now as they were when your department was established, and 
they’re certainly as sound this year as they were last year. Why the decreasing emphasis on co-operative 
development, or is this something else that you’re privatizing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Most of the positions deleted within the purview of co-op development were 
policy and planning people, Mr. Chairman, and we have indicated that we want our planning and policy 
to come from within the branch and, indeed, from without, from input, if you will, from co-operative 
people in Saskatchewan. We feel that the planning and the input should come from within the branch 
itself and, of course, from the people out in the field that are working as co-op management advisers out 
in the rural areas of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, it was also indicated to me early on when we moved into government in May, by the leaders of the 
co-op centrals out there that I visited with — the wheat pools, the credit union people, the Federated 
Co-op people, and indeed co-op college people, Co-operators and so on, that they expected us to be just 
as lean and just as efficient as they were in their operations in these days of restraint. So we had to have 
a hard look at  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
812 

the Department of Co-operation to see where we could delete positions and still keep our programs 
operating effectively. We have done that and the terminations that we did bring about, the people who 
were affected were given four months notice — the permanent people were give four months notice; the 
temporaries were given one month notice. And I’m proud to say that all of those people I believe, all of 
those people have now found new positions — most of them new positions within government, and 
there were a couple of the 13 net that I alluded to in the last estimates, who are now out in the private 
sector. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, you indicated that three of the positions which you deleted were 
co-op management advisers. Now those people relate directly to the public, so to that extent at least, 
you’re decreasing services to the public. But, I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that policy and planning is 
an essential element if the co-operative movement is to grow. This department provides the intellectual 
fountain, if you like, of the new co-operatives. Federated and the Credit Union Central and so on do a 
good job in their traditional areas, but the concept of a co-operative is a very elastic one, and it’s very 
flexible and it’s capable of growth — it’s capable of being used in new areas. And I suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, that when you delete the policy and planning people, what you delete is the future growth 
because you delete the development of the new fields and the new ideas. 
 
And, I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that what you have done with these cuts is to choke off the growth 
of the co-operative movement in the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The indication from the hon. member opposite was that policy and planning 
had been obliterated from the map of the Department of Co-operation and Co-operative Development, 
and that is not so. Policy and planning, as I indicated in my earlier answer, has now been brought in to 
the scope of co-op development, and we are putting strong emphasis on policy and planning within, 
within the branch of co-operative development. Those positions that were deleted in the policy and 
planning, when it was indeed a separate branch of the department, we found that when we took over 
government the people in policy and planning indeed had no practical experience with co-operatives. So 
what we’re saying is that we’re drawing our resources now from people within the development branch 
who have practical and related experience with the co-operatives of all kind: retails, and day care co-ops, 
snow-plough co-ops, and you name it. There are dozens and dozens of different kinds of co-operatives 
out there. We certainly are putting just as much emphasis now on policy and planning as we have in the 
past. But we feel it’s in a better position now to do more good, with more grass roots input. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, I suggested to you that your budget in consumer and corporate 
affairs is eloquent testimony to the priority which you’re giving to the protection of consumers, because 
your department had been cut a good deal more so than the average. And I make the same comment with 
respect to the Department of Co-operatives. I suggest that the figures here are eloquent testimony that 
this is no longer a priority of this government. 
 
I recall the comments of Mr. Gil Johnson, speaking to a group who said just that, that from now on 
co-operatives are going to be treated the same as everyone else. That wasn’t the case with the former 
administration. Co-operatives received a particular emphasis and a particular support because we 
believed in the philosophy. 
 
I suggest to you that the figures in co-op development, and the bottom line which is an  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
813 

actual decrease of $200,000 in funding, are eloquent testimony that you give co-operatives low priority. 
If you gave them anything else, you wouldn’t slash the funding the way you have. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the member from Regina Centre referred to a remark made by 
Mr. Gil Johnson. And we’ve gone over the remarks that he made in his address to, I believe it was a 
co-op activities council, and what he said, and what the leaders of the co-op sector in the province agree 
with, is that there was too much pie-in-the-sky programs during the previous administration. They 
weren’t effective programs that the previous administration were delivering. They were not relevant. 
 
The leaders of the co-op movement in the province of Saskatchewan have told me, they’ve told my 
deputy and others within the department, that they want equality with the rest of businesses in 
Saskatchewan. We’ve said that’s what we’re going to give them. We’re not going to treat them as the 
hon. member referred to, not in so many words, but what he alluded to was a political football. They 
don’t want to be treated like political footballs. They want to be free of that stigma. So we’re in the 
process of developing good communications, treating them on an equal footing, and that is indeed what 
they want. 
 
In regards to the numbers of staff, as I said before, they’ve indicated they want us to be lean; they want 
us to be efficient; and they want us to supply services that are relative to the co-op movement. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I can believe that you heard that from Federated Co-operatives and 
from Credit Union Central and the big co-operatives. I can believe that those co-operatives are not 
particularly in need of the services that this department has traditionally provided, but, frankly, Mr. 
Minister, I don’t believe you heard that from the so-called developing co-ops. I don’t believe you heard 
that they wanted to be treated like everybody else, because without the promotion and assistance of this 
department, those developing co-operatives will simply wither on the vine. 
 
What we have here, Mr. Minister, is a fairly sharp difference in philosophy between this administration 
and the last, with respect to co-ops. We sought wherever possible to foster the development of new 
co-operatives in new areas. What you’re saying is that you’re satisfied that the major co-operatives in 
the traditional areas, Federated and Credit Union Central, are doing fine, and therefore there’s less need 
for this department. 
 
Tell me, Mr. Minister, are there any plans to amalgamate this department with the other one for which 
you’re responsible, consumer and corporate affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — No. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, a few short questions on co-operative development. The minister 
alluded to development of day care in the Department of Co-ops. I’m wondering if you can tell me 
whether or not any of these people, the eight that were eliminated, were positions that were working on 
the development of day care in your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the Department of Co-operatives has developed a new thrust 
and put a new and invigorated importance on the development 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
814 

of day cares in the province of Saskatchewan. There have been no cut-backs in staffing in terms of 
service to day cares. We’ve introduced anew service where we’re putting on seminars and meetings with 
new emphasis on accounting and bookkeeping procedures, with new emphasis on board management, 
and new emphasis on management and advisory services. 
 
Day cares, to this department and to this government, are very, very important services that are needed 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and in co-operation with the Department of Social Services, the 
Department of Co-operation intends to provide day cares with every service possible in this province, so 
that they can grow and provide to the needs of parents in the province. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Well, that’s very nice. I wonder if you can tell me: have any seminars and 
meetings been held to date in this new wondrous program that you’re developing with any day care 
boards yet, or is this something in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes, I can tell the hon. member that there have been several seminars and 
meetings and if he would like a list, a detailed list of those meetings, I can provide him with that. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — As well, the minister mentioned board management. What exactly are you 
referring to? Do you have a policy that you are taking out to the boards in terms of management, or a 
plan? Can you as well fill us in on that — what guide-lines you are giving to the boards, who I’m sure 
can use some assistance in planning their budgets, seeing that they’re having very, very difficult times, 
as well as in some cases where they’re having lower numbers of children in the day cares, simply 
because the parent can no longer afford the $200 or $300 they have to pay even over and above the 
subsidy? And some of them are telling me now that they are going to have to increase their day care 
rates by as much as $100 per month over the next couple of months because of the fact that the grants 
are not coming in quick enough and in enough abundance in order to keep up with the way things are 
going. And can you tell me what kind of a plan you have in terms of supporting and giving advice to the 
boards of these day cares? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — It’s quite evident, Mr. Chairman, that there’s continually a heavy turnover of 
board members in day cares in the province of Saskatchewan, in co-operative day cares, and because 
parents are moving across the province and from city to city and what not. So it’s evident that there is a 
constant need for ongoing training of board members so that they can understand the management 
aspect and the functional role that they have to perform as board members. And we’re dwelling on . . . 
with emphasis on budgeting, accounting and so on, and the duties of board members in day care 
co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Can the minister tell me how many people in the Department of Co-ops are 
presently working on this project of day care development and can you give me the names of those 
individuals and also the job description that would describe the work that they are doing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Well, Mr. Chairman, all our co-op management advisers are capable of 
providing assistance to development of day cares in the province of Saskatchewan. They have standard 
packages that they use when groups of parents advise us that they want to incorporate as day cares, so all 
our co-op management advisers are capable of providing that service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
And, 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
815 

indeed, in certain cases, we have to call in special advisers to provide expertise in the area of accounting 
where the co-op management adviser can’t supply that expertise. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Is the minister then saying that none of the people in co-operative development 
have a job description that would be directly related to the development of day care? Are there no 
individuals whose sole responsibility is the development of co-operative day care in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — It’s a requisite, Mr. Chairman, that co-op management advisers have in their 
job description, that they are capable of providing the assistance that day cares need for their 
development. There are no particular individuals that are assigned specifically to day care development. 
Each and every co-op management adviser is capable of doing this. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Another question related to that area. Let’s use the example of a day care in 
Regina or Swift Current who needed some help in developing a budget and that sort of thing. How 
would they go through contacting your office and who, in order to get that kind of assistance and 
guidance or, in fact, get involved in the seminars and meetings that you are talking about? Who would 
they contact, and what kind of arrangements would be made by your department to go out and to meet 
with them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I would suggest if someone lives in the Swift Current area, the Swift Current 
region, that he contact the co-op management adviser in the Swift Current office. The co-op 
management adviser goes from there and helps the people who want the day care co-operative to 
incorporate. He gives them all the information they need and any additional expertise that they might 
need, as I alluded to earlier in the field of accounting and in other areas they might need additional 
expertise. Open the phone book, look for the Department of Co-operatives, no matter what region you 
live in in Saskatchewan. We have co-op management advisers in Yorkton, Tisdale, Regina, Saskatoon, 
Prince Albert, North Battleford, and Kindersley, and Estevan. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Could the minister inform me whether or not — since he has taken over that 
department — any communication has been carried on with day care boards in terms of a formal letter 
or communication letting them know what services are available from your department, in terms of 
organizing budgets and developing co-operative day care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Our co-op management advisers, Mr. Chairman, have a continuous 
correspondence with day care co-operatives in the province. As well, last summer, our co-op 
management advisers held special meetings with day care co-operatives across the province, those that 
wanted to take advantage of informational services that they were providing at that time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — The reason that I’m asking these questions — I’m going to be writing to the day 
cares of the province over the next week, and so if I include a portion in there, that this kind of service is 
available from the Department of Co-ops, I would not be far off. And the reason that it’s of special 
interest to me — it was something that was sort of just getting under way in terms of developing a day 
care operation that was being sort of jointly done by the Department of Co-ops and Social Services at 
the time that I was minister. So if I was to go ahead and let them know that this service is available, your 
department, you’re telling me, would be able to handle the influx of requests and possible requirements 
to go out and have meetings with the day care groups in the province. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
816 

Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Yes, we’d appreciate that, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I have before me some press clippings I’ve been reading that relate to all kinds of 
pressures that are facing young farmers: cost-price squeeze, reduction in price of their grain, increase in 
prices of input costs. In the past when that kind of pressure hit, a lot of young farmers decided to get 
together and form co-operatives and there was some decent assistance available. Has that program 
changed at all as your emphasis change, or have you got staff in the field to take care of those kind of 
requests? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The department is, at this time, currently working on development of 
machinery-sharing co-operatives, Mr. Chairman, and it is a service and it is a type of co-operative that a 
need has been indicated for out there by the young farmers of Saskatchewan. However, we are running 
into some income tax problems now, that they may have to fact. So we’re currently working on how to 
solve those problems and we expect that within a couple of months, or possibly a little longer, that we 
will have that problem solved and we will be able to forge ahead with the formation and incorporation of 
machinery-sharing co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, under examination services it’s actually an increase of three people. 
What accounts for the increase in the three people in that subvote? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — We took over the co-operative unit within Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chairman, and there were three positions there that we took over into our 
examination services branch. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, that’s right, Mr. Minister, now that you remind me. The co-op guarantee board 
— can you give me the total aggregate of loans outstanding as of (I guess it’s done on a fiscal year), as 
of March 31, 1983? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — $2,604,300. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s the additional loans guaranteed in the last fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — That’s the balance of loans outstanding. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — What additional guarantees have been given this year, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — None, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Have any been refused, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — No written requests for guarantees have been refused. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Can you give us a list of the loans which are in default — the loans which you have 
guaranteed, which are in default to the person who has lent them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — There is only one past due, Mr. Chairman, and that is Alfa Cubers, a mutual — 
an amount of $26,256 is past due. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
817 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, I guess there’s only the one overdue. Would you confirm, Mr. Minister, that 
that loan has not been given any supplemental guarantees, since you’ve guaranteed further amounts to 
loans which are already in arrears? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — We haven’t guaranteed anything new at . . . since the new government took 
over, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The co-op home building program, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me how many 
units were built last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, there were 66 incorporations in 1982-83 . . . home building 
co-ops, 66 incorporations. As to how many specific units were involved. I don’t have that information at 
hand right now, but I would estimate you could probably multiply it by three or maybe four. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Could you tell me, Mr. Minister, has there been any change in the status of the 
native planning and co-ordination unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — We have one position, Mr. Chairman, within the co-op development branch, 
that is specifically responsible for liaison with native groups, and their requests for information and 
requests for incorporation as co-operatives. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, the co-operative relations branch. There is a fairly sharp decrease in 
funding in other expenses. Do I assume that that to a decreased amount of advertising, or is there some 
other explanation for the decrease in funding in other expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — It is advertising, Mr. Chairman, yes. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Could you give me the names and rates per diem of the members of the 
co-operative securities board? I could put the question differently. I got it from you last year. Has it 
changed since last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — The per diem, Mr. Chairman, is $75. Did you request the names of those on the 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’ll quickly run through. They haven’t changed since the last 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This is virtually my final question. It has to do with the George Taylor Co-operative 
housing in the Rochdale village housing co-op. Have these projects been completed and have the units 
been filled? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, the George Taylor project has been completed; yes, it has. In 
regards to the Rochdale project, the Sask Housing Corporation reviewed its housing priorities and, as a 
consequence, decided that the project could best meet the housing needs of the Cathedral community by 
tendering the management of the project to a private firm, so it is no longer a co-operative. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Who got the tender, Mr. Minister? Who was the successful bidder? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — I would refer that question to Saskatchewan Housing  



 
April 11, 1983 

 
818 

Corporation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — That’s fair. Let me just understand you, though. The Rochdale Village housing 
co-op was transferred to Sask Housing and it is they who have taken responsibility for it. If that’s the 
case, I’ll leave it and I’ll take it up with . . . I don’t see Mr. Hardy here. I’ll take it up with the minister 
when his estimates for housing come forward. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 

Item 2 
 
Mr. Shillington: — One further question. Have there been any lay-offs, terminations — I don’t 
particularly care about suspensions — but have there been any lay-offs or terminations within the 
Department of Co-ops, apart from the ones which might have come about as a result of the loss of 
positions? Have there been any other lay-offs or terminations in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — No, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Items 3 and 4 agreed to. 
 

Item 5 
 
Mr. Shillington: — One question. I assume, Mr. Minister, that the explanation here again is the 
penniless state of the current government, and that explains the decrease in funding under co-operative 
grants. I assume that there’s no pretence that there’s any less need for it. It is just your incompetent 
management and current penniless state that results in a decrease in funding. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — You can make whatever assumptions you like, Mr. Member from Regina 
Centre. We have indicated that that . . . It’s been indicated to us, I should say, by the co-operative sector 
out there that that is all that is needed at this time, this year. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, this is the second time today the minister has referred to the co-ops 
who are not in favour of this program, and I think in question period he mentioned they had relayed that 
message to him. I wonder if you will now send over to us the message that you received from the co-ops 
that would indicate that they were not in favour of that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Chairman, in the spirit of new co-operation in the province of 
Saskatchewan — and the spirit of co-operation is alive and well — the leaders of the central co-ops in 
this province have indicated to me and to the department they’re happy with the new liaison they have 
with us, the new communication that they have with us, and the programs that are being carried on, and 
the fair and equal treatment that they are receiving. So the member’s comments are ludicrous. We have 
received communication from them, verbally, through person-to-person contact. I am not going to take 
his question at heart to provide documentation on it. It is a new feeling, a new spirit of co-operation in 
the province of Saskatchewan. The spirit’s growing on, is what I’m trying to say, Mr. Chairman. 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
 

 
819 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, the minister has referred to the fact that certain co-ops were not in 
favour of this program. My question to him: you’re the one who brought it up that certain co-ops were 
not in favour of this program, and I’m asking you now to let us know which co-ops you are referring to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I heard the hon. member from Shaunavon refer to the Minister of 
Co-ops from his seat, refer to the Minister of Co-ops as a liar. I think that is certainly unparliamentary 
language. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, I would like the Minister of Finance to withdraw that statement 
because at no time either from my feet or from my desk did I refer to anyone as a liar. It was the 
Minister of Finance who from his desk was talking about liars. I at no time suggested that anyone was, 
and I would ask him to withdraw the remarks that he inferred that I had called someone a liar. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Officially there was no one on their feet at the time when this activity was going on. 
It was across, so the Chair cannot recognize anything that was not said on their feet. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, there was an accusation made in this Assembly not two seconds 
ago by the Minister of Finance that I had referred to someone as a liar, which I didn’t do. I would ask 
him to withdraw that insinuation at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will relay to the House exactly what in fact was said. He 
indicated, the member clearly within hearing range, Mr. Chairman — clearly within hearing range — 
and there’s miles of precedent that indicates that the Speaker or the Chairman when he hears some kind 
of accusations in this House that are in hearing range regardless of whether he’s standing on his feet or 
not is cognizant of it. I simply refer back to previous occasions when members were ejected from this 
House for uttering statements from their chair when they clearly weren’t standing. 
 
What I understood the conversation to be, Mr. Chairman, was as follows: they were challenging; the 
members opposite were challenging the Minister of Co-ops. I asked them, ‘Are you in fact calling him a 
liar?’ The hon. member answered in the affirmative. I suggest that that is certainly challenging the Hon. 
Minister of Co-ops. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I think the . . . refer back to what I said before. There was no official . . . There’s 
heckling and, therefore, I think we should get back to the item on hand, and leave it at that. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Vote 6 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

CO-OPERATION AND CO-OPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT 
 

Nil vote. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I just want to thank the ministers and officials for their co- 



 
April 11, 1983 

 
820 

operation in these estimates. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I want to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:15 p.m. 
 


	COMMITTEE OF FINANCE
	CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE
	An Hon. Member: — We started this afternoon and tonight he could have had his staff here.

	Item 8
	Item 14
	CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE
	Item 2
	Mr. Shillington: — One further question. Have there been any lay-offs, terminations — I don’t particularly care about suspensions — but have there been any lay-offs or terminations within the Department of Co-ops, apart from the ones which might have ...

	Item 5
	CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS

