






















































Hansard: February 28, 1983


2177 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
February 28, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
FINANCE 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 11 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chairman, I want to refer the minister to the budget address. At 
that time he indicated and I quote: 
 

Had we proceeded to implement the March budget without holding it up to the light, I would not be 
able to announce this evening cuts in expenditures . . . totalling 170 million . . . These expenditure 
reductions have been made without affecting essential government services. 

 
As I review some of the budgetary cuts, I note that the senior citizens shelter allowance was one that was 
cut. I note that the cultural and recreational program that was under culture and youth was cut. I look at 
rural affairs and I see the capital grants to municipalities cut. I look in education and I see basic cuts in 
the STI and P.A. institute, geological science building. 
 
But I want to ask the minister: since he took credit for these major cuts could he provide us with a list, 
an itemized list, of the 107 which total up to $170 million, indicating the amount of the various cuts that 
he made giving the individual amounts of each program or each individual item? I’d like a list of the 
$170 million, which you indicated and took credit for and were very proud of at the time indicating your 
government’s very businesslike approach to it and indicating that there was no cutback in social 
programs. What I’d like then is a complete list of those items that made up the $170 million. Can you 
provide that? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — If I can undertake to get that to you. I think I set it out in fair amount of 
detail on questioning after the budget. But I will undertake to get that. I don’t have that for you and I’ll 
have to do some work to get that type of information for you. I will do that. 
 
Some of the ones that you looked at — I think you made reference to the fact that, you know, we made 
these adjustments without affecting some of the, or any of the, fundamental services that one looks at in 
government. I think from your own recollection you will recall the senior citizens shelter allowance. 
That was a five-year program when instituted. It was to run for five years and what your government 
decided, because it was an election year, was you were going to break that from a five-year and bring it 
into a four-year — regenerate under a four-year thing. 
 
Culture and recreation. We looked at that and if we had to make some adjustments perhaps that’s one 
area that we could make some adjustments in that given year. So 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2178 

that’s why we made that type of adjustment. 
 
Rural affairs. I think the rural municipalities are still going along relatively fine and the world isn’t 
coming apart because of some adjustments there and down turns there. I think we have made a 
commitment to Prince Albert technical institute. The Minister of Education is clearly committed to 
proceed with the P.A. institution. In fact, it will probably be a larger program than the previous 
government had proposed and looking at the type of services or the type of spaces it will deliver, we 
hope we will bring it closer into the reality of the types of things that we need. Looking at it overall, the 
$170 million cuts were, I think, by and large not harmful. I think the world is still swinging around 
pretty fair and I don’t think that we have in that sense made serious hardships for any citizen of 
Saskatchewan with regard to those cuts. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I take it that the minister will be providing a complete list of all those items 
which add up to the $170 million. I take it that what he has said relevant to the programs that I have 
indicated that were cut . . . I presume that you are taking the same attitude — and I don’t want to put 
words in your mouth — but obviously you must have taken the same attitude that all of these cuts were 
not essential to providing services to you. Basically, I would like to differ with you and I think that the 
cuts in the cultural and recreational program . . . It was indeed a service which had been provided and 
we undertook to institute another four- or five-year program. 
 
I think with the senior citizens shelter allowance . . . I think that they are one group which are hit by 
inflation and increase in rental rates and again I think that it’s one of the essential services of the 
government in protecting a particular group within society which are unable, often because of limited 
income, to be able to protect themselves. So I take what the minister is saying in his sort of offhanded 
sort of way is that for all of those which he will be providing, you take the similar view. Is that the view 
of the Minister of Finance and can it accordingly be applied to all cuts? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think that if you talk about the senior citizens . . . I don’t want to get 
into the Department of Social Services; I think you’ve been through that and probably asked those 
questions. All I am simply saying is this: when you look at the department, the question of senior 
citizens shelter allowance, what you are saying, is it not that those people who needed some assistance 
in repairing their home wouldn’t get it? Well, it’s just that the ones that got it four years and had to wait 
five years to get it again would have to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . All right, that’s what I said — I 
didn’t want to defend somebody else’s departments. I don’t know those particular details. But anyway, 
it’s no problem . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Just a minute, I’ll come back to that one. 
 
Let’s take culture and recreation grants. Culture and recreation grants were cut. I think by the same 
token you have to bear in mind that the Department of Health’s budget was increased some $120 
million. Now, when I come and look at things like increasing spending on health, versus increasing 
spending on culture and recreation grants, and you asked me which is the most important way of 
spending and which is the most fundamental service. I think I come to the view that perhaps health is 
more important than the culture and recreation grants in the given year. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to know within the time frame that we’re likely to receive the list which 
you’ve undertaken to provide. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Pardon me. I didn’t hear that. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2179 

MR. KOSKIE: — How soon can we get the list constituting the $170 million cut? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I will arrange to get it to you as soon as I possibly can, like everything else 
you’ve asked for. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Surely the minister, when he made the speech in the budget address, had it prepared. 
I mean he was knowledgeable of it; it has to be somewhere and surely he can undertake to provide that 
within a week. I mean, as soon as possible leaves it completely open to the minister. I mean, surely he 
could come to the House here prepared at least to support that which he was telling the public in the 
budget address in November. What is the reason that you can’t provide it? You obviously had it then. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would remind the hon. member that the Leader of the Opposition asked me 
several questions and asked for several pieces of information. I undertook to provide that information to 
him and I will provide that information to him as soon as I possibly can. I had no hassle from him as to 
whether or not I was going to provide it and when exactly I was going to provide it, and I think he 
seemed to be reasonably satisfied that we would in fact provide that type of information. I am not trying 
to hold any information back to you; I will provide it as soon as I possibly can. 
 
I would hope that you would take my undertaking with regard to that and I will provide that information 
to you. Now if we want we can we can stand up and harangue and hassle about it all night; all I am 
saying is I will provide it as soon as I possibly can. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’ll accept what the minister says. All I may say to the minister is that we have asked 
this government for a considerable amount of information by way of motions and questions, and to date 
we haven’t received one single answer to one single question. And now, at the same time when I ask for 
a specific piece of information, I get the answer: as soon as possible. Now I don’t want to be difficult 
with the minister and I take him at his word that when he says as soon as possible, that will be in a 
reasonable time, so let us leave it there. But you can understand why I have some hesitations in respect 
to the phrase, as soon as possible. 
 
There have been several other major (I would say) election promises during the last campaign. I think 
perhaps the major (if the press would examine it) one is the sales tax cut. That 5 per cent sales tax cut 
runs into $360 million, and I recall distinctly the Premier being interviewed following the election a 
week or two, to indicate that that would in fact be thought about during the current year. I was 
wondering whether, on that item and also in respect to the election promise of income tax cuts — 10 per 
cent income tax cut — I wonder whether or not the Minister of Finance has gotten those, or whether in 
fact there have been studies and discussions, and a timetable in respect to the implementation of those 
two major promises. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Of course. I’ve faced this question many times from the members opposite. I 
think we have to go back, number one, and look. I suppose any government has to account to the people 
as to the commitments they made during the election, and whether the people accept that those 
commitments have been lived up to. The way you judge that, I suppose, is when you go to the polls. 
 
I believe that as a government we committed to some very significant programs that I think were right-
headed, and obviously the people of Saskatchewan thought so, too. We made a significant cut in the 
price of gasoline, and I think that was clearly, by 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2180 

anybody in the media, and anybody else, a key political plank, a key program plank in our campaign. 
We delivered on that very shortly after coming into power, being sworn into office. 
 
We delivered a housing program — a 13.25 per cent interest program — that everybody, including the 
members opposite, during the campaign indicated was going to break the budget and break the 
Government of Saskatchewan. It was “foolhardy,” and we delivered on that program. Right now, we see 
the benefits of that program as the only province in Canada that has housing starts over what they were 
in 1981 — that combined with the build-a-home program. 
 
We delivered a program to young farmers that said that we will deliver a program that will help you 
with low-interest loans at 8 per cent money. We delivered on that program. 
 
The members opposite would indicate that the program wouldn’t be taken up, that we left it too long, 
and they wouldn’t have enough farmers. Well, I can assure you that as of now — as of now — there are 
far more farmers than we can even provide the money for who have applied under farm credit — well 
over $200 million, I believe now, with a cap of $150 million. We delivered on that program. 
 
We promised that we would deliver a rural gas program. I think the minister of power announced the 
other day that we embarked upon a 10-year plan of bringing natural gas to the rural areas of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would say that’s living up to the commitment pretty strongly. I suggest to you, hon. member, that the 
most recent test of whether or not we’ve lived up to our commitment was in the P.A.-Duck Lake by-
election, and we have a member sitting over there to prove that the people of Saskatchewan, in fact, 
believe that we delivered on our commitment and we will continue to deliver on our commitments over 
the years that we are in power. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to say that the significant thing here is that the minister should by now know 
that speech off by heart, as do all the ministers. I know the press is getting tired of it, and I can say that 
the opposition . . . Specifically, though, I asked in respect to a couple of other major promises, and of 
course, the Minister of Finance completely evaded answering the particular question. I guess I would 
like to repeat: have you a time frame? Have you worked out a time frame for the implementation of the 
two major programs that you promised — a sales tax cut and an income tax cut? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Two comments with regard to the questions. I can assure the member 
opposite that when we look at delivering programs we are more concerned with what the people’s views 
are than what the views of the media are in these particular programs. And it’s the people that count and 
that was demonstrated in Prince Albert-Duck Lake. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — With regard to the time frame which those other programs are going to be 
brought in, clearly we have a view of liking to see the tax rate in the province 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2181 

of Saskatchewan, be it sales tax, be it income tax, in fact brought down, because I think it is important 
that we be more competitive, particularly with our neighbour in the province of Alberta. We want to see 
that brought down, but we’re also going to be responsible, and we’re going to bring that down when in 
fact we can afford to. I can assure the member opposite that while we are government on this side of the 
House, those programs will in fact be delivered. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to turn to another topic, and that is in respect to your theory in respect to 
deficit budgets. There has been much criticism of the federal government as to the amount of deficit, and 
certainly recently the Premier has indicated that indeed, he would be in favour of increasing the federal 
deficit now, providing that that deficit or increased amount would in fact be used for job creation 
throughout Canada. 
 
I want to ask you specifically what is your particular view in respect to the rising deficits in Canada, and 
in particular the federal budget, and do you concur with the general thoughts as expressed by the 
Premier? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I can assure you that the thoughts expressed by the Premier are also the 
thoughts that I would see. I think the federal government has probably, I would suggest, very little room, 
given the situation in the country, to at this time turn around and start bringing that deficit down. I mean, 
obviously that isn’t going to happen this year, and to do so is meaning further cuts in payments to senior 
citizens, further cuts in EPF funding to the provinces, further cuts in unemployment insurance benefits. 
 
I find it somewhat strange that the national Leader of the NDP in Ottawa is in fact calling for further 
stimulus to the budget and probably more stimulus than should in fact be — that the deficit should rise 
higher. I find it strange when your only colleagues that form government, and that is in the province of 
Manitoba, in fact find their deficit rising from $325 million projected last March to in excess of $500 
million in this fiscal year. The budget that just came down the other day is almost $600 million in a 
deficit, trying to stimulate the economy. I find it somewhat strange that the members opposite are still 
pursuing the view of fiscal conservatism, and that seems to me very strange coming from members of a 
New Democratic Party. That seems to me to be inconsistent with the philosophy of your party across 
this entire country, wanting to move back with regard to the deficit. The first people who would scream 
and holler would be the situation if we were to cut further into the spending base of the budget — that 
would have to deal with questions of health, and questions of education, and questions of social services. 
We on this side of the House believe that we don’t have a lot of room to increase a lot of taxation. We 
believe that deficits can and should be used in times of a downturn in the economy, and that when time 
are good money should be put away; put away for times like this. Quite frankly, when we took power, 
we didn’t find a lot of money being put away, and therefore we had to find ourselves in a deficit 
situation. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I will not answer the comments of the Minister of Finance, 
except to say that one could only wish that in this province we would have a government which had 
done as well with respect to the increase in the deficit as the one in Manitoba has. The first budget 
brought in by my colleague, the Minister of Finance (my colleague in this legislature, not in the party) 
was 220 plus 139-140 which was $360 million worse than the year before; $360 million you went 
behind in your budget from a surplus of $140 million at the end of ’82 to a deficit of $220 million at the 
end of ’83 . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2182 

I see I am touching a nerve, because we have suddenly got everybody popping in. If the member for 
Turtleford or the member for Rosthern would like to explain why every word of that is not true . . . I 
know they’re going to enter the debate and point out exactly where any word is not true. If any of them 
denies, for example, that there was $140 million surplus, $139 million surplus, they ought to take up 
their quarrel with the provincial auditor, because I am very sure that that will be the case. If anyone is 
sanguine enough to believe that the deficit will be less than 220 million, then I am sure they are 
dangerously open to fraud, because certainly we know that the deficit is going to be at least 220 million 
when the figures are in, and we will certainly wait . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . People are shouting 
smoke and mirrors, but we’re not interested in smoke and mirrors, we are interested in straight 
performance and cash. The last year, the year ending March 31, 1982 was in cash $140 million ahead, 
and the year ending 1983 we’re going to be $220 million behind. Those are hard facts. I know that 
members opposite don’t want to accept them, but there is no way you can get around them. They are just 
there and very, very, very hard facts. And there is no gainsaying them. 
 
On to a few other items . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I am sure it’s good because members opposite 
don’t want to hear about the administration which they have given this province, which is in fact going 
down the Trudeau trail of deficits. There is no question of that and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, 
maybe . . . There’s no question that people love people when they’re spending money. No one denies 
that running deficits is popular the first couple of years. The question is whether the people of Quebec 
are liking the results of it. When you run five or six deficits, you have what you have now in Quebec. 
When you run six or seven, you have what you have in Ottawa. And no one denies that they were great 
the first couple of years. Everybody thinks it’s great. But I am surprised that any member of this House 
would stand up and say that it’s sound public administration. 
 
I share with the Minister of Finance the view that there is nothing particularly wrong with deficits in 
tough years. I am sorry that he has to acknowledge that the first year he becomes minister is a tough 
year. There hasn’t been a tough year since 1970 on this definition, because we haven’t had a deficit 
since 1970. But I think it’s true, and part of the toughness is the fact that the economy is in a tailspin and 
part of the fact is that we have the administration that we have opposite. Combined, they have certainly 
brought on a crisis in finances in this province. There’s no question, and the figures tell it, and next 
month’s figures will tell it even more dramatically, I suggest. But we will see. There’s nothing much we 
can do about that at the moment. It’s going to take a fair while to turn it around. 
 
I regret that we have started down this trail which, wherever it has been followed for any consistent 
period of time, has brought great, great hardship to the province which has followed it. The possible 
exception is Ontario which has, or has had, perhaps, a depth of tax capacity which we have not had. And 
even there, they’ve had their problems, as their sales tax creeps up to 7 or 8 per cent — 7, I believe now 
— and as their medicare premiums get up to the $500 or $600 per year per family range. We shouldn’t 
even call that a success story of successive deficits. And this is not to suggest that I quarrel with the 
Minister of Finance by suggesting that a single deficit or so is a serious problem. But I do quarrel with 
any suggestion that we ought to embark upon a policy where we will have successive deficits over a 
significant period of time. 
 
I have some questions. With respect to the minister’s staff, are there any persons paid 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2183 

other than by salary, i.e., in contractual fees? Do you have anybody who is on contract? I understood 
you to say the answer was no, today, other than Messrs. Robinson and Garven. I would like that 
confirmed. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The answer to the second one is that that is correct. Messrs. Garven and 
Robinson are the only two who were on contract. 
 
With regard to the question of deficits. I take it the hon. member is indicating that he now sees nothing 
wrong with a deficit, or that he can accept a deficit for one or two or three years, given the downturn of 
the economy. Or did I misunderstand what he was in fact saying — that any deficit at all, both this year 
and next year would be a serious and grinding problem that would take us down the slopes to Quebec 
and to New Brunswick and Nova Scotia? I can assure the member opposite that we are a long way in 
this province from the financial situation of the province of Manitoba. We’re a long way from the 
financial problems of the maritime provinces and the province of Quebec. I can assure the members 
opposite that I will stack up our budget-making process against their budget-making process any day of 
the week. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — It’s all right to stack up, but in a moment we’re going to have a budget 
which shows what we do when we stack up. We’ll see the interest on the public debt in a moment. 
 
With respect to entertainment expenses, would the minister provide us with a list of entertainment 
expenses incurred by the minister or the deputy minister, each special assistant, and each executive 
assistant? I don’t mind a modest cutoff, I’m not asking for $10 items. Are any members of the 
departmental staff on secondment to any other agency of government? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Not that I know of. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Of the positions listed in the estimates, approximately how many are now 
vacant, and how many are now filled? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — 29 positions are vacant. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — 29 positions of the ones listed here are vacant. Are they concentrated in 
any one agency or are they throughout the department? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I believe of the 29 that are vacant, 19 are on the comptroller’s staff. That’s 
not out of line because they have over half the staff in the department anyway, so they’re roughly 
proportionate. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do any employees, other than the deputy minister and the minister, have 
an assigned CVA vehicle? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No. There is a pool vehicle, as I indicated to you earlier, that is used by the 
investment people to track back and forth to the bank, etc. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2184 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Does the minister have a Legislative Secretary? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — You bet. He’s sitting right over there — Mr. Embury for Regina Lakeview 
— and he’s a very good member as well. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — What duties has he performed for you, in his role as a Legislative 
Secretary? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — He handles virtually all the matters relating to PEBA, and virtually all of the 
questions relating to Saskatchewan Assessment Authority. He does much of the briefing with regard to 
treasury board. He sits in on treasury board and is active on that. He does some of the work, because of 
his banking background, with the financial investment services people and works in that area. I’m also 
responsible for the public service commission; he does a lot of work with regard to the public service 
commission. He generally works around the department in most areas. Quite frankly, he spends a great 
deal of time, and is of a great deal of assistance to me, with regard to the general area that we deal with 
in the Department of Finance, which, as you know, deals with virtually every department of 
government. 
 
I also sit on the board of crown investments corporation, and he does a lot of the briefing with regard to 
that for me. He does much of the work that perhaps could be done by an executive assistant; many of 
them have extra ones for that. So he does a lot of briefing and a lot of research with regard to that. He 
does a great deal of work. I think he is far from overpaid for the work that he does. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — No one, I think, would wish to deny the need of the Minister of Finance 
for assistance. Can you advise whether or not he has travelled outside the province on your behalf? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — He has travelled with me outside the province on one occasion when we, 
along with Mr. Meiklejohn, travelled to the IMF in Toronto when the IMF and the World Bank had their 
meetings there I believe around Thanksgiving, some time in September or October. I believe that’s the 
only time he travelled with me outside the province. He does travel on some of the trips outside the 
province, and any other trips that he has made on his own, speaking to things, conventions, etc., he does 
on his own. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — In reviewing the list of borrowings, I noted one last August where it was 
indicated that it was guaranteed by the province. Have all of the borrowings been in the name of the 
province or have any of them been in the name of a crown corporation? I’m not sure whether I’m 
reading this note properly. It almost looked like CIC or Sedco was in the name of the corporation. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The two that I think you refer to are August 8 CIC, the borrowing was 
arranged by the Department of Finance in the name of CIC, and on December of 1982, another $15 
million was borrowed in the name of the municipal financing corporation, again arranged by the 
Department of Finance and handled through the municipal financing corporation. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — If I understand the situation correctly, that represents a change in policy 
to borrow in the name of a corporation with a provincial guarantee rather than a direct borrowing by the 
province. Could the minister indicate the reason 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2185 

for the change of policy? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I am advised by Mr. Meiklejohn that it’s not in fact a change of policy, that 
they’ve done two about a year ago — one for CIC and one for somebody else. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Is it intended that there will be a number of borrowings by, let’s say, the 
power corporation or Sask Tel guaranteed by the government, or are these unusual circumstances? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — These would be unusual circumstances. Certainly there has been no policy 
change to move away from the standard way of borrowing money for the province of Saskatchewan 
through the one central borrowing agency. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Since the minister has taken office, have there been substantial changes to 
the decoration, furniture, furnishings, etc., of his office suite? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I haven’t even so much as changed one of the pictures on the wall. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And not acquired a water purifier for example? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — I guess they got one of those. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, there were a number of those I noted. 
 
Were any aircraft chartered by the minister or any of his staff for flights outside the province since he 
became minister? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think any of the . . . There was one trip I know that we made which 
was mostly Department of Finance officials, along with the Premier, at a quickly called meeting of first 
ministers at 24 Sussex. We were unable to make connections because the airlines were fogged in at 
Vancouver and we did take a Norcan charter — I believe six or seven of us. I’m not sure whether it was 
charged through finance or charged through Executive Council. That would have been the only other 
time. Any other trips made outside of the province would be done on commercial airlines. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I don’t want to make an issue of that. I know one can get caught. You’re 
advising us that that’s the only occasion you can recall of the finance department or its senior officials 
chartering an aircraft for out-of-province travel. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s the only one I’m aware of. The trips I’ve made out of the province 
haven’t been very numerous and all but hat one have been on commercial airlines. 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Have you had occasion to make any substantial payments to a Mr. Terry 
Leier? 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2186 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Have I? No. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Has the Department of Finance had occasion to make any substantial 
payments to a Mr. Terry Leier? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — In the course of supervising the comptroller’s branch, from where 
undoubtedly cheques have gone to Mr. Terry Leier, can the minister tell me what agency of government 
may have contracted for services of Mr. Terry Leier? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would have a tough time being able to tell you that. I’m sure that that type 
of question could be directed at the overall with regard to Executive Council and you’d probably find 
the information there. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The cheques may have been of such a size as might have caught the 
minister’s attention when they were going through the comptroller’s office, but I take it you think not. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Not only that, but I don’t intend to go through each cheque when they go 
through the comptroller’s office. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Some of them might have been brought to your attention though, none the 
less. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Not that I know of, they haven’t been. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what changes in the senior staff of the 
budget bureau have taken place? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — None. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I ask this question here, and I could ask it in a couple of 
others. Are there plans afoot for any reorganization in the Department of Finance, particularly one which 
would involve the BMI? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There might be. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the year which we are considering, have studies been 
made with respect to the desirability of a reorganization which would involve BMI? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I suppose, when you say studies, I think there’s been an ongoing look at 
how we deal with BMI and how it should perhaps appear in the future: should it be the same; should it 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2187 

be different, or should it be modified. That type of thing is an ongoing type of conversation that you 
look at. I can assure you that there has been no decision as to whether changes be made or not, and when 
they are I think they would be announced. I am not sure that they would be of an earth-shattering nature 
in the world of government and politics. Any changes we would use there, we hope would make the 
Department of Finance more effective and able to deal with problems in a more effective way. But other 
than that I would say just a general overall view, I’ve had lots of ideas as to what you do and no 
decisions have been made yet. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, have Mr. Garven or Mr. Robinson 
recommended any changes that you would care to advise the House of? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No, not that I know of, nothing specific on that, no. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Items 6 and 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, have there been any of these 
implemented in the last year? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — No. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Item 10 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, just a minute here . . . There’s been a very 
substantial increase in that figure. Is there any particular reason for the two and one-half times increase? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That number apparently reflects an improper credit to the consolidated fund 
when it should have gone to the student aid fund and had to be correspondingly corrected and that’s 
what they’re reflecting in the blue book. 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Items 11 and 12 agreed to. 
 
Item 13 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I ask about these, the last three, 11, 12 
and 13. Has any consideration been given to breaking those down and distributing among the various 
departments? It’s a whole lot of work; it gives you a little better indication of the actual costs, the pay 
roll costs of the operating departments, and I’m wondering whether or not consideration has been given. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, it hasn’t been high on my priority list. It would probably reflect better 
for the department in the blue book, but no, we haven’t. Perhaps it’s 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2188 

something we could look at doing. 
 
Item 13 agreed to. 
 
Items 14 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 11 agreed to. 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
FINANCE — INTEREST ON PUBLIC DEBT — GOVERNMENT SHARE 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 12 Statutory 

 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, we know part of this is due to increased 
interest rates, and that cannot be laid at the door of the Minister of Finance. But part of it is due to the 
fact that he is running a very substantial deficit. Has he estimated how much it costs per annum to carry 
$100 million of deficit? He has interest which may be 12 or 13 per cent varying a bit. The last Canada 
issue was somewhere between 12.5 per cent and 13 per cent. Many of the others earlier were higher. I 
concede that point. Then there must be some money for sinking fund payments that must be set aside — 
a couple or 3 per cent. So you are looking at as much as 15 per cent. So if you have $100 million in 
deficit then that builds in a built-in cost of about $15 million. If you have a $200 million one, it builds in 
a cost of $30 million and so on. Would the minister concede that those figures are approximately 
correct? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, what I can concede from the information that I have here is that of the 
$44 million, approximately $14 million of that is to cover the interest on the deficit that’s calculated at 
13 per cent. The balance is ongoing interest costs with regard to government. So $14 million of the $44 
million is what would be classed as interest on the public deficit, if you like. If that can answer your 
question with regard to these particular calculations, we can do that for you, as well, but it would take 
some time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Almost by definition that will not carry the deficit for the whole year 
because we’ve just incurred the deficit as we went along. By April 1, it will be in there for the whole 
year and the costs of carrying it will be, I trust the minister will concede, a good deal more than $14 
million in the next year — a good deal more. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would agree it will be more. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Over twice as much. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I suppose that relates to interest rates. I suppose I can’t predict interest 
rates any better than you can predict interest rates. If you can find me someone who is very, very good at 
it, then let me know. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I concede the difficulty that the minister has. No one suggests that it’s 
easy. That builds in an additional hazard in large budget deficits, so we just make the point. I make the 
point that this deficit will cost us, in the next fiscal year (and we will have an opportunity to argue about 
that a little later), I would suggest in excess 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2189 

of $30 million to carry the $220 million — however much it turns out to be, $220 million or such larger 
amount as it turns out to be — for the 12-month period commencing April 1, 1983. And that point 
should be noted — that we’re talking about very substantial sums of money and regrettably they 
accumulate. 
 
I am sure that we have all looked at the figures in the estimates put forward by the federal Department of 
Finance, which were in the paper last week, I believe, when we saw them outline the fact that their total 
operating cost of the government, excluding payments like old age pension and excluding the cost of 
operating the armed forces, was about 15 per cent of their net outlay. And that 15 per cent paid all the 
public servants, and say the armed forces, paid all the costs of operating their buildings and their travel 
expenses and all that sort of thing. And the interest on the public debt, federally, was about 21 per cent, 
fully one-third higher than the total cost of paying all of the public servants and all the travelling 
expenses and the cost of all their buildings and all their cars and all the rest of it. 
 
That gives you some idea of where they have got themselves — what sort of a position they’ve got 
themselves in. And some provinces are in as bad shape as that. And I merely make the point that the 
consequences of that are coming home to roost for all too many people in Canada and it is, I think, 
imperative that this province not adopt the policy of continuous government deficits. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think perhaps we also have to bring that whole question into the light of 
day. When you say, “$14 million to finance the deficit,” relative to the cost of many other provinces to 
finance their deficit, I think we’re stretching it a long ways to say that we’re in serious trouble. That’s 
point number one. 
 
Point number two, by way of comparison. Let me talk about a deficit situation. Let me talk about maybe 
some situations where I believe perhaps the previous government has gone in error with some of the 
things that they had done. One in particular I look at is the previous government in the Saskatchewan-
Ottawa energy agreement, which gave up what I believe was a very significant concession to the federal 
government for those five years. They gave up the right, in effect, of one government to tax another 
government, and that was the imposition of PGRT tax on Saskoil and on Sask Power and the, whatever 
the other one was called — NGGLT or something like that. That is costing Sask Power this year, 1982, 
the year 1982, $85 million and that cost is going to go on each year for at least the next five years. It’s 
costing Saskoil some $17.5 million in PGRT tax and that’s going to go one each of the next five years. 
That’s well over $100 million in the year 1982, and if we project that on over the next five years, that’s 
$0.5 billion. So I think perhaps I don’t stand here to be criticized for interest on a public debt at $14 
million, when $100 million is in effect given away, concede away on a legal point that I don’t believe 
that the Government of Saskatchewan should have conceded on. 
 
I can refer to many other ventures that perhaps the government got into; something like the 
Saskatchewan Development Fund, which was not a winner and I think even by your own admission you 
would admit that it was not and has not been a success. I can get into the question of perhaps the 
purchase of the P.A. pulp mill, at the value it was purchased at. It was purchased at the top of the line 
and of course as you know your government, or at least stated position, was that you were going to sell 
that particular operation. Well, I can assure you that the value of it now is a great deal less than what you 
paid for it. 
 
I can go on and on in various other things that you purchased and bought into that 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2190 

didn’t make a lot of money. So I think when you look at these you have to also bring them into 
perspective. And when I look at the deficit of that size and I look at something like the Sask Power ($85 
million this year, probably to go higher), I would say that you maybe should look at yourselves 
sometimes and ask yourselves whether maybe you didn’t do that good a job either. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — The particular arguments with respect to the oil pricing agreement are . . . 
I think they are in the category of being amusing since the running room for the Government of 
Saskatchewan, after the Government of Alberta had signed an agreement, was next to nil and we all 
know that. And that’s what it will be again if Mr. Lougheed and Mr. Trudeau reach an agreement; the 
Government of Saskatchewan will have to follow. And it would be nice to think that we had enough oil 
to dictate the terms of the agreement, but such was not the case . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and with 
respect to whether or not any grants are paid by power to . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
I am a little surprised at the interjections by the folks who are in fact interjecting, but with respect to the 
oil pricing agreements, the suggestion that there was a great deal of negotiating room for the 
Government of Saskatchewan is interesting, and one would wish it were so, but only the highest degree 
of unrealism would suggest that that was the case. With respect to some of the other propositions, fair 
enough, one can argue about the price of this purchase or that sale and those are legitimate. The oil 
pricing agreement is, with every respect to the Minister of Finance, not a legitimate argument. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Any more questions? 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With respect to the interest on the public debt, does the Minister of 
Finance have any comment on the trend of interest rates as he sees them in the next 12 months? And 
obviously this is a smoke and mirrors operation, but you have got some excellent advisers, at least in my 
judgment, and I wonder whether you would care to venture an opinion. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The best you can get is going to be this: that we wouldn’t see the interest 
rates turning around significantly and going up in 1983 and that’s obviously quite risky. I think it’s 
clearly something far beyond the control of the Government of Saskatchewan and probably beyond the 
control of the Government of Canada. 
 
We look at things like the oil pricing with OPEC and how that’s going to happen — obviously that 
impacts on the economies of the world and how that is going to happen, I don’t know. I suppose the 
advice would tend to be that if oil prices drop, that would tend to probably push interest rates down even 
a little bit lower. 
 
I think all that I can say is it would be the hope of me that interest rates would in fact come down a bit 
more, because the interest rate policy pursued by whoever was at fault with it — certainly the impact of 
it, on basically stagnating the economy — I question the wisdom of that policy, as I think most 
politicians would question the wisdom of that particular policy. 
 
I think all people have paid the price across this country, perhaps some more than others, perhaps some 
businesses more than others, perhaps some consumers more than others. But it certainly has been a 
scorched-earth policy if one ever saw one, and I would hope that we would not have to return to interest 
rates of 20, 25 per cent, 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2191 

because should we find ourselves in that situation again the impact that it will have on the economy will 
be horrendous and would be very difficult for people to absorb. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I am pleased to hear the minister’s 
remarks. The particular views he expressed were expressed by our government and by the Government 
of Alberta, particularly, with all the force we could mount attempting to argue against the proposition 
that we needed the continued high interest rates in order to damp down a runaway inflation. It seemed to 
me that they switched their policy some considerable number of months too late — some considerable 
number of months — and this was a point of view which was put strongly, and I gather is shared by 
members opposite as it was by our colleague governments here in western Canada. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND DEBT REDEMPTION, SINKING FUND AND INTEREST 
PAYMENTS 

 
FINANCE 

 
Vote 55 — Statutory 

 
Vote 56 — Statutory 

 
Vote 57 — Statutory 

 
SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
RESOURCES DIVISION 

 
FINANCE 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 12 

 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 12 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

SASKATCHEWAN HERITAGE FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

RESOURCES DIVISION 
 

FINANCE 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 12 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 12 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2192 

FINANCE 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 11 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 11 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

SASKATCHEWAN MUNICIPAL FINANCING CORPORATION 
 

Vote 51 — Statutory 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, would the minister outline the policy 
which he is pursuing with respect to interest rates charged by the municipal financing corporation, in 
relation to the cost of acquiring money that he is incurring? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — There’s been no overall change in policy, in the sense that usually it’s a 
monthly meeting and we bring it down. We’re riding approximately a quarter or a half point above what 
we can borrow money at, and each month that either goes down or slightly jumps up again. It’s the same 
type of policy, basically, that provides the municipal corporations with the access to money 
approximately as cheap as we can borrow it for them. So, there’s really no change there. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I understand the minister to say that the policy is really the cost of 
borrowing plus the very small handling charge, as you might call it. The corporation, then, might be 
expected to break even. It was losing money a little bit because of an unwillingness to charge the 
municipalities the very high rate at the peaks which money was acquired from banks at short term. I take 
it that we’re back at a situation where the corporation will be charging approximately its cost plus the 
small margin. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We’re charging the cost and the additional quarter or half is not to cover any 
administration costs. The administration is virtually nothing on it. It’s the loss that you might have on 
one in the rate being a little higher or paying it out. So, it’s geared that way; it’s geared to be a break 
even situation — nothing but that. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PROVINCIAL AUDITOR 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 28 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I wonder if I might ask a question as to whether there will be a long series of 
questions with regard to the public employees’ benefit agency. Mr. Palmer, who runs that, broke his arm 
yesterday and is not able to attend. I would try to fend off the questions the best I could. I don’t pretend 
to be an expert on it. I’m not sure 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2193 

there’s a great deal of controversy on that anyway. I just wondered if we had any questions. Certainly, I 
would undertake to get any information for you, but if it’s not going to be done we could perhaps 
resolve that one as well. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I think I speak for my colleagues in saying that we had 
some questions essentially with respect to how many employees were now in. We don’t need the 
information tonight. We have some questions which we will seek information on, but I think we could 
do it tonight without Mr. Palmer. 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I somehow take exception to these people being referred to as my officials, 
but I guess that’s the way the world is. Willard Lutz is the provincial auditor. This is Mr. Bucknall and 
Mr. Wendel. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I’m referring to the staff of 72 
members. I note that it is the same as last year. Is it the view of the minister that the staff complement is 
sufficient to permit the auditor to do the increasing job which appears to be arising? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I’m sure that will become a contentious issue. I would have hoped — 
and I simply throw this out as a suggestion - -that when the rules were changed, one particular rule that 
was allowed and that could be used was that certain estimates could be delegated to the estimates 
committee, where a lot of the details could come and those questions could be directed particularly at 
Mr. Lutz. I would find it, I’m sure, somewhat difficult to sort of stand here and say that he doesn’t want 
more staff — clearly he would want more staff. I suppose it becomes a question of, like everything else 
. . . I suppose every department could use more staff people, and probably operate more efficiently with 
more staff people. Clearly, I think, Mr. Lutz, over the years, in his reports, has indicated that he has 
always found difficulty with not having enough staff people and enough qualified staff people. I would 
doubt very much that that is any different now than it was two years ago, one year ago or three years 
ago. I suppose it’s something we will have to address over a period of time. I do hope to introduce 
legislation, as I announced earlier, in the next session, that will create a new statute, a particular act to 
deal with the provincial auditor. It will no longer be under The Department of Finance Act. I think that 
type of thing will move it in the direction of perhaps being far more on its own. How we stage that 
toward, however you might want to do that . . . It seems to me that it’s a department that probably 
should be subject to, and can, of course, be subject to questioning in the public accounts committee with 
regard to the staff component. It always has been in the past and my experience in that department has 
been that the answer was usually the same — that, you know, we need more people, and we have a 
tough time competing with the private sector or with the corporate or the crown or otherwise sector, for 
chartered accountants, etc., to do that work. 
 
Having said that, I do trust that while they may be getting by with fewer, they are probably getting by, 
and I think that they haven’t found themselves in a tough situation. 
 
Mr. Lutz indicates that they now have more C.A.s than they have positions for and that’s the first time in 
history that that, in fact, has happened. Perhaps C.A.s are easier to come by these days; I don’t know. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2194 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, there’s been one other question I 
wanted to ask in this general area. If the minister suggests that there is another forum which would be 
more appropriate, I certainly won’t press it here. It may be difficult for the minister to answer. It has to 
do with the relationship between the provincial auditor and the private firms that audit a number of the 
crown corporations, and what the provincial auditor perceives to be his duty and his role in those 
circumstances. How much of a . . . I think I’d stop right there: what he’s perceive to be his duty and his 
role under those circumstances. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The outside auditors are primarily involved in the resource crowns. The 
advice from Mr. Lutz is that the problem that he would be experiencing with them would be the 
legislative compliance. I say that not knowing exactly what it means. They tend to be more like the 
private sector type audit that tend to do the attest function only, and perhaps not going beyond that. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Yes, I just want to direct a question to the minister, Mr. Chairman. As the minister 
will be aware, during his term in opposition one of the areas that he indicated a considerable amount of 
support for was the concept of comprehensive auditing. As I recall the fact, and for those that weren’t 
here, the minister took a position that comprehensive auditing was indeed what this province needed. In 
fact he felt so strongly about this particular issue that when he was chairman of the public accounts 
committee, the matter, in his opinion I suppose, was not moving fast enough. As a consequence he 
resigned from acting as chairman of the public accounts committee. Certainly since the minister, in my 
view -—and I think all members that were here at that time will agree — felt strongly toward 
comprehensive auditing, I’m wondering, now that he is in the cabinet, the Minister of Finance, if he 
could indicate whether he feels as strongly today as he did when he was in opposition, and if he would 
indicate what steps he has taken to date to implement that very important policy of comprehensive 
auditing. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think I would like to correct the reason around the resignation back 
in the days as opposition. What we were doing — and I was chairman at that point in time — is we 
sought as a committee to study comprehensive auditing. Some advocated it and some didn’t advocate it. 
What we did was attempt to study the concept, not that we were going to recommend it, but we thought 
that we should hear from the people that were in fact bringing it in. 
 
What happened is that we arranged for such notable people as J.J. Macdonell and the late Robert 
Andras, former minister of treasury board, I think, while that was coming in, and the provincial auditor 
from the province of Ontario . . . Between myself and one Mr. John Skoberg, the vice-president of the 
public accounts committee, we arranged it through the Clerk’s office to have those people come. The 
thing that I suppose bothered me the most, and I think bothered John Skoberg, quite frankly — he 
resigned just prior to me — was that the government of the day used their strength on the committee, 
their numbers on the committee, to in fact not even allow the committee to look at the question. 
 
That’s a far different thing between arguing whether comprehensive audit is good or comprehensive 
audit is bad. That argument can go on, and does go on in all quarters. The question was, you were 
hamstringing a committee of the legislature to in fact look at something. That was the thing that irked 
me. That basically said that the committee was not functioning, was not performing any more. So I’d 
just like to clear that point up. It was the process by which the committee functioned that both caused 
myself and Mr. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2195 

Skoberg to resign from that committee. 
 
With regard to comprehensive audit, I think that clearly as times changes, I would suggest that attest 
audit, which was the traditional auditing function of governments, and of the private sector if you like, 
has probably served its course and we must move toward a system that does more than simply the attest 
audit function — go beyond that and determine that — and I think that clearly we will be moving 
toward that. Any statements I have, have indicated that we would move toward that, but I suppose in my 
conservative way I think we should probably move one step at a time and put one foot forward first. I 
think you’re going to see some changes in the next session with regards to the act. 
 
I think that was one of the things that Mr. Lutz has identified in his provincial auditor’s report over the 
various years that I have been here, that, number one, he thought he had to have the independence, and 
not only the independence but the perception of independence. So we’re going to be moving in that 
direction. 
 
We will move further from that type of thing into various other ways that we can perhaps amend it. One 
I would think is the defence of the estimates before the forum of public accounts or before some other 
forum, and not through the Minister of Finance. I think that in itself would be a positive step. If you look 
at independence, or perception of independence, for me to stand in this Assembly to defend the 
provincial auditor in itself seems to me to be a rather strange form, quite frankly. So, yes, we are moving 
in that way and we’re going to be moving in steps that way. I can assure you, my friend, that we are 
moving far quicker than the previous government ever thought of, ever planned on doing, or ever would 
have done, had they remained in government. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to indicate, and I don’t want to get into a debate in respect to the facts, 
but I think your interpretation that we were not prepared as a committee, and the government with their 
majority was not prepared, to look at comprehensive auditing is not in fact accurate. Because we were 
prepared, as I recall and I was on the committee, to look at comprehensive auditing from the position of 
finance and from the position of the provincial auditor, and at that stage to determine, having the 
knowledge from the provincial auditor and from the Department of Finance, to move on to another form 
of other experts which you indicated. 
 
So, I don’t think it’s accurate to say that the government, with its majority, made it impossible for the 
examination of comprehensive auditing. Indeed we did look at a position of the Department of Finance. 
I think we also had some position papers in respect to the provincial auditor, if I remember correctly. 
 
All I want to say is that I am certainly hopeful about the principle of comprehensive auditing, which the 
Minister of Finance, when he was in opposition, in my opinion, clearly supported. I hope he will have a 
timetable in which this comes forward. I don’t think that he can now look back and say, “Well, the 
previous government didn’t move.” This was a principle which he supported. This is a principle which 
he went to the press with in criticizing the Public Accounts as they existed under the then government, 
and therefore I would think there is an obligation for him to follow through on the particular position 
that he took as a member of the opposition. And certainly we will be following that up with interest and 
hope that the minister will be acting forthwith in respect to that. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I can say that in the last composition of this legislature I 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2196 

probably stood alone among 64 members, with an interest in a call for comprehensive auditing. I don’t 
deny that; it’s clearly on the record. I can say that the colleagues around me in the opposition at that time 
and pretty well everybody on the government side at that time did not see it as a very significant issue. I 
am encouraged by the fact that now more members than myself see it as a significant issue. When 
something like that becomes more significant, time usually leads to change. I can say that obviously 
views one had while in opposition were intended to be spoken as a particular person, more so than as a 
caucus position a lot of the time. Certainly some of those things come home to haunt you if you like and 
I can acknowledge that. I am a minister among a cabinet, and a member of a caucus, and some of the 
views that I particularly have are not necessarily shared or carried by the others. And the parliamentary 
system of government is such that whatever decision is taken by the government, the member of the 
treasury bench supports that. And clearly that principle I think is fundamental to the parliamentary 
system of government, a principle that I would follow. 
 
I do suggest, and I have suggested earlier, that comprehensive audit is going to be coming. It’s going to 
be coming not only in government side and government circles, but also coming in the private sector. I 
think it’s an important thing to look beyond the attest function. I think you’re going to see it happening 
and I’m sure that during the time of our administration you are in fact going to see comprehensive audit 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 28 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

PROVINCIAL AUDITOR 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I don’t know whether this is in order, but what change of policy has 
produced no payments to private auditor firms in connection with the audit of clients not financed by 
legislative appropriations. Why was that true last year and not true this year? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised that the reason for that is it’s for convenience sake. It’s been 
just now lumped into the one vote as opposed to separating it out. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PROVINCIAL AUDITOR 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 28 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I just want to pursue that last point and 
we’re here. We have a supp here. Does that mean that if the private firms are being paid $50,000 or 
$100,000 or whatever their fees are, that that gross sum is in the 3.1 million in the subvote 28 and there 
is a reimbursement showing up somewhere else? Or is it netted? 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2197 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — It’s apparently a gross figure and the revenue has come in from the 
consolidated fund. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I have two questions than with respect to this 10,000. Last year — and it 
is obviously to go into the gross amount — is this part of the money? How much is going out to the 
private audit firms in connection with the audit of clients not financed by legislative appropriation? How 
much is in subvote 28 then — plus the $10,000 which we have under review —to put it in proper order? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised — and bear with me if it’s not that clear an answer — 
approximately $25,000 was spent from outside auditors and it was basically to try to consolidate from 
those accounts that were handled by outside auditors for the particular crown, and to co-ordinate that 
with the balancing or the finalizing of the CIC situation. So, if that can sort of handle your question . . . 
The only thing that was contracted out was that amount, basically using the auditors with the firms, I 
take it, that would do the audit for the potash corporation or for Saskoil or for SMDC to co-ordinate the 
thing up to the date of the CIC balance sheet. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, that 25,000 you refer to would 
correspond with the 50,000 which was in the item for the previous year which appears on page 113 of 
the printed estimates. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think the answer to that is correct, that it was. In other words, if you’re 
getting at the details I’m sure you could ask Mr. Lutz by picking up the phone and getting the details 
from him with regard to that. With regard to any change of policy, if that’s what you’re looking at, with 
regard to outside auditors, that has not in fact taken place and will not in fact take place. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 28 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PROVINCIAL AUDITOR 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 28 
 

Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 28 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PUBLIC EMPLOYEES BENEFITS AGENCY 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 34 
 

Item 1 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2198 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — If we could move to doing public employees benefits agency and public 
service superannuation board — as I indicated earlier, I’m not sure that I can answer all the questions, 
but I would certainly undertake to get the information back to you as quickly as I possibly can. 
 
I believe there were a series of questions the Leader of the Opposition had for me, and if he could lay 
out all those questions, I will try to answer the ones I can. The ones I can’t, I would get back to him. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I didn’t have clearly in my mind what 
was encompassed in the public employees benefits agency. That is a new title which has been the public 
service superannuation board and is designed to cover the administration of what I might call the old 
plan and the new plan and the group life and other benefits. Is there anything else in this subvote other 
than those functions? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I can advise the hon. member that we have made absolutely no changes with 
regard to PEBA in the last nine to 10 months we’ve been in office. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — What about the administration of the long-term disability levy? Would that 
fall into this area? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — You’re talking about the disability plan that’s presently in dispute with 
regard to SGEU? That’s in the Public Service Commission. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — And, Mr. Minister, I doubtlessly should know the answer to this, but I 
don’t: why the substantial increase in staff from 14 to 25? That seems a rather startling increase since 
there has been no particular program change in the last year. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I will undertake to get that answer for the hon. member. All I can say is that 
I think if you would refer that, it was not an additional number of people that we simply hired. I think 
under your administration that what you were doing is consolidating a lot of the things under the public 
employees benefit agency that were otherwise being handled by a different departments, etc. It’s sort of 
an ongoing consolidation under public employees benefit agency to try to maximize the amount of 
benefits that they can achieve for the employees of different departments or that type of thing. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I wonder if I can ask you to obtain for 
me a table indicating the number of employees who are covered by the (what I might call the old plan) 
public service superannuation plan and the number who are covered by the public employees 
government contributory superannuation plan. You can do it either with respect to the public service 
proper, or you can give me a breakdown of how many are under the old plans, meaning public service, 
power, telephones, liquor board and WCB, and how many are under the new matching contribution plan 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, not particularly how many moved, although if you want to put all 
that extra, but the result of how fast we’re moving to get people onto the new plan. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I would undertake to get that information for you, and appreciate what you 
are looking for there, that you would like to get them off into the new plan quickly too. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2199 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — As the member for Rosthern will know, under the new plan there can be 
an unfunded liability or virtually none, and I suppose the biggest single problem, and this is not strictly 
in order here, from a long-term point of view is the teachers’ plan. If you care to add it to save me the 
trouble of asking the next minister how many are under the old teachers plan and how many under the 
new government contributory teachers plan, that would give us more or less a picture of what is 
happening. I wonder if I might ask whether or not it is the policy of the government to give employees 
opportunities to switch over from the old plan to the new plan. And there are clear long-term advantages 
to that and clear short-term problems because it adds up a short-term bill. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay, it’s an area that we are studying right now. Just exactly how we 
effectively do that and, of course, the cost restraints that we have of in fact doing it is certainly an area 
we’re looking at and we haven’t come down with a firm policy or number that we could give you at this 
point in time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, it was my recollection that some of the 
changes either made or proposed in the legislation during this session were such as to make it somewhat 
more difficult for people to transfer, and I wonder if the minister would comment on that. Is my 
recollection faulty or not? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m afraid I can’t answer that question for you. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this issue will keep until another four to 
six weeks of it. I’d like to make a brief statement in that in my judgment the Government of 
Saskatchewan should, to the extent that money permits, encourage employees to switch over, 
particularly young employees, to the government contributory superannuation plan. It is certainly to the 
benefit of the government in the long fold not to have a very large unfunded liability. 
 
It is my further view that the government contributory superannuation plan is going to prove to be not an 
adequate plan and is likely to have to be augmented at some future time. But when the government has 
to augment that, 25 or 30 years hence, it will have an enormously solid base on which to operate, and 
will need probably only to augment it modestly, and will not have to make the very substantial infusions 
of cash that every government in Saskatchewan has had to make in order to make the statutory, the old 
plan, acceptable, and I’m now speaking of the payments to superannuates. 
 
I think that the government contributory plan does not contain any protection for guaranteeing for the 
level of payments to superannuates, and that is a problem. I think it will have to be addressed by a future 
Government of Saskatchewan, but I don’t suggest that we should be addressing it now. We are now 
paying for what amounts to two superannuation plans at the current time. We’ve got one going on a pay-
as-you-go basis and we’re fully funding another, and that is probably enough for this generation. 
 
When we have made a large bite in the old pay-as-you-go plan — that presents problems in the public 
service and the teachers, but not in power and telephones and those others, which are virtually fully 
funded — when we’ve made a large bite in that then I would hope that some future government will 
look to see whether or not there shouldn’t be some additional component added to offer our protection 
for the superannuation allowances of people who are paid under the government contributory plan. If 
there is any rapid rate of inflation, there is going to be a problem there, so that is the broad direction 
which the previous government was moving. I commend it to the 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2200 

new government for consideration. There is obviously nothing urgent about it. If we can continue our 
payments under the old plan and get a good number of people under the government contributory plan, 
we will be doing right by the next generation, if I may say so, and they can address some of these further 
smaller problems which we will be leaving. 
 
There is no question that the unfunded liabilities have potential for trouble if they crest at a time when a 
government is otherwise in financial trouble, as in the city of New York or someone else who will be 
able to attest. And there are, I suggest, a good number of governments in Canada which are not fully 
taking into account the potential for unfunded liabilities cresting at the wrong time. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan has been prudent in many ways. The WCB workers have the accident 
fund, and the WCB superannuation fund and the power superannuation fund and the telephone 
superannuation fund are substantially fully funded and I believe the liquor board equally. Power and 
telephones are considerable sums of money and the accident fund is not a small sum of money. The 
teachers and the public service are the problems. They’re being addressed and I would think that if we 
carry on, and I urge the government to carry on, then we will have acted appropriately, be acting 
prudently without panicking, if I may put it that way, and I think that this is what the situation requires. 
 
I make that statement because I think it is of some considerable long-term interest to the financial 
liability of governments, what they do with pension plans with very substantial unfunded liabilities. And 
this is true with respect to social service in the United States and Canada Pension Plan here. And we’re 
going to know more about the Canada Pension Plan in the next 10 years, about what the price tag is. 
 
I think that we in Saskatchewan always have a somewhat more fragile economy. I hope it won’t always 
be so but we must assume it to be so for some time, and therefore be a little more prudent in that regard. 
And that’s the road we took and the road the present government is I believe taking, and I commend it to 
them. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, this amounts to the payments pursuant 
to the statute to people who are on superannuation. Nothing is contributed to the fund and all of it is paid 
to the superannuates out of that $20 million. Is that right? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Correct. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Items 3 and 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I ask the minister whether any change 
of policy is under consideration with respect to people who have been under the old plan and who 
worked for the government for less than 10 years. I believe as it now rests, their claim only is to get their 
contributions back plus interest without any 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2201 

share of the government’s contributions, because there aren’t any contributions, and without any 
absolute right to transfer over to the government contributory superannuation plan and thereby capture 
government contributions. I believe that to be the case and I ask whether or not any consideration is 
being given to permitting people who, let us say, have been under the old plan for three or four years, if 
they’re leaving the government to put their money into the new plan there accumulated, and recapture 
the government contributions, and then it’s frozen in. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — To answer the question specifically, we are looking at an overall review. I 
haven’t had anything back from Mr. Palmer as to the suggested way that we go with regard to that, other 
than to say that it is an ongoing and problemed area that we find ourselves in, and I think all 
governments, as the hon. member has referred to, find themselves in, and in all likelihood an area that 
will probably have to be addressed more and more collectively by governments and not simply one here, 
and one here, and one here, going in different directions. 
 
It is a very large problem, and I’m sorry I can’t be more specific about the answers to it. We are looking 
at pensions, as to just how we’re going to address them, and when we come down with a 
recommendation, a proposal, then we would act on that accordingly. But at this point in time, it is still at 
the investigation stage. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, thank you, and I would ask the minister 
to accept as an objective the idea that everybody who works for more than two years or some minimum 
figure be, generally speaking, locked into a pension plan and have a right to the employers’ contribution 
and that it go in the pot. 
 
As my former colleague, Wes Robbins, would be prepared to illustrate with all manner of charts, this is 
the only way we’re going to get adequate pensions. I urge the government to consider it. The problems 
surround the fact that we’re only one, and if we pension up everybody in Saskatchewan, we tend to 
mean that we’re going to lose some benefits out of the federal pot, but none the less, I think we ought to 
look at that because I think that’s the way to go, not only here, but everywhere in Canada. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We’ll undertake to look at that overall thing. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Items 6 and 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, what new plans have been added to the 
list with whom we had reciprocal arrangements in the last little while? 
 
I thought I saw one from Manitoba rolling through — the Manitoba public service. Let me put it this 
way. Could you let me know what new plans have been added? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I will undertake to do that. I’m not sure the Manitoba one has been finalized 
yet. It’s certainly been worked on and tried to resolve. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2202 

Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Items 9 and 10 agreed to. 
 
Item 11 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, without opening up that subject, has a 
deal been made with the Sask Government Employees’ Union on this? Is it operational and non-
operational, the disability part? 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Non-operational. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think that question could be more appropriately put when public service 
commission comes up. We can deal with it then; I’ll have officials to be able to address that better. 
 
Item 11 agreed to. 
 
Item 12 agreed to. 
 
Item 13 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I give notice that I will ask a couple of questions under PSC, who will 
know a little bit about the disability plan, the employees’ group life and the public employees’ dental 
plan. 
 
Item 13 agreed to. 
 
Item 14 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. If the minister indicates he wants to 
leave this subject until your chairman from public service superannuation commission is with you, I’ll 
do so. the subject I intend to raise is the question of increments for superannuants who have gone by — 
increases for superannuants. I want to discuss the issue with you and ask some questions on it. If you 
want to deal with it when Mr. Bock is in the House, that will be fine so long as it’s agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Yes, that’s fine. I would undertake to take those questions and get the 
answer back if I haven’t got the information. It’s with regard to the increases for superannuants, as to 
what form you use, as to whether you have a bill each year in the House. I take it that’s the line of 
questioning. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — . . . (inaudible) . . . to take such steps last spring. Yes, I want to raise such 
issues and I will be as kind as I can about what’s a very sensitive issue, I’ll tell the member for Rosthern. 
If I have your undertaking that we can discuss that when Mr. Bock is here, that’s fine, so long as I don’t 
lose the opportunity to raise it. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — You will not. I will undertake to answer those questions at that time. 
 
Item 14 agreed to. 
 
Item 15 agreed to. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2203 

Vote 34 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PUBLIC SERVICE SUPERANNUATION BOARD 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 34 Statutory 
 
Item 1 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, can anyone recall what that was about? I 
recall that that fund was melded and there must have been a . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

THE SASKATCHEWAN ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 44 
 

Item 1 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The reason that finds itself in the Department of Finance is because there 
was always a bickering between rural affairs and urban affairs and education with regard to assessment. 
It’s simply the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, the Saskatchewan assessment 
commission should be a non-controversial agency since it does what is essentially a skilled professional 
job, one which ought not to be in the realm of controversy. In fact, however, there always seem to be a 
number of questions arising and they arise under two or three different headings. 
 
There seems to be a perception that reassessments don’t happen often enough, and that we ought to get 
on a cycle which is somewhat more rapid than the current cycle. This is argued for two or three reasons. 
One of them is that when one uses an old assessment it becomes progressively out of date even if you do 
index it in some way. There are problems because the base is distorted. 
 
Two, there is a belief (I think more or less unfounded, but with some modest basis) that if one 
community is operating a new assessment and one on an old assessment, one or other of them is going to 
come up short on school grants or any of the other grants which are based upon assessment. 
 
There is a third argument, and that is that when you do get a new assessment, then some very substantial 
changes can take place which distort the tax structure significantly, a la Moose Jaw of a couple of years 
ago when there was apparently a fairly substantial tax shift (I believe from residential to business, as I 
recall it) at that time, and while all the residences had their assessment go down, the businesses that were 
facing a tripling of assessment were not amused. And nobody argued that the overall result was 
particularly unfair. They argued that the transition from A to B was either unfair or too abrupt or 
something. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2204 

So, I raise these issues and ask the minister . . . I will back up a little. When the assessment authority 
was set up, there was a decision made to put some more resources in there to see whether we could 
shorten the cycle, and I note that you have an extra 10 people in assessment services. 
 
What I think I am asking is: is it now thought that the assessment cycle can be significantly shortened 
with the extra staff or is it likely to be a long haul? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think the biggest plus to it is when the computerization is up and running. 
At that point in time, I think you’d be able to rationalize it a lot better. I suppose there’s never going to 
be any kind of a fail-safe system or a system that satisfies everyone. I suppose we’re going to always 
have the problem, but it would be our hope that, when the program gets up and running, we should be 
able to start dealing with the problem in a more reasonable way because of the speed of information 
transfer, etc. So, I hope that will start to address the question which has been a thorny question for, I 
suppose, all governments for some time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — For a typical city . . . I think I’m right here in saying that Moose Jaw was 
just reassessed a couple or three years ago. In the ordinary cycle, when would we look for Moose Jaw to 
come up again? Could they hazard a guess? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The statute requires a 10-year turnover. I suppose, at this point in time, it 
probably takes most of that 10 years to get them done. At some point in time, perhaps we could do it 
more quickly. Perhaps we could find better mechanisms to do it by which the cities maybe would handle 
it, or a variety of ways. I don’t know. That’s obviously something that we’ll have to address, but it’s 10 
years at this time. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Ten years I not too bad, really, if we could stick with that. I suppose it 
could be cut down to nine or eight over time or something. Is it thought that we would be, with the staff 
complement we have, able to meet a 10-year deadline for substantially all of the municipalities in 
Saskatchewan — rural and urban? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — With the computer, we will be able to do that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Are the municipal associations now reasonably happy with the prospect 
of our being able to do that? Have you had any discussions with them? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — They would like to reduce the 10-year cycle, obviously, but I would say 
generally they’re happy with it. They’re particularly happy with it when we pay for it and not them. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Could the minister indicate when he feels that the computer program will 
be effectively operating so as to be able to handle the material produced by the assessors? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised that all the main elements should be up and running by June of 
1983. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — How many professional people as assessors do you have on staff at the 
present time? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I believe the number — stands to be corrected one way or the 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2205 

other — is 42. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Just one more question: are there any unresolved questions with respect 
to getting the new program going — any significant unresolved questions? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I’m advised that some of the policy decisions have been submitted to the 
assessment review advisory board and should be dealt with in due course and should be on, up and 
running. They don’t anticipate any problem with it. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Have there been changes in the assessment advisory board in the last 
year, in the personnel? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay. The only changes have been . . . Dan Gilewich is now deputy minister 
of rural affairs. He’s in place of the previous deputy minister and the deletion of the deputy minister of 
northern Saskatchewan from it is just a matter of having someone to fill that position and not . . . 
(inaudible) . . . staff and that. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — With the large increase in expense, particularly in other expenses, but the 
other item, 438 to 710 for the same number of employees, could we give a brief explanation of the half-
million extra with the same number of employees? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — We don’t have that information — we will undertake to get it for you — 
other than to advise that it’s not to reflect significant increases in salaries of the people working in that 
particular department, whether it’s the computer or whether it’s the transfer of DNS and some of those 
adjustments there. But they will get it for you and send it to you, but that’s where it is and they just don’t 
have that information. 
 
HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, that’s quite satisfactory. I’ll get it from the minister. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 44 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (NO. 3) 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

THE SASKATCHEWAN ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 44 
 
Items 1 and 2 agreed to. 
 
Vote 44 agreed to. 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2206 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

THE SASKATCHEWAN ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 44 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Vote 44 agreed to. 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 33 

 
Item 1 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — David Bock, Tor Ueltheim, Pat Bugera, Lorne Koback, Murray Bender. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have a number of routine 
questions. I think that some of them probably have been answered, Mr. Minister. In terms of your 
personal staff, I believe you mentioned earlier you have one executive assistant; does that include for 
this department as well? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I have one special assistant in the public service commission, one Ron 
Larson . . . 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — On a point of order, we couldn’t hear the minister’s response. I’m not sure 
why. I couldn’t hear the minister’s response to that last question. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I indicated I had a special assistant, a person classed as a special assistant, 
one person by the name of Ron Larson that works at the public service commission, over there. He’s not 
in my office per se. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Can the minister give me the name of, not the name, you have already 
indicated that, but the salary of that individual and whether or not he is assigned a CVA vehicle? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — He does not have a vehicle. I will undertake to get the salary. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Another question on CVA vehicles. Maybe the minister could indicate 
whether or not any other employees are assigned a full-time CVA vehicle. This wouldn’t include if you 
have a pool of cars, one or two, but are there any other employees who have vehicles assigned to them 
as individuals? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, one CVA vehicle assigned. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — I wonder if the minister would mind sending across a list of his people 
who are with him. I missed some of the names, if you would do that for me. 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2207 

Another question I would like to ask: how many times was the executive aircraft used by the minister 
and members of his staff since May 8? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay, I can advise that the only person to use the executive aircraft in the 
term that I’ve been in office is Mr. bock. I think there’s an order for return indicating the number of 
times I used that. That will be made available when it’s set up. But as far as answering the question, any 
time I would use a CVA vehicle I would do it in my capacity as the Minister of Finance as opposed to 
the minister responsible for the public service commission. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — As well, I would like a list of the entertainment expenses of the minister as 
well as people in his department, and similar to what we’ve been asking earlier — not very trivial 
amounts, but let’s say in excess of $10 receipts. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Once again, I can advise the members that any expenses that I would use 
would show in the Department of Finance and we will undertake to get that from the public service 
commission. Just to advise you, any ones that I can recall, because you have to sign over such and such 
an amount, have been very, very few. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, on another subject it has come to our attention — it’s 
something we have raised before — in terms of the hiring practices of the government, the Conservative 
government, this letter on government stationery you’ll be aware of, dated August of 1982, addressed to 
people who are applying for jobs with the civil service of Saskatchewan which in part says. “Enclosed 
please find an application” and “. . . forward the application to R.L. Forsyth, 102 Leg Building, Regina, 
Sask.” 
 
I wonder if this practice of hiring by sending your application to the Legislative Building and, I believe, 
what was part of the transition team is still in place, or has that been suspended in light of the turmoil 
that has existed in terms of guidelines and political involvement in the civil service to date. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — That matter was raised, I believe, early in the session, I think within the 
summer session. At that time I gave the House my thinking that that in fact should not be done. It is to 
my understanding not being done and ceased being done when the matter was raised in the House. I do 
not agree with that particular line and was not aware of it. When I became aware of it, I certainly put a 
stop to it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can indicate to us how many people were 
involved in sending their application to this office, 102 in the Leg Building, and whether or not you feel 
that had any ramification on people being turned away from the civil service because they didn’t met the 
criteria of the transition team? The political implication sand overtones that are indicated by this kind of 
a hiring practice were, I think, unheard of in Canada before this kind of a matter was raised. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Okay, what had happened I suppose when we took office (and I can vouch 
for this, because the number of applications I received personally to my office was literally hundreds) 
wasn’t sort of the normal routine of applying to work for government. It was, you have a new 
government there, I’d sure like to come and work for you, and this type of thing. It was basically used as 
a clearing house and was not used as a mechanism to hire . . . (inaudible) . . . And that mechanism was 
basically used to deal with the ministers and people writing to the ministers or writing to a particular 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2208 

MLA. I think that is not uncommon when you see a government change — that people from all over the 
boards are saying, “I was doing this for you, or, I was working here; I’d like to see the government do 
this and I think I can help. And can I have a job?” This type of thing from entirely across the country 
was coming in, and as I say I received literally hundreds myself in my own office. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, I think the Minister may feel it’s a common practice for hirings to be 
done in this manner, where people are asked to send their applications to the Legislative Building and to 
a so-called transition team who will screen the applicants, and I would imagine forward the ones who 
will pass the blood test. I’m glad to see that has ended, but I think that there is still a great amount of 
concern in the province and in the civil service about the attitude of this government toward political 
involvement by people who work for the government. 
 
A follow-up question, I suppose somewhat related to this same matter, is whether the minister can 
indicate to us tonight when he feels the guidelines, interim guidelines, will be available, in terms of 
conflict of political interest for civil servants in the province of Saskatchewan, so that the air can be 
cleared, and people like Harry Van Mulligen and Sharon Young and Mr. Cousineau, and the lists goes 
on and on, will have some idea as to what the government expects of them in terms of political 
involvement, or not political involvement, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, without getting in to any specifics, I indicated before that this matter 
was adjudicated on by the Ontario Court of Appeal. It is now going to the Supreme Court of Canada, 
and I believe you are going to see those guidelines coming down there. With regard to the supreme 
court, at that point in time, as I indicated, we would react to that, and try to put in guidelines consistent 
with the ruling of the Supreme Court of Canada. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Minister, I think that for you to say that there are no guidelines 
in the province of Saskatchewan at the present time is absurd. Harry Van Mulligen was affected very 
much by guidelines that were involved in a certain crown corporation, Sask Housing, where he was told 
that he should not be involved. The Premier has stood in this House and agreed with the decision to 
transfer Harry Van Mulligen to P.A. and that decision was later rescinded. So to say that there are no 
guidelines in the province of Saskatchewan is not true. 
 
On the other hand the brother-in-law of the Premier, Rene Archambault, who was also a Conservative 
candidate in Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, was given authorization and approval by the Premier to go and 
canvass actively in the Prince Albert-Duck Lake by-election. And so to say that you can’t make a 
decision on guidelines until a supreme court decision in Ontario is simply not true. 
 
What we are asking tonight is if you will give us an assurance that temporary or interim guidelines can 
be written down so that the employees, who are at a loss right now as to what they are allowed to do, can 
come to some sort of a conclusion. Because I can tell you, you may think there are no guidelines or try 
to explain to us that there are no guidelines, but there are very effective guidelines in place — simply by 
watching the Premier, his actions in dealing with his own brother-in-law and also the actions of another 
minister, the Minister of Government Services, in dealing with a clerk-steno 2 who was transferred from 
P.A. to Regina and told not to be involved in politics. So I would like you to square that with us — how 
you are telling us you can’t have guidelines before the supreme court rules on an Ontario decision. It is 
very obvious you have 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2209 

guidelines and what we would like you to do is write them down so everyone can read them, so 
employees know what they can and can’t do. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think I was indicating that there’s guidelines there. There are 
guidelines there from the previous administration. They are still in place. What we were looking at doing 
is maybe suggesting some amendments to those. Our simple answer was: why look at amending them if 
the supreme court is going to adjudicate on the question? Why not wait until the supreme court comes 
down with their decision? Perhaps these ones are not even valid at that point in time. But we do in fact 
have these guidelines. It’s in the law. It’s covered by the law and if anybody wants to challenge 
something that we do wrong they perfectly have the right to go to court. 
 
But, you know, I get a little bit annoyed by the sanctimonious attitude of the people across floor when 
they sort of think that there is no political involvement here or that the Premier is hiring his brother-in-
law because of some political thing. I’ve got a list of people here that you can go through just one after 
the other. 
 
You have one Harvey Abells who just happens to be the son-in-law of Auburn pepper, and Auburn 
pepper’s daughter, Janet. You can go through the list here. You’ve got the Premier’s daughter hired. 
You’ve got Randy Snyder, son of the former minister of government services and labour now working 
in the Department of Government Services. You’ve got Tim Whelan, son of Ed Whelan, a former 
member. You’ve got John Burton, a former NDP candidate. You’ve Zeny Burton who was the wife of 
the former candidate. Don Cody had a job. He was hired somehow by the government. You go through 
the list — Don Faris, when he was defeated got himself a job. You had various people that ran for 
office. You can go through the list if you want. You can go through the list of the number of people. 
Here is a Barbarie Kramer, daughter of Eiling Kramer. Now that’s long list as well. It goes on for pages. 
 
So you sit there in your sanctimonious way saying that somehow these guys have hired a guy that 
happens to be a brother-in-law of the Premier and naughty, naughty, they are doing something terribly 
wrong. Well, I’ll tell you, my friend, we didn’t invent that by a long ways. And that was brought in and 
that was a policy of your government — to favour defeated candidates, to favour members of the family 
of defeated candidates, or members of the family of existing members of the legislature, or family 
members of the people who were NDP candidates federally. We didn’t invent that by a long way. You in 
fact are the people that hired on those mechanisms, hired on those deals, and perhaps you should look at 
your tactics of hiring over the last 10 years. Then perhaps you wouldn’t be quite so sanctimonious in 
your approaches to the question. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the minister is doing a very good job of skating 
around an important issue, that being guidelines as would affect civil servants in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’re not talking about who is hired here or who is 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2210 

hired there. What we are talking about is what is expected of civil servants in the province of 
Saskatchewan at the present time. 
 
That is definitely a change where you have people involved in the Conservative Party who are allowed 
to be actively involved in election campaigns and people who are not involved in the Conservative party 
being transferred because the government has assumed that in some way they are involved in political 
activity. It’s not a question of whether the Premier’s brother-in-law is working and no competition was 
held and he was the best guy for the job or not. The simple question: do the same rules apply to Rene 
Archambault as apply to Harry Van Mulligen? Very apparently they don’t. That’s what we are trying to 
straighten out, not whether Harry Van Mulligen should be hired or not, or Rene Archambault, but what 
rules apply to them in terms of political activity. That’s what we are trying to get to the roots of tonight, 
not whether or not you could hire a relative of yours. Of course you could, and be perfectly legitimate if 
they were qualified for the job and went through the proper competition. What we are talking about is 
their role in terms of political activity once they are hired and on the job. And the discrimination that 
exists at the present time, I don’t think the people of Saskatchewan can tolerate much longer. Therefore 
we’ve required and are requesting that you bring forth some guidelines so people will for once and for 
all know what they are able to do. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I think you would refer to section 50 of The Public Service Act as to 
what people shall and shall not do. Those are the guidelines in law that are put down there. Those are the 
ones that, if you come back to a legal question on anything, you have to follow. We simply indicated 
that we would look at further guidelines. We felt that we should have further guidelines in and we will 
bring those further guidelines in, but we are not going to bring them in until such time as the supreme 
court rules. Why bring in some guidelines, only to find out that the supreme court says “no you can’t do 
this” or “yes you can do this” or “no you can’t do that”? Then we address that. Well, the supreme court 
is about to deal with that issue very, very shortly. What we will do is wait until such time and then act 
accordingly and in conjunction with a common-sense application of the supreme court decisions. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, that’s all we’ve been asking for since last summer when this 
thing first blew up, is a bit of common sense. I say, Mr. Minister, that if you want to follow legal 
precedent, and constitutional law, I’ll recommend a decision to you that is somewhat closer to home. I 
don’t know if you’ve had a chance to read it; written by Judge Dielschneider on an application for an 
interim injunction, and the applicant was unsuccessful. The applicant was a Harry Van Mulligen. I’d 
recommend to you the reading of that decision, because he found that to be contrary to that man’s rights 
and contrary to the Canadian constitution. Surely, Mr. Minister, if you want to follow legal precedent, 
you’d follow the decision handed down in a starkly similar case. I defy you to differentiate the cases of 
harry Van Mulligen and Sharon Young. The only difference was that Harry Van Mulligen was an 
alderman. Sharon Young has no such platform through which to make the injustice of her case known. 
But the injustice is there as starkly as it is in Mr. Van Mulligen’s. If you want to follow some legal 
precedent, why don’t you read Dielschneider’s decision and follow it? If you did, you’d send Sharon 
Young home. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I find that somewhat strange, coming from a lawyer, to say, “Why don’t you 
follow the legal precedent of Judge Dielschneider?” Clearly legal jurisprudence in the province of 
Saskatchewan says that you follow jurisprudence which is that decision. That decision is on the books of 
the law of the province of 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2211 

Saskatchewan. By way of jurisprudence, we have no choice but to follow. That’s the standard law as it 
exists right now. Anybody that feels harmed or wronged by any decision we made, clearly have the right 
to go to court and clearly have the right to use the jurisprudence of that particular decision. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — But surely, Mr. Minister, the logic of that decision applies as equally in 
Sharon Young’s case as it did in Harry Van Mulligen’s case. Surely the logic applies equally. She was 
asked to transfer to Regina; she asked for reasons. In a brief interview with the deputy minister, the then 
deputy minister, she asked the assistant deputy minister, the acting deputy minister, for reasons; she 
didn’t get them. In a brief interview she was asked if she was related to the defeated NDP candidate. She 
replied that the acting deputy minister knew full well she was. The acting deputy minister then told her 
that politics weren’t welcome in the department and that was just about the whole interview. Now, 
surely the logic of the Harry Van Mulligen case applies to the Sharon Young case, except that she 
doesn’t have the wherewithal to stand you on your ear the way Harry Van Mulligen did. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Now, I think, clearly she can file a grievance under the collective bargaining 
process. That doesn’t take a whole lot of money. That’s what her union is there to protect her for us. 
And as far as I know, as of to date she hasn’t filed that grievance. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Mr. Minister, the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yeah, my colleague 
from Prince Albert said something about . . . mentioned the word Siberia. Prince Albert may have 
seemed to Harry Van Mulligen like Siberia, but I can tell you that Regina seemed to Sharon Young like 
the middle of the Sahara. She was just as anxious to come here as Harry Van Mulligen was to go to P.A. 
 
What earthly justification can you provide for transferring a clerk-typist 2 out of her home and 
community down to Regina? What earthly justification can there be for such a bizarre transfer? Surely, 
had there been any scintilla of justification for it, it would have been offered by the then acting deputy 
minister, who offered none. And no justification has been given to this date by the minister or by anyone 
else for this unusual transfer of a clerk-typist 2. Surely, the only fair and just thing to do is send the poor 
girl home. I’ll make you a deal. If you send her home as you ought to, I won’t raise it again. That’s all I 
ask, that Sharon Young be allowed to go home. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, as I understand, that was involved with the realignment of DNS; that 
was a decision made by the various . . . the particular department involved in it. When the matter comes 
as a grievance, then the public service commission becomes involved in it. Otherwise it’s simply a 
transfer within that department and within that realignment. 
 
You indicate that she is almost fearful of the large city; that she’s living in great fear down here. I 
simply say that if that’s her problem, she clearly has a union there to protect her and that’s what they 
should be doing. It would seem to me that that is the process that they would follow, and we will deal 
with it accordingly at that point in time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I would think, surely, Mr. Minister, you’ve got some guidelines and every 
public servant in this province knows what those guidelines are. They’re simple, they’re clear, and you 
have applied them consistently, Harry Van Mulligen went to, what to him, was Siberia because he dared 
to put forth a motion at city council which wasn’t entirely in accord with the policy of this government, 
and that’s the reason the 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2212 

Premier gave. And that’s a far more generous position than the one that the Minister of the Environment 
took, I may say. 
 
Sharon Young showed insufficient discretion in choosing her in-laws, and therefore, she’s sent to 
Regina. Rene Archambault is free to go up to Prince Albert and campaign. As I say, you have a 
guidelines which is clear; it’s understood by every public servant and it’s consistently applied. The 
guideline, Mr. Minister, is this: if you are a Conservative, there aren’t any rules, and if you are a New 
Democrat, there’s no protection. Surely, that’s the policy you are applying. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — The only comment I have is that it was part of the reorganization. To 
suggest that the reason that she was transferred is simply that she was a sister of Jerry Hammersmith . . . 
I haven’t heard that particular argument. I think if that argument is to be advanced, then why not have a 
grievance and simply go through the mechanism of saying that’s in fact what has happened? 
 
You are the one that is telling everybody what went on at this particular interview. I was not there; I 
don’t know what happened. And I don’t suppose you were there either to know what happened. So I 
suppose what you were both talking about is second, third or fourth-hand information and when you 
have that, I suppose — and you and I as lawyers should know that — obviously you have a proper 
forum to raise those concerns. I doubt very much that she’s somehow afraid of that particular forum to 
raise the question. I would suggest that perhaps you seem to be more concerned about it than perhaps 
she is. I don’t know. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I am fortunate enough to have a forum in which I can raise it at no cost or 
inconvenience to myself. So did Harry Van Mulligen, I might say. So did Harry Van Mulligen have a 
forum in which he could raise it. She’s not blessed with holding elected office. That’s why I’m raising it 
and she’s not. 
 
Will you at least . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If you’re going to stonewall us on Sharon Young and 
Harry Van Mulligen, will you at least give us your undertaking that deputy ministers or acting deputy 
minister will stop harassing public servants who are thought to be New Democrat or related to them? 
And that is clearly what Mr. Cousineau was doing; that is clearly what he was doing. Why on earth else 
would he ask a public servant in that sort of interview whether or not she was related to an NDP 
candidate? For what other reason would that arise, other than to harass her? 
 
Will you at least give assurance that until you have some guidelines (and you deny that the guidelines 
that I put forth are your guidelines; I may say you’re going to have some difficulty convincing the public 
servants those aren’t your guidelines, so long as you continue to act the way you are), will you give us 
your assurance that the acting deputy ministers will stop harassing public servants who are thought to be 
New Democrat or related to them? Will you at least give us that assurance? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, you asked two questions. Number one, that this particular employee 
does not have a quarrel and that you do, somehow. To suggest that a grievance is not a forum, to suggest 
somehow I think, as the member for Shaunavon, that this person . . . I think the suggestion that he is 
making is that the person is afraid to go before a grievance. I took it that’s what his comment from his 
chair meant, that she was afraid to go to a grievance for somehow that to go to a grievance would mean 
some dire consequences for her. I don’t believe that exists and I’m quite sure that she doesn’t 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2213 

believe that exists either. So to say that there’s not a forum, I think is to stretch the truth a long way. As 
to what happened with Mr. Cousineau, I would tend to take that information from this Sharon Young if 
she in fact came to this forum to say what in fact happened, rather than taking it from you. For all I 
know you simply read it from the Leader-Post. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I can appreciate you people aren’t particularly fond of the press you’re 
getting these days. As a matter of interest, I didn’t read it in the Leader-Post. I took an opportunity that 
was available to any of you people — none of you seem to have bothered to contact Sharon Young and 
ask her directly what happened, any of you could have done that. Indeed, I’d be delighted to hear you 
people deny, either you or the minister in charge, deny that that in fact is what has taken place. The 
Minister of Government Services has consistently stonewalled and evaded the issue as you are doing 
now. 
 
Will you at least give us an assurance that you will stop transferring people for political reasons? Will 
you just give that assurance, that we have seen the last political transfer? Will you at least give us that 
assurance? I know that my colleague from Prince Albert-Duck Lake has a tenuous hold on his riding. 
And I frankly don’t know anything about Sharon Young’s politics. But I suspect that you would stand 
her presence in Prince Albert-Duck Lake. But that’s a bit aside. Will you at least give us the assurance 
that we have seen the last politically-motivated transfer? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I can give you the assurance that the public service commission will act 
within the law. They will act within the collective bargaining agreement, and that’s what we are to do. 
With regard to indicating what a particular department is going to do, again what we have to say is that 
the public service commission is before the Assembly today, and we will act accordingly to the 
agreement and according to the law. If that’s not good enough assurance, I don’t know what else is. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you can inform us what the collective agreement 
is on notice given to employees who are to be transferred. Can you inform us how many days notice are 
allowed, whether or not there is time allowed for house hunting in the community where they are going? 
Just give us a brief rundown on that whole area. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I am advised under the collective agreement that an employer has the power 
to unilaterally transfer a person at any time without any notice whatsoever. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — So what you’re saying then is that in the collective agreement in existence 
now, there is no time allowed for a person to . . . any notice allowed to transfer to house hunt in the 
community where they’re going to at the present time. 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Apparently there is nothing in the agreement that would be binding. It 
would simply be how each department would deal with a given employee. With this particular 
employee, again I must say that the matter has not come before the public service commission because 
there has been no grievance on it, and until such time as there is, we would not become involved in it. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, maybe you can tell us 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2214 

what your opinion is on whether or not Sharon Young was treated fairly, given the fact that on the 8th 
she was told that she was going to be moving — the first she had heard about it — and to report in 
Regina on the 14th. In your opinion, is that a fair deal to give a person, a clerk-steno 2 from Prince 
Albert — between the 8th and the 14th — that great amount of time to pack her bags, find a place to 
stay, and move to Regina? Is this what the employees in the province can expect if they’re involved in 
political activity or related to a politician who isn’t of your particular political persuasion? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — I think you make a number of assumptions there. I would like to, before I 
would express any view of mine as to whether it is fair or not fair, have the setting out of the entire facts 
of the case, hear all sides of the case, the determination of the case and determine that. It’s your 
suggestion that she had to be moved because she was actively involved in a campaign. I don’t know 
whether she was actively involved in the campaign or not, and couldn’t, quite frankly, care. Our view 
has been, the view of the minister has been, that she was transferred according to the reorganization of 
DNS. As to how much time is convenient in that particular case, I would not want to express an opinion 
until I saw all of that. So I wouldn't tend to want to make subjective judgments on a given case when I 
don’t know and the matter hasn’t come before the public service commission, or come before a 
grievance. 
 
MR. LINGENFELTER: — Well, Mr. Minister, the outline that you have set out certainly isn’t an 
accurate one. At no time did I insinuate or refer to the fact that Sharon Young was involved in a 
campaign. As far as I know, she wasn’t. The scenario, as told to us by the individual, is that she was told 
to report on the 14th in Regina, given notice on the 8th of February, and arriving in Regina, in an 
interview with the acting deputy minister was told not to be involved in politics. 
 
What we’re saying is that this is unacceptable for a great number of reasons. In censuring people like 
this, the government can exercise a great deal of power. But, I think that it’s unacceptable that people 
who are hired by the government, who are well-known within the Conservative ranks, are not treated 
that way, in fact, are encouraged, I believe, to go to P.A. and be actively involved in campaigning for the 
Conservative candidate in the Prince Albert-Duck Lake by-election. 
 
That’s the point. I think that what we’re seeing here is the blatant use of power by a very large 
government to stifle political freedom in the province of Saskatchewan, such as we haven’t seen since 
the days of Anderson back in the 1929-30 era. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think that it’s a starting revelation of what this government really thinks about its 
employees, when you have a young person — a clerk-steno 2 — being treated in that manner. 
 
I would like the minister to once again try to explain whether or not in his mind this is fair treatment of 
an employee who is attempting to do a job for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
MR. KATZMAN: — Well, I’ve listened to some hypocrisy this evening, and I’d like to just remind the 
member that the federal president of Saskatchewan-Humboldt, who worked for the potash corporation 
when he got elected Conservative president in 1980, got moved to Saskatoon. Why? Because he got 
elected Conservative president. So, you’re talking about things . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s 
exactly the way it was put to me by this employee. “I got moved out of the Humboldt area because I was 
a Conservative and I got elected president.” 



 
February 28, 1983 

 
2215 

Now, you wanna talk about your little fun and games? Let’s go back to a name, Howard Lucas. You 
might remember him — NDP candidate, ran against me in 1978. After the election, I asked him point-
blank: “What were you in it for, Howard?” He says, “Because they promised me a job in labour-
industrial relationships.” And he got the job! Would you believe it? He got the job. So, don’t give me 
this garbage. 
 
Talk about another man that supported me in ’78 in Allan, who had made an arrangement to rent houses 
to the potash corporation. What happened because he supported me? Your people informed him they 
couldn’t rent houses from him because he supported the Conservatives. You guys talk out of the side of 
your mouth all the time. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 


