



















































Hansard: December 12, 1983


721 

 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 

Monday December 12, 1983 

EVENING SESSION 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 23 – An Act to amend The Vehicles Act, 1983 

 

Clause 1 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I have one more on the way yet, Mr. Carl Shiels from highway 

traffic board. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Speaker, I have a couple of questions of the minister. I see in the amendment he’s 

made a few changes, and most of them are changes that I would suppose should have been in the bill to begin 

with. And I would wonder why the changes were being made now and weren’t included in the bill originally. 

Mr. Minister, as one of my colleagues had mentioned, this bill is nothing more than some additional work for 

the lawyers, and I’m sure my colleagues here would agree with me because they would probably do quite 

well if they were out in private practice right now. 

 

One other point, Mr. Minister. Let’s just deal with the total amendment you have here, and save time in 

going through section by section. I’ll do it under item 1. The amendments that you started with, and we’ll go 

to subsection 165(1). Why did you . . . This is just defining, putting “motor vehicle” after “highway” and I 

don’t see much in that one. 

 

One other thing there, and that’s defining who can take blood, and that’s one that I’m a little interested in, 

Mr. Minister. Did you consult with the people that you are saying will now be allowed to take blood, and 

that’s a person “who is certified to take blood” after “1978” in clause (b). And that would be under (d) you 

have “a duly qualified combined laboratory and x-ray technician.” Did you consult with x-ray technicians 

previous to putting this act together? Have you consulted with them now? And what was their opinion in 

regards to them having to take blood from individuals? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, to answer the member’s questions. On the first question, yes, 

there were some mistakes. We’re not perfect. I’m quite prepared to admit that. To your second question, on 

section 165, it was a drafting problem. We’re in error there. On your third question, we did consult with 

hospital administrators, who are the bosses of and the supervisors of the laboratory technicians on this case. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, you may have consulted, you say, with the administrators of the 

hospitals. What about the technicians and the people that are going to be involved in performing this service? 

Did you consult with them or their association, to see whether they are prepared to end up in court because of 

having take blood from someone without having really had any input into whether they’re prepared to do it, 

or not prepared to do it? Are you saying that you are forcing them to do that now, that they will have to take 

blood from an individual that is in a hospital after an accident, or whatever – that they will be forced to take 

blood from them simply because you are saying now they have to do it, without their approval to do so? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I will stand corrected on that other point. We did consult with the 

Saskatchewan Health-Care Association, Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association, Saskatchewan 

association of laboratory technicians, Saskatchewan Justice, and also highway traffic board. All of these had 

input into this. Also, the department of Health, in consultation with the following groups, put out questions 

and answers about drinking and driving provisions of The Vehicles Act, prepared by Saskatchewan Hospital 

Services Plan, November, 1983. We did  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

722 

 

consult with all of those groups. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Out of your consultations, Mr. Minister, did lab technicians agree to be the people that 

would take blood from accident victims, or whoever may happen to be in a hospital, that was brought in 

there simply to try and verify whether they were under the influence of alcohol or not? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — They agreed that normal hospital practices would be carried out. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Normal hospital practices, I suppose in some cases maybe they do take blood from 

individuals, but in most cases I think this is imposing something on them for a different purpose than what 

they normally would be doing. And are you saying that they now agree to act under this act and take the risk 

of going to court and being sued by some individuals by taking blood when they are not doctors, but are 

merely X-ray technicians? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Okay, I’ll try and explain it to the member opposite. Some registered nurses are 

qualified to take blood samples; some aren’t. The laboratory technicians or the doctors, example being the 

small rural hospitals . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s it; that’s right; that’s it. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, it’s simply adding, in those facilities where a doctor . . . Mr. Chairman, it’s simply 

adding laboratory technologist for the taking of blood. And just further for the member that was asking 

questions from his seat, the Saskatchewan Medical Association completely endorses the new program, 

endorses the new act, and are very prepared to work with the government in implementing this. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Question to the Minister of Health, Minister of 

Highways. Have you . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that’s right, my apologies to the Minister of Health. We 

are dealing with a problem there that relates to the lab technicians in particular. What kind of coverage does a 

lab tech have, as far as the court of law is concerned, if she takes a blood sample and the person she takes it 

from decides to sue her? What protection would she have? I’m aware of the protection you put in for doctors. 

What are you doing as far as the lab tech is concerned? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — It’s the same for anyone that is in the taking of the samples, section 168(13): 

 

No action lies against any person as a result of the taking or analyzing of a sample of blood taken 

pursuant to this section except an action for damages arising from negligence in taking or analyzing 

the sample. 

 

It’s the same for all. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — I don’t think that’s quite the same for a doctor as it would be for a lab tech. And the bill 

expressly talks about damages involved, and . . . Is the department . . . I’m all for prosecuting and setting up 

a flag in Saskatchewan that there shouldn’t be people that are consuming alcohol driving vehicles, and I 

think with advertising . . . And I’m just in the process in reading a copy of a letter that was sent to the 

Premier. Schools and everybody, the teachers – everybody is concerned with the amount of people and the 

pressure that is being put on about your recent change to have liquor advertising. This is part of it, and now 

you’re sloughing the responsibility onto the backs of lab techs, somebody that is working in a hospital, 

somebody that is asked to be called out in front of the hospital when she is on duty, and she is supposed to 

jab a needle in some guys’ arm to get a sample of blood. 

 

What protection . . . go through it step by step again. A copy drags somebody up in front of a hospital. What 

is going to be involved that this lab tech is going to be called out to take a blood  



 

December 12, 1983 

 

723 

 

sample. Just go through the process of what is going to happen to the girls working in my constituency. I 

have small hospitals that have one or two lab techs, total. Now, when the lab tech in Rockglen or Lafleche or 

Assiniboia or Gravelbourg is called out to do a blood sample if a doctor’s not there, what protection is she 

going to have? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chairman, I mean I’ll try and explain it. We haven’t taken 

anything away. Where it was registered nurses, it is now lab technicians have been included into this. I could 

read you section 13 again. That rule applies for everyone in the taking of a blood sample. I mean, if you can 

be a little more clear on what your question is I’d be very pleased to answer it for you. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — As you know, Mr. Minister, the law profession has, through its registration, errors and 

omission insurance. I take it the medical insurance has coverage in the event of any lawsuit or errors or 

negligence arising out of the actions of a doctor, which is covered pursuant to their association. I wonder 

whether you can advise me whether the others that you have included in the list – the lab technicians and so 

on – whether they as a profession, by the mere registration in their profession, have insurance against any 

actions that may result in respect to carrying out their particular duties under the act. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — I’m instructed by my department officials, Mr. Chairman, that this issue was not 

raised in consultation with them and that they are taking care of it within their own organization. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I don’t quite understand what the minister is trying to say here. He says that this question 

was not raised with them but . . . 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — They never raised it. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Well aren’t you . . . I’ll ask you the question, then. They never raised it. Are you not 

concerned that what you are doing here is imposing an obligation upon various groups to carry out the 

performance under The Vehicles Act that, in one instance, they have insurance coverage which will protect 

them, and other associations . . . You haven’t even checked into determining whether or not they have 

coverage in the event of being sued. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, a lab tech, as I know them, they take blood samples every day and 

they could be sued every day. I’ll read section 13 of the act for you again. Here’s the difference. There is no 

difference. It’s one law for everyone, whether it’s a doctor, a nurse, or a lab tech. And I’ll read it to you 

again, section 168(13): 

 

No action lies against any person as a result of the taking or analyzing of a sample of blood taken 

pursuant to this section except an action for damages arising from the negligence in taking or 

analyzing the sample. 

 

Now, that’s for everyone. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — I want to ask the minister whether he can advise this House that a provision in The 

Vehicles Act will, in fact, circumvent a citizen’s right to commence an action for assault where an individual, 

without the consent of the person, is in fact assaulted. And the definition of assault, if you look in the 

Criminal Code, is straightforward. 

 

What I’m asking you is: can you in The Vehicles Act circumvent the rights of that the citizens have under the 

Criminal Code? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — No, Mr. Chairman, we do not cover it there. We deal with the civil aspect here, 

not under the Criminal Code. 



 

December 12, 1983 
 

724 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Are you saying, then, that in every one that you have designated within here are open to 

charges under the Criminal Code? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, while the officials are looking up another answer, I’d just like to 

raise at this time, Mr. Chairman, that it seems that we have the opposition doing a flip-flop here now. The 

only thing that we’re . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Don’t you tell me what to do. You just sit there and 

listen. 

 

Mr. Chairman, what we seem to have here right now is an opposition doing a flip-flop. I remember being in 

this Assembly and they stood and voted for second reading and third reading of this bill. Now what I’m 

hearing – because we’re simply adding lab technicians, to enable them to take a blood sample – now, Mr. 

Chairman, we’re hearing the opposition doing a flip-flop. That’s what we’re hearing today. We’re hearing 

them do a flip-flop. They’re not in favour of taking the drinking driver off the road. They don’t really care. 

They want to play politics with it. They aren’t genuine in their concern about removing the drinking driver 

from the road in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what they’re telling us here today. 

 

Mr. Chairman, as I pointed out before, we have simply added lab technicians to this amendment in The 

Vehicles Act. That’s all we’ve done – to allow doctors, qualified nurses or lab techs to take this blood sample 

on the demand of a law enforcement officer. That’s all we’re doing. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — We’ve heard this speech so often that it’s becoming boring. But I want to indicate to the 

minister that he has been going around the province trying to indicate that he’s taking substantial action to 

curb drinking and driving. What I want to ask the minister, whether or not he has got any other opinion other 

than the Minister of Justice, and including the law society, which indicates that the actions which you are 

taking, or proposing to take, are ultra vires vis-à-vis the Criminal Code. 

 

And we raised these concerns before, because if you don’t, in fact, have the power to put it into place, all that 

you’re going to be doing is ending up with a lot of court cases. But more particularly, what you have said 

here today is that that section excludes people from civil liability. And what I’m asking you is: does it also 

exclude the potential under the Criminal Code? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, as I pointed out previously, this book sent out to all of the 

health care professionals in the province of Saskatchewan, “Questions and Answers about Drinking and 

Driving Provisions of The Vehicles Act, 1983,” prepared by Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan, 

November, 1983. One section there – and I will send the members a copy – number 14: 

 

Is there any legal protection for the individual who, by carrying out the request of the peace officer to 

obtain a blood sample, assaults the individual without consent? ((b) of that section.) The Criminal 

Code is administered in each province by its Minister of Justice. It is obvious that the Minister of 

Justice of Saskatchewan will not prosecute for assault anyone who takes blood in accordance with 

the provisions of The Vehicles Act. 

 

Hopefully, that is the answer you wanted. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I would like to ask you whether, as an individual, under the Criminal Code whether 

I would, in fact, be able to commence an action of assault as against a doctor or one of the technicians or 

otherwise who, in fact, without my consent took a sample of blood. I know the Minister of Justice can, in 

fact, refuse to prosecute on behalf of the Crown. But I’m asking you whether a private individual can, in fact, 

proceed with a case of assault as against the removal of blood without consent. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes, and I’ll read you another section of that booklet. 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

725 

 

It is possible for a private citizen (even you) to lay a charge of assault before a Justice of the Peace. 

When such a charge is presented to a court of law, officials of the Minister of Justice have the 

authority to direct the court not to proceed with the charge. The Minister of Justice has stated that a 

private prosecution for assault will not proceed where a blood sample has been taken in accordance 

with the provisions of The Vehicles Act. 

 

But, yes, you could lay that charge. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — The Minister of Highways said that lab techs are taking hundreds of blood samples. Let 

me go through the process. I go to see my doctor. He needs a blood sample. The doctor sends me over to a 

lab tech. She takes a blood sample. She does hundreds of those. 

 

That’s quite a different process than a sergeant dragging a young teenager up to the door of the hospital, 

that’s been watching a liquor ad and seen how beautiful it is to drink and be up with it. He drags this young 

17- or 18-year-old up in front of the door of the hospital and says to this lab tech, “Come on out here and 

take a sample.” The kid says, “No way. No way.” And she takes it anyhow. 

 

And he’s trying to tell me that’s the same circumstance as the lab technician taking a sample. Please explain 

that one one step further. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, nothing fails to amaze me any more. Mr. Chairman, that 

young individual has the right to refuse. But let’s just back it up so that you don’t try and twist what is 

actually happening here in the province of Saskatchewan. I know where you’re coming from now. You’re 

opposed to this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s fine. That’s fine. You’re the one that wants to scare 

people out there, use your scare tactics . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

That’s right. That’s your democratic right. But there’s not going to be any 17-year-old dragged up in front of 

the hospital, lab tech runs out, jabs him with the needle. That’s NDP garbage and you know it. That’s what 

that is. That’s a scare tactic. That’s how genuine, that’s how serious the opposition in this Assembly are 

about removing the drinking drivers from the road. You want to see those coroner reports continue? You 

want to see those accident things? 

 

I just hope, I just hope, by the grace of God, some drunk driver isn’t involved with an accident within your 

family because, mister, then you’re going to start thinking. We’re concerned about it. I’m genuine about it. 

I’m not trying to play politics and play the media up there. You are . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

 

You don’t need to tell me to sit down. You want to get into the kitchen, fine and dandy; it’s going to be 

warm. You’re the one. You’re the one that said they’re going to drag a 17-year-old up in front of the 

hospital. You’re the one that said they’re going to run out, their lab technicians’ going to run out and jab him 

with a needle. We’re talking about a law enforcement officer taking an individual to a qualified medical 

facility, demanding a sample of blood be taken . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s correct. That individual 

can refuse it. Now, very hopefully that your mind can be changed in this Assembly here today and you can 

cut down on this scare tactics of the people. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Highways is treading on some pretty thin ice when he talks 

about who’s leading young people to get drunk. You’re telling me that you hoped, and I’m not sure what 

your words were . . . I’m not sure what your words were, but you were kind of hoping that it wasn’t a 

member of my family. That’s what you said, and you dragged this in here. 

 

I have a copy of a letter here that was written to your Premier. 

 



 

December 12, 1983 
 

726 

 

I have a copy of a letter here that was written to your Premier. I got a copy of the letter here sent to your 

Premier and copies sent to all the MLAs, signed by teachers and students, and the deputy leader has a copy 

too. Well, that adds to hundreds of copies of letters we got back, where concerned citizens all over 

Saskatchewan are saying you pushed the booze at them. You’re the pusher. You’re the one that’s flashing 

these fancy ads, according to this letter. 

 

No one can deny the tremendous impact commercial advertising has on children, and modern TV production 

techniques are utilized to sell a product. Our children are now being exposed to these techniques used to 

promote the sale, most especially, of a variety of brands of beer. The commercials are powerful and 

seductive, equating the consumption of beer with fun, glamour, and enjoyment. And the minister, the Deputy 

premier thinks it’s a big joke. Well, I don’t think it’s a joke; I don’t think it’s a joke. And I think it’s 

seductive, and it’s seductive on your part because you are the ones that encourage TV advertising and allow 

it to happen in this province. 

 

And you’ve got yourself a problem. You want to clamp down on alcoholics on the road; so do I. But let’s get 

to the source of the problem; let’s get to the source of the problem. Don’t drag them up in front of our 

hospitals and tell a lab tech to jab needles in them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And you think it’s a big 

joke. You think it’s a big joke. Well, let me tell you it’s going to be a heyday for the lawyer, it’s going to be 

a heyday for the lawyers in this province, and I think you got yourself a pack of trouble here. You tried to 

sneak in the lab techs through the back door with an amendment, and I think that’s not fair politics . . . 

(inaudible interjection) . . . The minister didn’t hear the question, he said. Well then, Mr. Minister, you’re 

very naïve. Then you’re very naïve. You accused us of cheap politics in the name of the lives of young 

people on the road. You really did. And I wonder whose the question is. Who’s going to . . . (inaudible) . . . 

Who’s going to take the responsibility – those that are against liquor advertising or those that are promoting 

the sale of alcoholic beverage? Those that are making a buck off it and those that are paying off cheap 

political debts to the breweries and the advertising media to sell liquor – they’re the ones that are responsible. 

And you, Mr. Minister, as a key member of the Crown that decided to promote liquor advertising, you’re 

going to have to live with it. 

 

Your bill is a farce. It makes mockery of it because it doesn’t get at the root cause. That’s my question. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — In view of the sanctimonious approach that he has put forward in this House as how he is 

opposing drinking-driving, why he can stand in the same cabinet that will promote the consumption of 

alcohol in the same breath. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, now we have a question. And the member asks: how can I 

stand with a cabinet or with a government, the fine group of people like this, and go along with them? 

Proudly. Very proudly, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Because I’ll tell you the difference, Mr. Chairman, between the socialists and the Devine government. They 

want to control everything. I don’t want to control individuals’ social habits – their social lives. What they do 

in their own homes is entirely up to them. A driver’s licence is a privilege; it’s not a God-given right. That’s 

the difference. That’s the difference, Mr. Chairman. 

 

And if individuals are going to abuse that driving privilege in the province of Saskatchewan by drinking and 

driving, yes, they’re going to lose their licence. What they do with their own social lives at home is entirely 

up to them. I’m not going to tell them what to do. 

 

That’s why we’re government of the province today, and they’re going to be opposition till the end of time. 

It’s very obvious – not controlling, not regulating freedom. It’s a word that the members opposite can’t 

understand, Mr. Chairman. but that’s the difference between them and us. 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

727 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Well, frankly, I think that the greatest amount of freedom that you can develop among 

young people . . . the method of giving people more freedom is giving them more information of the evil of 

the consumption of alcohol. I would think that this is the way in which you could free a lot of people from 

the problems of alcohol is through education. And what you have done is reverse that position. What you 

have done is said to the booze sellers, “you’re free to sell, to advertise, to entice people to purchase. And I’ll 

tell you what we’ll do at the same time. We’ll go out and we’ll prosecute them.” 

 

There is no consistency. There is a total hypocrisy, and you can’t deny it. You stand up in this legislature . . . 

I challenge you, to be able to indicate that there is no hypocrisy in the approach of this government imposing 

stiff penalties for drinking and driving, at the same time inducing people to sell. That is a basic hypocrisy, 

and you must live with it. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a letter here that maybe we should read into the 

record. 

 

Mr. Allen Engel, MP, Assiniboia-Gravelbourg 

Legislative Buildings, Regina, Saskatchewan. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — MP? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — MP. 

 

Dear Sir: I am prompted to write you regarding the letter you sent out to churches in connection with 

the beer and wine ads which are now being shown on Saskatchewan TV stations. I am shocked to 

think you would stoop so low as to . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. the Bill before the committee is Bill No. 23, An Act to amend The Vehicles 

Act. I don’t think that liquor advertising enters into it. I would like the questioning to stay on the bill, and the 

answers. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I am only simply responding to a question from a member in the 

opposition, trying to clarify it. That’s all I am trying to do. I didn’t bring the debate up, Mr. Chairman. I am 

just trying to respond, as a responsible member in this Assembly, to answer their questions. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, in a statement previous here, you stated that the individual, if he is brought 

to a hospital, has the right to refuse the taking of a blood sample. If that individual has the right to refuse the 

taking of a blood sample, then he has to be conscious. What happens in a case where he cannot refuse? Then, 

the blood sample is taken from him without his consent. Does that not violate the freedoms of that 

individual? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again, I mean, yes, the blood sample can be taken, but 

we can talk about freedoms in this Assembly and we can talk about choices. I think we have to start talking 

about rights of individuals. 

 

I am going to relate one little story, Mr. Chairman. It has directly to do with this bill. What about the rights, 

what about the freedom of that little six-year-old boy that was playing out in his front lawn in an urban centre 

in Saskatchewan? 

 

I see the members opposite trying to make light of a very serious situation where fatality occurred. Where 

were the rights of that little six-year-old boy? Where were his rights when he was run over and struck down 

by a drunk, a drinking driver? Mr. Chairman, he didn’t have any rights. 



 

December 12, 1983 
 

728 

 

What we’re simply trying to do . . . as the government of this province, we’re simply trying to remove the 

drinking driver from the road. Simply trying, Mr. Chairman, simply trying to save lives. The members 

opposite – it’s quite obvious; it’s quite obvious – are not in favour of this. That’s their choice. That’s their 

choice. I’m not trying to tell them what to do. I’m not forcing this bill upon them. But it’s amazing, Mr. 

Chairman, that when we went to third reading of The Vehicles Act, we had everyone stand up and vote in 

favour of it. Now we bring an amendment in where we’re simply adding lab technicians, giving them the 

right to take that blood sample. All of a sudden now, all of a sudden, the opposition is opposed to it. 

 

Well, Mr. Chairman, let me just tell you I’ll be calling for a standing vote on this, and we’ll just see, we’ll 

just see who’s going to voting in favour of it and who’s going to be opposing it. And, Mr. Chairman, I’ll tell 

you right now, it wouldn’t surprise me in the least bit to see the NDP do another flip-flop and vote in favour 

of it. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, again you try to put across to the public your view of what you think 

somebody might be thinking, the same with some of the things you’re trying to do in the bill. The opposition 

on this side of the House does not go around promoting people to drink or promoting the use of alcohol . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order, order. The bill before the committee is An Act to amend The Vehicles Act. It 

has nothing to do with liquor advertising. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, in a case where an individual that is brought into a hospital and has a blood 

sample taken by an X-ray technician, what protection does that X-ray technician have? What legal protection 

does he have from being sued by the individual from whom he takes blood? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I’ll read the two sections again. This time I’ll read them a little 

slower. Section 13 of section 168 states: 

 

No action lies against any person as a result of the taking or analyzing of a sample of blood taken 

pursuant to this section except an action for damages arising from negligence in taking or analyzing 

the sample. 

 

Question 14(b) in the little pamphlet that was sent out to all the health care professionals in the province. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Who wrote that? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — We’ll tell you again: prepared by Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan in 

consultation with the highway traffic board, Saskatchewan Justice, Saskatchewan health-Care Association, 

Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association, Saskatchewan Society of Medical laboratory Technologists, 

Saskatchewan Medical Association. 

 

(b) of number 14: 

 

The Criminal Code is administered in each province by its Minister of Justice. It is obvious that the 

Minister of Justice of Saskatchewan will not prosecute for assault anyone who takes blood in 

accordance with the provisions of The Vehicles Act. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, we keep getting the same story again. It is true, apparently, from what you 

say that the Minister of Justice has the final decision as to who gets prosecuted and who doesn’t. What 

happens in a case where the individual prosecutes the technician and the Minister of Justice then has to take 

sides, either on the individual’s side or on the side of the technician? What you’re saying, then, is the 

minister has made that decision that he will not prosecute anybody unless it is for negligence. 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

729 

 

What the individual is going to have to do, then, is prove that the technician was negligent before the 

minister will even allow his case to get to court. That is making it a little difficult for the individual involved 

because if that individual was not consuming any alcohol, went into that hospital after an accident of any 

kind, there was a blood sample taken, and there was some negligence involved, before the thing can get to 

court that individual is going to have to have definite proof that there was negligence. Some of those rights of 

that individual are going to be taken away. 

 

You’re covering a broad base of individuals with your law, and yet some of those people don’t have the 

protection that they should have. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, once again we go back to the printed bill that all of the 

members have and is available to the public of Saskatchewan. Before I even read from this, I’d just like to 

say, Mr. Chairman, that I’ve got the greatest deal of confidence in the law enforcement officers of this 

province. I believe they’re professionals. They have a job to do, and they will do that job. Now I will read 

another section of the act for them. It’s section 168, sub (3). 

 

Where a peace officer, on reasonable and probable grounds, believes that a person: (a) has consumed 

alcohol or drugs; (b) within the preceding two hours has driven, or had the care of control of a motor 

vehicle; and c) is incapable of providing a sample of his breath; the peace officer may, subject to 

subsection (4), by demand made to that person, require him to provide a sufficient sample of his 

blood that, in the opinion of the person taking the sample, is necessary to enable a proper analysis to 

be made to determine the proportion, if any, of alcohol, drugs, or alcohol and drugs in his blood, and 

to accompany the peace officer for the purpose of enabling the sample to be taken. 

 

It’s right there, in black and white, in the bill. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Minister, when you decided on this course of action, to get tougher with alcoholics 

that are propelling vehicles down the road – I’m not going to call it driving, because they really aren’t in 

control of the vehicle – when you decided on this tough action, have you looked at other jurisdictions that 

have been clamping down on it, and have you looked at other bills? Where did you all go to see what they’re 

doing about it? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, I have had consultation with the minister from B.C. We did 

take a look at that legislation, and did mirror it to a certain degree. Many other jurisdictions, at a meeting I 

just attended last week . . . Other jurisdictions are looking at it, example being Alberta, and even NDP 

Manitoba, Mr. Chairman. They’re even looking at doing the same thing. But more importantly, Mr. 

Chairman, I think something that’s very important for all members of this Assembly and the people of 

Canada to recognize, that in meeting with the federal minister, he has stated that he is looking at and 

hopefully going to introduce amendments to the Criminal Code. This will be great, but until that is done by 

the federal Liberal government, and I won’t get into whose friends they are or anything else . . . I don’t want 

to prolong the debate here tonight, Mr. Chairman. I don’t want to raise an issue like that. What I’m simply 

stating is that other provinces . . . B.C. has done it; I believe it was September 1st, was it, they got 

proclamation on theirs? . . . October 1. I’m in error of one month. 

 

Saskatchewan’s proclamation took place on December 1. The federal government looks like now they might 

accept that responsibility and amend the Criminal Code. It’s a problem that is not just to Saskatchewan; it’s a 

problem across North America. I believe this government has taken very positive and firm action in trying to 

deal with this problem. As I stated earlier, we’re not perfect. This bill wasn’t perfect. We don’t profess to do 

everything perfect. The only thing we’re adding is lab technicians, to allow them for the taking of that blood 

sample along with a qualified registered nurse or a doctor. Now, that’s all we’re adding to it. I don’t know 

what the  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

730 

 

opposition is all excited about – trying to challenge it and everything else. I’m simply saying we did consult 

with other jurisdictions, other areas. Other provinces are following our lead, including Manitoba. They are 

going to go with it as well. It’s a problem that is nation-wide and a problem, Mr. Chairman, I believe, that 

has to be dealt with in order to try and save some lives in our Canada. 
 

MR. ENGEL: — This further comment or question . . . I wasn’t expecting that long an answer. I just wanted 

you to say which jurisdictions you’re talking about. Have you looked at any American states that have taken 

similar action and have passed legislation like that in the past couple of year? 
 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes, I’m told, Mr. Chairman, that we did consult and get some input from some 

of the American states that are doing it as well. I think the point that has been brought up that it’s something 

that started . . . And I think you have organizations like MADD (Mothers Against Drunk Drivers), PRIDE, 

many organizations like that, where someone has lost a loved one, and it’s been brought to the focal point. 

And it should have been done before, but it’s done now, and very hopefully it will work, Mr. Chairman. 
 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, just one further comment, and I’m glad you mentioned that. You’re 

standing up here like some people did in agriculture recently and pretended they invented agriculture since 

you are in power. American states have taken this action as long as three and four years ago and have passed 

a similar act as your Vehicles Act had. But I want the minister to know, and even if the Chairman thinks this 

isn’t in relationship, 17 states today, 17 states are either in the process of or have in conjunction with this 

liquor ad, banned liquor advertising both on cable and on television. Now maybe the chairman thinks I’m not 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. Liquor advertising isn’t on this bill. It’s an act to amend the Vehicles Act. 
 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, the point I am making is: the act we have to deal with drunken driving is so 

closely related with the promotion of alcohol that it has to be in the same act. And there is one more 

amendment that this minister should have done, and steps that he should have taken, like has been done in 

this forerunners . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, the point I am making is: the act we have to deal with drunken 

driving is so closely related with the promotion of alcohol that it has to be in the same act. And there is one 

more amendment that this minister should have done, and steps that he should have taken, like has been done 

in his forerunners . . . (inaudible) . . . 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Chairman, I understood the hon. member was speaking to the Chair on a 

point of order, and I think that I understood the Chair to rule that the liquor advertising is not part of this 

particular legislation. I thought the Chair rules that some 15 or 20 minutes ago. I understood the Chairman 

raised the point again, and I understood the hon. member was speaking to the Chair. And if that was the case, 

I think he was using rather strong words. 

 

MR. LINGENFELTER: — On the point of order, I think that you, in fact, have been observing the 

conversation and the flow of questions and answers, and I’m sure if the member had been out of order that 

you would have ruled that way, and that you don’t really need other people instructing you how you should 

be ruling. And I would think that the member was well in order with the questions that he was asking – 

trying to find out the ministers’ opinion on a very important bill – and I don’t know why we would want to 

stifle that. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — The question before the Assembly is The Vehicles Act and it has nothing to do with 

liquor advertising . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It has not. And that’s the ruling I’ve made, and that’s what 

I’ll stick by. 

 

MR. ENGEL: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to challenge that, because the point I’m making is this bill is 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

731 

 

 copied. This bill is copied from an American bill, and the next step is to rule on advertising. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — The hon. member is challenging the Chair and making a pointed argument. I 

don’t believe that the procedure of the House allows for that type of argument. If the hon. member wants to 

challenge the Chair, then the hon. member can challenge the Chair. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — I’ll leave the Chair and report back to the Speaker. The ruling of the Chair has been 

challenged, so I will report back to the Speaker. 

 

CHAIRMAN’S RULING 

Challenge to Chair 

 

MR. MULLER: — Mr. Speaker, during consideration of Bill 23 I rules that certain remarks were not 

relevant to the consideration of the bill. My ruling was challenged. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Shall the ruling of the Chair be sustained? The Chair is sustained. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE (continued) 

 

Bill No. 23 – An Act to amend The Vehicles Act, 1983 

 

Clause 1 (continued) 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Mr. Minister, this bill was passed some time ago, yet it wasn’t proclaimed till December 

1. Was the reason for that delay, one, because the medical association had some concerns as to what their 

legal rights were and what protection they would have, or did they have other concerns relating to the same 

fact that same time of liquor promotion with the individual, or what was the concern about the delay? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, the individuals involved, the health care professionals of the 

province, just basically wanted an additional 30 days to work out the mechanics, the procedures, the 

paperwork, and everything else, before this section was proclaimed. 

 

MR. LUSNEY: — Well, Mr. Minister, didn’t you consult with the association prior to introducing the bill, 

and to passing it, and getting all of that paperwork and procedure approved before you went ahead with the 

bill? 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Yes, we did. We did consult with most of the health care professionals in the 

province, Mr. Chairman. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, before I move that the committee report the bill, I’d just like to 

thank my officials for coming in here tonight and helping all members of the Assembly to understand what 

we’re trying to do in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Chairman, with that I move that the committee does 

report the bill. 

 

The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 

Bill No. 18 – An Act to amend The Department of Revenue and Financial Services Act 

 

Clause 1 



 

December 12, 1983 
 

732 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. To my left, Allan Palmer, the chairman and executive 

director; and to my right, Mr. Ken Wilk, senior pension and benefits analyst. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I was puzzled by this bill because, like the last one, the ink is 

hardly dry on it, and we’re busy amending it. I’m not quite sure I could even find . . . The last one I couldn’t 

find in the statutes because it hadn’t been printed yet, it had been passed so recently. This one, I doubt 

whether I could find it in the statute either. So clearly, we’re busy patching up a job that the minister did last 

time, some minister. Once again, it’s musical chairs over there, and I don’t quite know who has 

responsibility last time. It is a tough, tough contest. But what I am asking, Mr. Minister, is basically: why do 

you want to change the administration of the superannuation and other employee benefit plans? What evils 

are you trying to correct with these amendments? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I guess what we’re doing today is something that should have 

been done a long time ago, that all the time that they were running this they were doing it illegally. And what 

we are, in fact, doing is formalizing what already exists, for example, the funding of insurance programs. 

There had been no authorization for many of the programs, and it is basically – I wouldn’t say basically, 

necessarily – I would say at the insistence of the provincial auditors that it be legalized and done properly. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, have you received legal opinion suggesting 

that the language of the last act you passed didn’t allow the government to do something that you intended to 

do? I’ll ask that question first. I’m asking whether or not you received a legal opinion indicating that the act 

you passed as 1983 (d) 22.02 didn’t allow you to do some things that you wanted to do. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, that’s correct, but so did the previous act. The fact is that 

we’ve never had the authority, and it’s never been a legal act, and we’re now correcting that situation. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So what you’re telling us is that you got some advice saying that the 1983 act 

which you passed needed to be changed. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — The same advice that you got in respect to the act that was there before the 

1983 act, and you didn’t act on it. We’re acting on it. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, we won’t pursue that. If the advice came to our government, it was on 

your desk when you passed this act, and you ignored it, and now you’ve decided that you’re going to act on 

the advice you ignored . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, whether we ignored it or not, I’m asking you 

whether you ignored it, and the answer is yes. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — The rules are different now. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — No, same rules, same rules. He ignored it, and he freely admits he ignored it. 

 

With respect to the auditor, did the auditor question something with respect to the administration of the 

plans, and if so, what did he question? There is something very odd because you’re making it retroactive – 

portions of it – and you’re not making it retroactive . . . If I read this right, portions of it are retroactive and 

the . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — You know about retroactivity. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Well, there are people here busy chatting away but I reckon they will  



 

December 12, 1983 

 

733 

 

not be on their feet chatting. 

 

Did the auditor suggest that something that was done was not legal and, therefore, suggested legislation 

which would be retroactive? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I am advised that we did not have the legal authority to fund 

the insurance programs, and this act, in fact, gives us that authority now, legally. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Minister, does any provision of the act have retroactive application? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the section 31.1(1), which is a new provision. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — To what date is it retroactive? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, it’s retroactive to the establishment of the agency of 1982. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — If the activities were illegal prior to that time, why wouldn’t the act be 

retroactive to the time of the first illegality? Why are you just choosing to make it retroactive to the time 

when the fund was set up in 1982? And isn’t it the facts that that’s the first time the illegality took place? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, prior to 1982 to the establishment of the act, the funding came from the 

appropriations act. The auditor felt that this was wrong, and the agency was established in 1982. He has 

indicated he’s not prepared to accept the appropriations and wants it retroactive to that date of the agency 

establishment. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Do we suspect it? The only illegality was the time you set up the agency and 

set it up wrong. And you’re making it retroactive to that date. That’s perfectly reasonable. Probably next year 

we’ll pass an act curing the ills of this one. But that, we have come to expect from the minister. 

 

I want to ask one other general question, Mr. Minister. And that general question is this, Mr. Minister: do 

you believe that anything in this act permits you to use pension funds paid in by employees to finance equity 

venture funds or any such investments out of pension funds of employees? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is no; the simple answer to the question is no. I 

want to go back to the previous statement made by the Leader of the Opposition where the appropriations 

referred to the appropriations act, where it was illegal. It was illegal then, as well. I pointed that out to you, 

and I don’t want you to leave the impression that that particular transaction was legal; it wasn’t. What we’ve 

indicated is that the Provincial Auditor has agreed to only go back to the new act and leave it at that, not to 

worry about what happened in the past, but to the establishment of the agency, which was 1982. So the 

illegality existed in both cases. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, I flatly don’t agree with the minister, and his views of what’s 

illegal don’t impress me very much . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not at all. 

 

Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I return to this matter of various pension funds for the use of investment 

capital sourcing. Have you been corresponding with your colleagues on the question of using pension funds, 

these pension funds that are set up in this fund that we are talking about, for investment capital sourcing? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised we are prevented from doing so by both the British 

Insurance Companies Act, and secondly, by the investment review board of the government. 



 

December 12, 1983 
 

734 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So are you then prepared to give employees whose funds you administer an 

assurance that you do not propose to use those funds to purchase equity investments recommended by the 

Government of Saskatchewan unless they are equity investments which are authorized according to the 

British . . . (inaudible) . . . etc., authorized for pension funds as the authorizations now exist? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, Mr. Chairman, the closest we’ll come is when we buy Saskatchewan 

bonds when they are deemed to be the best investment. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, let me be clear. I am raising no objection to 

the Government of Saskatchewan selling its bonds to the pension funds and doing whatever it wants with the 

bond proceeds – investing them in equities or the like – because then the risk is with the Government of 

Saskatchewan. But I am raising a question about what I think the minister knows: inquiries have been around 

about the use of the pension funds as a basis, as a source, of equity financing for private companies in 

Saskatchewan; and this is on the street. And the Minister of Finance will tell us if, that he has got a 

prominent investment house in Saskatchewan looking into that, and I don’t think it’s any secret. If it is, it’s 

an ill-kept secret. 

 

What I’m asking the minister is whether or not he is prepared to assure the people, the employees whose 

funds he administers, that he does not propose to invest those funds in equity investments, except equity 

investments which are now authorized for pension investment pursuant to the federal rules. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I would just repeat what I said earlier. We don’t have that 

choice. We are prevented from doing so by the British Insurance Companies Act. We’re prevented by the 

investment review board of the government. We’re also, in addition to that, prevented from the public 

employees superannuation plan board itself. So there are three checkoffs. And frankly, I’m a little concerned 

or a little surprised at your concern on this issue. As you know of, in many, many, many years over the past, 

that the employees’ pension fund in this province was never funded till recently, which was brought in by 

your government, admittedly. But there’s still hundreds of millions of dollars of unfunded liability in those 

plans. And to be concerned today, the concern should have been expressed some 25 years ago. We wouldn’t 

be faced with that situation now. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I don’t want to talk about history, except to make . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . well, except to make the simple fact that the Saskatchewan pension funds and workers’ compensation are 

better funded than in any Tory government in Canada. And if you can find one where that isn’t true, let me 

know. Just one – just one . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right. But I’ll come back to the bill, Mr. 

Chairman. 

 

I want to ask the minister why he wishes to give himself new powers. Roughly, the powers that he gave 

himself when he brought this bill in last time – six months ago, or whenever it was – were to administer the 

pension funds. Now he wants powers to not only administer them but to operate them, and I don’t understand 

that general distinction. He wants to bring in something else, which is to manage them, and he wants to bring 

in power to establish them. Now, what things are you contemplating which go beyond the term 

“administration” and are included in “manage,” “operate,” and, particularly, “establish”? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, it really provides just additional flexibility for the department 

to be able to act when necessary, for example, to encompass more of the plans that are in the province now. 

If we decided that we were going to bring some of the other plans in, or they agreed that we should have 

them under one umbrella, it would be that much simpler. It could be done with ministerial authority. 

 

As I said earlier, it is just that much more flexible. A prime example, I am just advised of, is the liquor board 

and the workmen’s compensation board plans which are being brought in. It makes  



 

December 12, 1983 

 

735 

 

it much simpler to have that ministerial authority. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Is the minister advising that it is proposing to roll the liquor board 

superannuation plan and the workers’ compensation board superannuation plan into a common fund? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, not at all. I think you misunderstood. Not separating the fund, they are . . . 

The funds are separate and they’ll remain so, the administration of them. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m rather surprised that that needs legislation, but I won’t quibble with it. I’ll 

come back to the question of what do you intend to establish. Why is the word “establish” throughout this 

bill? You can establish pension funds; you can establish benefit plans. What is it, as opposed to “manage” or 

“operate”? What do you intend to do under the authority you are seeking by way of establishing programs? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — You were the first one, a few minutes ago, to criticize redoing the plan or 

amending the act again this year. If we didn’t do that, every time we’d want to introduce something new into 

a plan we’d have to do the same thing we are doing now. So this will allow us that flexibility and that 

freedom. If we wanted to introduce a new plan – a health plan, or legal insurance, or other forms – it could 

be done without having to again amend the act. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I note that you obviously are intending, at 

least, to take power to establish some new benefits, otherwise you wouldn’t need it. Would you care to share 

with the House any plans you may have for establishing new pension or superannuation or other benefit 

plans? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, whenever we decide to do that, I’ll be happy to share the 

information with the hon. member. At this point in time, I have no intentions of sharing something that we 

aren’t doing as yet. It does – and I repeat again – it does give us that flexibility. If a crown corporation 

wanted to come in under that administration and establish one board, for example, under all the plans . . . 

There are many things that could happen and we’d like to move into improvements of the superannuation 

plans that we have, and perhaps – we think – this is the best way of doing it. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I now ask about how you intend to make public major decisions with respect 

to changes in the superannuation plans or changes in the employee benefit plans. I note that the agency can 

make them and there is no requirement that these be in regulations, or some other public document. I note 

that they are not with the consent of the Lieutenant Governor in Council, not with the consent of any 

minister’s orders, that would be published in the gazette, but with the consent of the treasury board and it’s 

rather difficult to get copies of the minutes of the treasury board. Although I suspect they’re public 

documents, we have never found it easy to get copies. I’m not pressing that point. 

 

What I am saying is, why are you saying that these changes, which may be of great interest to a great number 

of employees, will be done by the agency in dark of night, approved by the treasury board in dark of night, 

no regulations by the minister which might be in the gazette, no regulations by the Lieutenant Governor in 

Council which might be in the gazette, let alone any legislation? You have given yourself power to make 

major changes in pension plans and benefit plans affecting perhaps 20,000 employees, and there is no 

obligation to make your changes known. Why have you taken that course of action? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Are you suggesting that when you had government that you operated treasury 

board in the dark of night, and that you didn’t take those results over to cabinet? I’m surprised to hear you 

say that or even ask that question. If it goes to treasury board, it isn’t going to operate in the dark of night, 

number one; and number two, it has to go to the cabinet from treasury board. It automatically goes to cabinet. 

So I’m surprised that you would  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

736 

 

ask the question in the sense you did because you’re inferring to me that somehow you operated in that 

manner, but that’s not the way this government operates. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m delighted to hear the minister comment that way, because I assume that 

there’ll be no objections from the Minister of Finance if I ask him for copies of the treasury board minutes. 

But if the Minister of finance is going to assert that the treasury board minutes are confidential, as I suspect 

he will—as I suspect he will – then exactly what I said is true, that it will be dark of night that you and he 

together, that your agency and his board will get together; whether you take it to cabinet is up to yourself. 

We did; but even that is still dark of night so far as the 20,000 employees are concerned. I’d like the minister 

to advise us whether he is prepared, as a matter of routine, to share treasury board minutes and cabinet 

minutes with the 20,000 employees — and, of course, he’s going to say no. I am asking how the employees 

are to find out what their rights are. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I find this hard to believe – that you would even suggest that – because it 

suggests to me that that’s how you operated treasury board when you were government; and frankly, that is 

not the way that this government operates treasury board. Whenever treasury board decides on a program or 

whatever, it goes to cabinet. It goes to cabinet. Isn’t that what you did with the dental plan? Isn’t that, in fact, 

exactly what you did with dental plan, or did you decide that at treasury board and forget about cabinet? I 

don’t think so. It went to cabinet and that’s what we do. It goes to cabinet. Cabinet makes that decision. It 

can be decided at treasury board but it isn’t implemented until approved by cabinet. If you operated 

differently in your day, I don’t see it operating that way today. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I’m clearly not getting my point across. The question I ask you is this: do you 

have any mechanism in this act which requires you, and I underline the word “requires you,” to advise the 

employees with respect to any of the changes which you are entitled by this act to make in their 

superannuation plans, in their employee benefit plans? Is there anything that requires you to advise them? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, number one, Mr. Chairman, the employees are advised prior to any 

implementation through the boards. They have representation on every board of every plan and that’s when 

they first become aware of it, and furthermore, agree to it, prior to it going to treasury board or to cabinet. So 

they’re well informed and, frankly, that’s is not any different than it was under the old plan, or under the act. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I am not going to argue with you as to whether or not changes are discussed 

with a board dealing with the dental plan. I’m not at all clear on whether or not here is a board that deals 

with, let us say, the dental plan for out-of-scope employees. I’m not at all sure of that. And with respect to 

many of the employees, while it may provide them with a “a representative,” he tends to be a union 

representative, and for out-of-scope employees that is far from an effective line of communication. But what 

I am asking you this, and I will take a section here as an example. I look at section 5, which will change 

clause 31(1), and it says: 

 

Subject to the approval of Treasury Board, the agency: may consolidate into one fund any two or 

more funds established pursuant to this section. 

 

That’s a nice, simple thing. And you’re saying that that can be done – two funds can be rolled together. It has 

to be approved by treasury board; let’s concede that, by the act. The agency has to make the decision; let’s 

concede that. So the agency knows about it. The treasury board knows about it. Is there any legal 

requirement that anybody else knows anything about it – the employees or anybody else affected – and if so, 

where is it? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, going right back to his first comments. Unions, yes,  



 

December 12, 1983 

 

737 

 

they are represented. But, as well, and the Leader of the Opposition knows this, management is also 

represented, which takes care of out-of-scope employees. 

 

You’re absolutely right about the dental plan. It doesn’t have a board, but all pension plans do. All pension 

plans have a board. Yes, it goes to treasury board. Yes, it goes to the agency. Yes, you denied that. It also has 

to go to cabinet. It actually hasn’t changed. 

 

Now, one of the advantages that we’re talking about is to allow all of these small funds that find it too 

difficult to find good investments that we can act on their behalf and better administer and better invest for 

those numerous, small pension funds. This way it gives them quite an advantage in being able to use those 

services to provide better investment vehicles and advice. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Could the minister name two such pension funds? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Yes, I’ll name two as the Hon. Leader of the Opposition asks: the 

Saskatchewan Transportation and the Anti-TB League funds. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Take the Saskatchewan Anti-TB League fund. The question I asked the 

minister is: before this legislation is passed, is it not true that you would have to come to the legislature to 

roll in the anti-TB fund with any other fund? And after this act is passed, is it not true that you will be able to 

roll it in without the consent of the legislature, and without regulations, and without a minister’s order, but 

only with the consent of the agency and the treasury board? Now I’m speaking purely legally. Is it not true 

that before, you would have had to come to the legislature; now it is something that can be done by the 

agency and the treasury board alone? And I speak of the legal situation. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — They would have to be approved, Mr. Chairman, by, first of all, the individual 

plan, the board. For example, on the anti-TB league board, they would have to approve it. Then the public 

service superannuation board, as well as the treasury board, as well as cabinet. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, the minister says the anti-TB board would have to approve it. I 

deny that there’s any legal requirement for that. Would he point out the legal requirement? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, on the particular board you’re referring to, the authority there has been 

already delegated to the public service superannuation board. So that’s already happened. That’s already in 

the authority of the public service superannuation board. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — So the minister is, in effect, saying that what I say is right – that there is no 

legal requirement that anybody but the agency and the treasury board know anything about this. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that it would, in fact, take an act of the legislature 

to repeal their act before we could do it. It’s not in here, but it’s in theirs. So if we wanted to accomplish 

what you’re inferring or suggesting, the legislature then would have to pass an act to repeal their act. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I won’t belabour this, Mr. Chairman, except to say that I believe the act 

should contain a provision which says that the changes in the plans should be by minister’s order, or by 

regulations approved by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, or some other public document, so that 

employees could find out what their rights are. And I make that point, and I will not pursue it further. 

 

I want to deal with one other broad trend of this act. The act provides that, with the consent of the Lieutenant 

Governor in Council, the minister can enter into agreements respecting the  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

738 

 

administration of all of these funds. And we’re now talking about something which is going to be some 

hundreds of millions of dollars before long. And indeed, if you put power and telephones in there now, and 

the . . . I don’t know what the sum would be now, but teachers and public service – the matching benefits, 

whatever we call it—there’s a large sum of money, and rapidly growing. This act permits you to enter into an 

agreement to get, let’s say Pemberton Houston Willoughby, to administer the entire fund. Is that true? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, as has always been in the past, that has not changed. That issue, 

that concern you’re raising, has not changed. The individual boards have always had the authority to invest, 

or to delegate the investment responsibilities of each plan to whoever they wanted to. There’s no change in 

that at all from what it was when . . . in the history. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, as I’ve said before, I don’t think it’s 

worthwhile to get into the minister’s interpretations of what the past law was. And I’m asking you is . . . 

Incidentally, I don’t believe that the public service superannuation board could have farmed out the 

administration of that act to Pemberton Houston Willoughby. I don’t believe you for 30 seconds. But let’s 

leave it at that. Never mind what was true in the past; do you concede the fact that under the act which you 

have before us, the bill that you have before us, you could turn over the administration of this, what must be 

pushing a half billion dollars, perhaps a good deal more than that, to Pemberton Houston Willoughby? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, Mr. Chairman, that is incorrect. We cannot do that without the authority of 

each individual board. I want to point out to the Leader of the Opposition, as well, that another area where it 

hasn’t changed is that all of these investments are now handled, and always have been handled, by the 

investment and financial services branch, with the exception of the three insurance plans. So we cannot do 

that with this act any more than you could before, unless so authorized, or unless the individual boards agree, 

or wanted it done that way. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I would like to believe the minister. I read here that the Lieutenant Governor 

in Council may designate any superannuation plan to be operated by the agency, and then where the 

Lieutenant Governor has designated a plan: 

 

the minister may enter into an agreement (and this is without the consent of the Lieutenant Governor) 

or purchase a policy (and I like that one) relating to the provision of or administration of the benefits 

program and may pay any costs . . . 

 

It may well be that the minister is alleging that this deals only with benefits and not superannuation. I would 

like to know what stops anyone, once this is passed, from the minister entering into a contract to administer a 

benefits program. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I guess there’s several points here, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I want to 

point out to the Leader of the Opposition that this act does not override any of the acts already in existence 

by all of the agencies. All right? So they’re there, and this cannot override what is already established under 

those acts. The new money purchase plan specifically gives the board the power to delegate the investment 

through the Department of Finance. Okay? Okay. 

 

There are some examples where we have to deal with the private sector. And I think the Leader of the 

Opposition knows that full well, as well. For example, under group life, if we didn’t deal with a private 

company, all of the benefits to the beneficiary would be taxable. So there’s an instance where it has to be 

done that way. 

 

And also, under the dental and disability plan, again as was done by your government, and for the same 

reason as done by ours – it’s much cheaper to deal with a private company on those 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

739 

 

two plans. And that’s why you did it as well. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — One further question along this line, and then I will go back to section by 

section. With respect to your proposal to deal with private insurance companies and other private agencies 

with respect to employee benefit plans – and I am not raising an objection to that per se; I might raise an 

objection to individual contracts, but to the idea I’m not raising an objection to that per se – is it any part of 

your intention to enter into plans which force the employee to take his annuity from any contractor that you 

have selected? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, under the money purchase plan, Mr. Chairman, it’s their choice – stay 

with us, or they can go the private sector, it’s up to them, to the individual. Under the plans I referred to a 

minute ago, under the group life and the dental and disability, it’s our funds. When I say our funds, I’m 

referring to the Crown, and it’s dealt with on an administrative services only, for the private sector. The 

insurance company where we’re dealing with is actually making the payments from our funds. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Just to establish that one point before I close this line of questioning. With 

respect to annuity payments under the money-purchase superannuation plan, you do not see section 5 – well 

it’s really clause 31(8) on the bottom of page 2 and up on the top of page 3 – you don’t see that as giving you 

any authority to enter into any contract which would require the employee to take his annuity contract from 

any insurer who you might contract with. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No, it doesn’t. As I am advised, it doesn’t, again because this act does not 

override the other acts. So, as I indicated to the Leader of the Opposition earlier, this act provides the 

flexibility that we need, and it legalizes what hasn’t been legal in the past. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 

 

Bill No. 16 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act, 1980 

 

Clause 1 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce Mr. Larry Fogg, the vice-president of the 

AAIA, Mr. Bill Heidt, who is the treasurer of SGI, and Mr. Dan Kuss, who is the legislation advisor, 

corporate law department. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — We would seek some advice from you as to how you want to proceed. Do you 

want to deal with both bills at once, or do you want to deal with SGI, then go on to AAIA? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I’m afraid at this point, because we have go clause by clause, 

we’ll have to take each bill separately. So I don’t think we have much choice. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 



 

December 12, 1983 
 

740 

 

Clause 3 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — This bill . . . I cannot find my bill in here. But I do recall, Mr. Minister, this 

section or the next one relates to a change in the name of the chief executive officer. Am I wrong? From the 

general manager to president. No, I’m wrong. Sorry. Pass. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 4 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 

Bill No. 17 – An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, you indicated, in answering questions from my colleague from 

Regina Elphinstone, that you had replied to the mayor of Regina when he had written you expressing 

concern over the imminent departure or SGI – imminent destruction of SGI is a more apt phrase. 

 

Mr. Minister, do you have that letter and if so, would you share a copy of it with us? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I will indicate to the hon. member that if he was to check his 

mail, he’d find he has it. It was mailed on November 28, addressed to His Worship, Mayor Larry Schneider, 

carbon copy to the Premier, the Regina MLAs, and the city clerk. So, November 28. If you haven’t got it by 

now, there’s something wrong with the mail distribution in your office. Mr. Chairman, I would be happy to 

provide him with a copy of this letter, and I would ask the hon. member tomorrow to come back and 

apologize for having asked it since he has it in his office. We’re quite sure of that. And all members opposite 

have a copy of it. But I’d be happy to provide it. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, do you anticipate or have you given any consideration to having 

The Automobile Accident Insurance Act administered by any agency, line department, or crown corporation 

other than SGI? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — No. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, do you anticipate or have you given any consideration to altering 

the scope of the activities of SGI so that they do not provide the same insurance . . . (inaudible interjection) 

. . . Pardon me? Do you anticipate any change in the scope of activities of SGI in terms of the kinds of 

coverage they provide? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, so that I am technically right – and I’m not giving you this 

answer to be facetious but only to be absolutely right – we’re now talking about The Automobile Accident 

Insurance Act, not SGI. 

 

Now, if you’re talking about the act I’ll respond to that, but SGI has nothing to do with this, or the functions 

of it has nothing to do with this particular bill. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — But, Mr. Minister, the dismantling of SGI has everything to do with this bill, 

because this bill would be a necessary first step before you could dismantle SGI as it now is and still 

maintain The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. So I ask you, Mr. Minister: is there any  



 

December 12, 1983 

 

741 

 

intention to alter the scope of activities of SGI in terms of the risk it covers? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I am not going to indicate to the hon. member any 

changes that may happen within SGI over the years. There are changes happening – have happened already. 

We’re changing some of the things at SGI. 

 

For example, there’s been some changes in the salvage division. There’s been other minor changes. And the 

scope of the activities of SGI may, in fact, be adjusted from time to time. And if the question is leading up to 

the dismantling of SGI, of course, that’s another story. And I’ve already indicated to the hon. member and all 

the members opposite, it’s not the intention of the government to move in that direction at this time, or move 

in this direction, period. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I was having the greatest difficulty hearing what you were saying. 

In fairness, part of it was the House Leaders conferring on what was probably a legitimate discussion. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have your letter . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . that’s a rarity, Mr. Minister, in this House, 

most of the discussions are not particularly authorized. 

 

Mr. Minister, I have your letter, and quite frankly I find this less than convincing. I want to read your letter to 

you. I also want to say that I never got a copy of this. You may have sent . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I see 

that. But none arrived at my office that I saw. As I say, in Tory times the administration collapses to the 

extent that not even the mail system will work. No wonder SGI isn’t working. 

 

Mr. Minister, I find your letter less than convincing, and I suspect it was fairly carefully drafted. Let me read 

it back to you. I’m reading the last sentence of the first paragraph: 

 

In response to the alderman’s concern, let me assure you that SGI has no intention of withdrawing 

from the automobile insurance fund, nor reducing the number of head office staff. 

 

Mr. Minister, we have never suspected that. The Automobile Accident Insurance Act is going to be repealed. 

What we have suspected is that you will be getting out of the general insurance in other lines. And your letter 

. . . (inaudible) . . . Deny it indeed. Indeed, by a letter as carefully drafted as this one, my suspicions, Mr. 

Minister, are fuelled not allayed. I ask you again, Mr. Minister, what do you intend to do in lines of insurance 

other than the automobile insurance, which we never suggested you were getting out of? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, first of all, Mr. Chairman, I would like to respond to the member from 

Quill Lakes. He shouted across. I’d like him to know that he, as usual, easily gets lost. He is not in . . . this 

was sent to the Regina MLAs. Secondly . . . 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Order. I think the discussion has gone on so long that the minister can’t remember 

the question. If the member who asked the question could . . . 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Chairman, I can remember the question. 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — In that case, Mr. Minister, proceed to answer. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I can well remember, especially when 

they are the kinds of questions that were being asked. 

 

Secondly, I’d like to address the concern the member from Regina Centre has, but only learn how to read. 

First of all, it says “insurance field” not “fund.” And what this letter responded to was the question and the 

issue that was raised. Why should I talk about something else? They were  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

742 

 

talking about the automobile insurance field. That was the question. We’ve addressed that. When I reply to a 

letter, I like to address the contents of that letter. That’s what we did. We addressed the contents of the letter 

that was written, and the concerns by the city council. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I ask you to respond to the question raised, the issue raised at the 

Regina City Council . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, you didn’t. No you didn’t. The issue was whether or 

not you’re going to sell SGI. It has never been suspected that SGI will vacate the automobile insurance fund. 

The suspicion is that you’ll get rid of everything else and turn it over to a line insurance company. I ask you, 

Mr. Minister, to respond to that enquiry. What is the intention of SGI with respect to the general lines of 

insurance? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, I’m not surprised that the member from Regina Centre doesn’t know 

what he’s talking bout. First of all, he can’t find his mail and, secondly, I want to tell the hon. member that 

the issue that was raised or the question that was raised by city council – a member if city council – was 

whether or not SGI had any intention of withdrawing from the automobile insurance field. That’s what we 

addressed. That’s what we answered, the letter. Now, if you had a copy of the letter that was sent to me and a 

carbon copy to you with you tonight, and if you would have come prepared, you’d have it with you and you 

would have a copy that I sent which addressed the letter and the issue. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, your avoidance of the issue is fuelling our suspicions. The issue, 

Mr. Minister, is: are there any intentions by SGI to vacate the general lines of insurance and become little 

more than an administrator of the AAIA fund? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the simple answer is, it’s a market question. As I 

indicated, it’s a market question . . . 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — A market question? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Of course, it’s a market question. There might be some lines that are nothing 

but losers, that we would rather not sell. That may happen; that could very well happen. There may be some 

that we want to add to it. Okay? And I think we’ve already done that. So it’s a market question. 

 

As a matter of fact, as I indicated the other night to the opposition members, I’ll sell you an asset right now 

of SGI. It cost us $600,000. It’s the study you guys did on that life insurance. I’ll sell it to you – I’ll even 

charge you less than that for it. I’ll sell it to you at a bargain. So, those things can happen. But I think what 

the hon. member really wants me to answer is: are we going to sell SGI? The answer is no. Are we going to 

dismantle it? The answer is no. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Well, just in respect to your answer, Mr. Minister, it seems to me that the philosophical 

support that this party has been giving to SGI, and particularly in general insurance, obviously is very simple. 

If you want to increase the rates such that they are no longer competitive with the line companies, then of 

course you can indicate and achieve a very substantial loss. And all the information that I can gather is what 

you have been doing is elevating the rates for general insurance to such an extent that there is left no 

competition with the line insurance companies. Obviously, there are going to be a considerable amount of 

losses in many of the areas in the general insurance, and as a consequence, this will be your excuse in the end 

for wiping out many of the policies and coverages that we have at the present time being administered under 

the general insurance. And that’s exactly the direction that you are going. The people of Saskatchewan are 

aware of it. 

 

If you talk to the insurance agents, the information that you get is that the rates under SGI, under the general 

insurance, are not competitive with the line company rates, and as a consequence  



 

December 12, 1983 

 

743 

 

the sales will be substantially down and this will be your method of destroying the basis of the general 

insurance. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Some of the comments made by the member from Quill Lakes indicate what 

little he knows about the free market. First thing, if he is suggesting that the higher we raise our rates, 

eliminates the competition, it’s actually the opposite that will happen. We’ll add more competition. As a 

matter of fact, if the members opposite would do a little research before they ask questions, they probably 

wouldn’t bother asking the question because the exact opposite has happened this year: premiums written 

have increased over last year and over 1981. We are doing more business than what we were doing at that 

time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . yes, we have discontinued some. I’ll give you an example of a line that 

we have discontinued which was a real loser: the livestock mortality. But there are many, Mr. Chairman, that 

we’ve enhanced. I don’t hear the member opposite referring to them. So, think about what you are asking 

before you ask the question. You may not want to ask it after you’ve given it some thought because our 

business is, in fact, on the increase. We’ve written more premiums this year than in the past. 

 

MR. KOSKIE: — Can you indicate why you have adopted a policy, then, of not allowing SGI, for instance, 

to write direct policies, for example with the Sask Power? Previously, head office was, in fact, writing the 

policy directly for Sask Power. Now you have turned it over, excluded the right of SGI head office. In the 

specs you did, and Ducketts qualified for it, and Ducketts is owned by Reed and Stenhouse, a British 

company . . . So, what you have done is to transfer and to pass on over to your political friends a premium 

which was unnecessary to pay. That’s a known fact, that you changed the specs in order to allow Ducketts to 

get the policy in respect to Sask Power. What you are doing is transferring it over, passing it over to Reed 

and Stenhouse, the British company. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Again, Mr. Chairman, I wish the members would really do their homework 

and their research before asking questions. Nothing could be further from the truth. That’s absolutely false 

. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I am telling you it is. There is nothing stopping Sask Power or potash or Sask 

Tel or anyone else from buying a policy from SGI directly. There is nothing that stops them from doing that. 

But let me tell you that by giving them their choice, by allowing them their choice of market buying, they 

were able to save considerable sums of money. SGI will, at the request of any crown corporation, write the 

policy directly. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, our suspicion is that by the time you are finished with your 

ministrations, by running SGI into the ground, you will have justified selling everything but the automobile 

insurance and that, in fact, is all SGI will be, is the administrator of the AAIA fund. 

 

Mr. Minister, I ask you whether or not you have any present intentions. Have you entered into any 

discussions with anyone with respect to the sale of any of the general insurance lines? 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, you know, I’m surprised you’d even open that door. You are suggesting 

that I’m going to run SGI into the ground. That’s what I heard you say. And yet, and yet, and yet, I just 

finished indicating that we have written more premiums, dollar-wise, this year than we did before. We’re on 

the increase. That’s really running it into the ground. But you seem to forget . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 

Ned . . . or, Mr. Member, I’m sorry for calling you by your first name. I say to the hon. member, listen very 

carefully, because it was your administration that cost the taxpayers of this province $55 million of $56 

million in two years time. Your administration. That’s number one. Now that’s what I call running a 

corporation in to the ground. That’s what I call running it into the ground. 

 

It was also your administration, in two years time, that increased the rates by 55 per cent in the AAIA, and 

even with that you couldn’t make any money with it. It was also your administration that paid no attention to 

the management of that corporation. You authorized them, instead,  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

744 

 

to go venturing into all other areas that they had no business ticking their noses into, like the life insurance 

business. If you are concerned about running SGI into the ground, then why didn’t you speak up when your 

previous minister – your minister – and your previous government and your previous management . . . Why 

didn’t you speak up at the time, because that’s where it was going – into the ground? Had that been a private 

company . . . I want to tell you something. Had that been a private company, they’d have declared 

bankruptcy. They’d have been into receivership. So don’t ask silly questions without thinking about what 

you’re asking. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Just answer the question. 

 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — I did. That’s exactly what I did – I answered the question. And I tell you again. 

I’ve indicated to you before, in second reading; I’ve indicated to you in question period; we have no 

intentions of selling SGI. We have no intentions of selling the lines. We may get out of some, as I indicated 

we got out of the livestock mortality policy. It was costing money. We’ve adjusted other ways, in other areas, 

and we’ll continue to do that, because we’ll continue to operate it as a business, not as a political tool, as you 

did. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your frank and honest admission that you will get 

out of SGI piece by piece, as you are able to justify it. Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that admission. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 

Bill No. 22 – An Act to provide for the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain Documents 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Is the minister ready to proceed? The minister’s ready to proceed with the house 

amendment as well? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Chairman, no, we have no officials nor will any be required. We have 

agreement, as was indicated earlier today by the House Leader from the opposition. We have a house 

amendment which we will submit now on section 2 of the printed bill. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 as amended agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 21 – An Act to provide Financial Assistance to Encourage and Promote the Development and 

Expansion of the Agricultural Industry and to establish the Agricultural Credit Corporation of 

Saskatchewan 

 

HON. MR. HEPWORTH: — Mr. Speaker, I move that it be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a third time. 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

745 

 

Bill No. 5 – An Act to Provide for the Taxation of Minerals 
 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be read a third time and passed 

under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 6 – An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Mineral Taxation Act, 1983 
 

HON. MR. SCHOENHALS: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 23 – An Act to amend The Vehicles Act, 1983 

 

HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 18 – An Act to amend The Department of Revenue and Financial Services Act 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I move the amendments be now read a 

first and second time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 

title, with amendments, and by leave. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 16 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act, 1980 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 17 – An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 22 – An Act to provide for the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain Documents 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move that the amendment be read a first and second 

time. 

 

Motion agreed to. 



 

December 12, 1983 
 

746 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, with leave I move that the bill be now read a third time and passed 

under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time, on division. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 24 – An Act to repeal The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise on this occasion to present second reading for 

the repeal of The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. This bill hasn’t been distributed for 24 hours and leave would be 

required. Does the member have leave? Proceed. 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. In 1979, the government of the day, the members opposite, 

decided to introduce An Act respecting Labour Relations in the Construction Industry in Saskatchewan, and 

it is my understanding that it was their intention that this act should provide for a more structured, a more 

organized, and a more peaceful labour relations system in the construction industry. In proclaiming this act 

the government of the day made some major changes in the traditional labour relations system, which had 

relied extensively on the free enterprise and the free market forces of Saskatchewan to determine labour 

relations peace, and the establishment of collective agreements in our province. In the two subsequent rounds 

of collective bargaining which took place under the auspices of The Construction Industry Labour Relations 

Act, labour peace was not the hallmark of those collective bargaining engagements. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

things went from bad, in the 1980 round, to worse, in the 1982 round of collective bargaining. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government, shortly after we had been voted into office by the people of Saskatchewan, 

discovered in the summer of 1982 that the collective bargaining legacy in the construction industry was 

about to become the worst record of labour strife and conflict in all of Canada. In 1982 the people of 

Saskatchewan were left with 416,245 worker-days lost due to strikes or lockouts in all sectors. And of that 

figure, 359,000 worker-days was due directly to the conflict in the construction industry, a conflict, Mr. 

Speaker, of which I would remind the House that the legislation introduced in 1979 was supposed to avoid or 

reduce. 

 

In short, the promotion of labour peace, settled collective agreements, and work force stability were all lost 

as objects, and the act failed in the worst possible way. Over the past several months, we in the Department 

of Labour have held an extensive series of meetings with the individuals, the trade unions, the trade union 

organizations, employer groups, labour relations experts and others on the subject of labour relations of the 

construction industry. The overwhelming diagnosis, Mr. Speaker, is that the system put in place by the 

construction industry was not working as it should have been, and it had been given ample opportunity to 

apply the principles expressed in that legislation. 

 

In these extensive discussions to which I have earlier referred, it became abundantly clear that the people of 

Saskatchewan deserve something better, that the contractors and unionized workers of Saskatchewan deserve 

something better. It became clear, Mr. Speaker, that the artificial prohibitions and restrictions hindered 

successful collective agreement settlements, and were inappropriate, and could not remain. 

 

Support for the repeal of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, can be found in virtually every sector of the 

construction industry. I have found substantial support among contractors and among unions alike. It is 

because the people of Saskatchewan, the workers of Saskatchewan, and the contractors of Saskatchewan 

demand an opportunity to work in a stable labour relations climate  



 

December 12, 1983 

 

747 

 

that I am proposing the repeal of The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act, and that we return to the 

operation of The Trade Union Act which, although it may have faults, and although it may yet be improved, 

would leave the parties to the labour relations scene in the construction industry in our province more likely 

to succeed in their search for labour peace and fair collective agreements for all. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased with the support we have received from the Saskatchewan Construction Labour 

Relations Council and from the building trades in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have spoken to many, many investors, both in the province of Saskatchewan and from outside 

the province, who had a fear of construction unrest in the province in 1984. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to 

inform the members of this House that after the investors had received notices in regard to this government 

rescinding Bill 88, that the investors are confident that there will be construction stability in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and that the contractors and the trade unions will work harder now than ever before to come 

up with agreements that will, in fact, allow the construction industry in the province of Saskatchewan to 

prosper more now than they ever did before, and to provide the jobs that are so necessary today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am, therefore, more than pleased to move that this bill now be read a second time. 

 

SOME HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I predict, Mr. Minister, that what you are 

doing will work even less well than what you are repealing. I will say at the beginning, and I’ll say at the 

end, we will not be opposing the repeal of this legislation. I think the opportunity to have ever made this 

work has gone by the boards. I think now we’ve little option but to repeal it. But, Mr. Minister, that’s not to 

say it might not have worked. 

 

The difficulties which we faced before this legislation was in effect was that one trade would go no strike; 

other trades would honour the picket line. And strikes were caused when there was not, I think a general 

consensus among all the trade unions that a strike should be called. This, by introducing industry-wide 

bargaining, sought to replace that with a saner system, and frankly, it didn’t work badly as long as the 

Department of Labour provided some leadership. Where this broke down is when the Department of labour 

became the handmaiden of the construction industry, and began to work with the construction industry to 

drive as hard a bargain as was conceivably possible. When the Department of Labour began to work in close 

concert with the construction industry, that, Mr. Minister, is when this piece of legislation began to break 

down. It broke down, Mr. Minister. Not when we were in office, but when you were in office. But I think 

now it has broken down to the point where it is not likely to work, and we will not be opposing its repeal. 

 

But I say, Mr. Minister, you are treading into a difficult area, and you are going to have difficulties in the 

construction industry if the industry ever gets back on its feet. If we ever rid ourselves of this good, 

old-fashioned Tory prosperity that we’re suffering through right now, if the construction industry ever gets 

back to anything like a normal rate of activity, then, Mr. Minister, I think you will find that what you’re 

introducing will work even less well than what you have repealed. 

 

AN HON. MEMBER: — Doom and gloom. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, I’m not. No, I’m not doom and gloom. I don’t think that day will ever pass, 

because I don’t think we’re ever going to get rid of this (as I call it) good, old-fashioned Tory prosperity 

we’ve got now with 90 per cent of the membership of many trade unions unemployed – 90 per cent of their 

membership is unemployed. That’s what Tory prosperity means when you’re at the bottom of the heap, Mr. 

Minister. If that ever passes and we return to  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

748 

 

a more buoyant economy, Mr. Minister, I predict that you are going to have difficulties the like of which you 

haven’t imagined in the construction industry. However, that’s a prediction for another day, Mr. Minister. 

 

Partially through the lack of leadership of the Department of Labour, this legislation isn’t working and I 

think now the time is past when it ever will. 

 

Motion agreed to on the following recorded division, bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, 

referred to a committee of the whole later this day. 

 

YEAS – 48 

 

Devine Muller McLeod 

Andrew Taylor Rousseau 

Katzman McLaren Garner 

Smith (Swift Current) Baker Hepworth 

Schoenhals Duncan Currie 

Klein Dutchak Embury 

Dirks Maxwell Young 

Domotor Folk Muirhead 

Petersen Sveinson Smith (Moose Jaw South) 

Hopfner Myers Rybchuk 

Caswell Hampton Gerich 

Boutin Schmidt Tusa 

Meagher Glauser Zazelenchuk 

Weiman Sutor Morin 

Blakeney Engel Lingenfelter 

Koskie Shillington Yew 

 

NAYS – Nil 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 26 – An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, by way of a very quick explanation for the need for this amendment, 

as members will recall The Northern Municipalities Act, which we passed in the last session, was proclaimed 

on, believe, the 1st of October, just past. One of the provisions of that bill provided for the Northern 

Municipal council, which was a municipally elected council in the North that will now be replaced by 

provisions of The Northern Municipalities Act, to be phased out over a six-month period, I believe, as of the 

1st of April, 1983. Or ’84, I’m sorry. 

 

The necessity for this amendment is so that we won’t have to go through the major expense, which it is in the 

northern part of this province, for an election of northern municipal councillors. I might add, and point out to 

the House, that people on the northern council and that council has asked for this amendment so that they 

don’t go through the expense of that election, and, in fact, people could conceivably take office for a period 

of about a month and a half, and then it would be phased out. The Northern Municipal Council will no longer 

be in existence on the 1st of April. 

 

So, I move second reading of this amendment, Mr. Speaker. 

 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

749 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, in the session we had prior to the 

presentation regarding local government, regarding The Northern Municipalities Act which was introduced 

here in the last session and passed in the last session, you talked about economic self-sufficiency in your 

letter regarding municipal local government in northern Saskatchewan. I wonder what the amendment, that’s 

now before us . . . I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you may elaborate on what you meant exactly by economic 

self-sufficiency. 

 

At the present time we have tremendously important issues in northern Saskatchewan relating to economic 

development. I bring this up, because when you talk about local government in any region of this province or 

in this country, when you talk about local government, you talk about an economic base to sustain that local 

government – to sustain its responsibility, its functions, its administration, and its job in terms of local 

government development. When you talk about local government, you talk about self-sufficiency for local 

government, and you talk about an economic self-sufficiency plan, Mr. Minister. 

 

I wonder if, at this point in time, you may address that very important issue that is a constant, nagging issue 

in the minds of many local elected officials in northern Saskatchewan, what your intention is with respect to 

this proposal that you had last July of 1982. That is one issue, Mr. Minister. That is one issue. And just to 

substantiate the seriousness, Mr. Minister, we have in northern Saskatchewan, at this point in time, higher 

unemployment statistics. Just for an example, one community, namely La Ronge. In the past year, 

unemployment in that one community has increased by 43 per cent. And the majority of northern 

communities . . . 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The bill that’s before the House has nothing to do with employment or 

unemployment, and it’s a very narrow bill with very narrow guidelines, and I would ask the member to 

address the bill that’s before the House. 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you. My apologies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to address some of the related issues that are before us, Mr. Speaker, in my native tongue, with respect 

to the amendment before us. The amendment is an important one, and if I may be allowed the privilege and 

opportunity, I would continue on, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(Mr. Yew addressed the Assembly in his native language, Cree.) 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. The member is using the names of individuals in the Assembly, and I 

would ask him to refer to members by their positions or by their constituency. 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

(Mr. Yew continues in his native language, Cree.) 

 

Getting back to that amendment, Mr. Minister, getting back to that amendment, I’ll go back to my original 

question, Mr. Minister, and I’ll sit down. I’ve addressed the issue before us in my native tongue, and the 

most pressing question that is in front of the local government officials, the various communities and band 

councils we have in northern Saskatchewan is related to jobs and the economy. Jobs and the economy. We 

talked about building an economic base for many of these northern communities. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if 

at this point in time you maybe able to state what your position is, what your government is prepared to do, 

what alternative plans you have, if you, in fact, have a solution. To date you have not offered any solution in 

terms of your dismantling of DNS, of the realignment of DNS, of your mainstreaming northern 

Saskatchewan with the rest of this province. You have totally ignored the North. You have proven yourself 

to be irresponsible, and you have shown  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

750 

 

that your government is totally insensitive to the needs, to the crisis that we have in northern Saskatchewan. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, the member raises issues that are certainly far removed from the 

particular sections of this very simple and straightforward amendment to this particular bill. Certainly those 

issues which he raises are a subject for some debate there’s no question, at certain times, but they are 

certainly not under this bill at this time. And I have no intention of getting into that very long debate. But I 

would say, Mr. Speaker, that with that I would move second reading f Bill No. 26. 

 

Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, referred to a committee of the 

whole later this day. 

 

Bill No. 27 – An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be rather brief on this, perhaps a bit by way of history. I think 

about three years ago, through an all-party agreement of this Assembly, a formula was put in place by which 

increments to the members of the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council was established. The 

rationale behind that formula was that each year we would be into a process of increases, a formula not 

unlike most other provinces. That formula was tied to the cost of living. 

 

Last year, because of the particular increase in the cost of living, we brought in legislation that restricted 

MLAs’ salaries, I think, to six, six and a half per cent, something like that. We froze the increments to all 

other offices: the offices of the Premier, the offices of the members of Executive Council, the Leader of the 

Opposition, Mr. Speaker, the whips, other committees, etc. 

 

This year we are faced with the same type of conundrum, if you like, that if we are to simply leave the 

formula in place, the result would be that the members of the Legislative Assembly would receive a larger 

salary increase than would the members of most public sector unions that are dealing in the 5 per cent 

guideline range. This legislation, Mr. Speaker, is designed to delay that formula, once again, for the year 

1984, to put a 5 per cent guideline on it. After ’84, we would revert back to the formula. Hopefully, we can 

some day get back to that formula when a proper climate happens to find there. 

 

I suppose that in the six years that I have been in the Assembly we have invariably found ourselves in the 

same type of situation – I suppose always will – and that is that the members of the Legislative Assembly 

have to, in fact, vote themselves what their, in fact, pay raise is going to be. I believe this bill and the 5 per 

cent increase is reasonable. I’ve always maintained, Mr. Speaker, both from this side of the House, and from 

the other side of the House, that many people . . . Obviously you’re going to look at members of the 

Legislative Assembly and say they are probably paid too much money, that all politicians are paid too much 

money. 

 

And I suppose that is part of the burden that you carry when you’re into this particular business, and I don’t 

think many people go into politics for the money that you’re going to receive from it. We are always subject 

to that. I believe, and as I say I’ve always believed, quite frankly, that members of this Assembly and 

members of politics, quite frankly, across this country are not, in fact, paid too much. I know that doesn’t 

make one all that popular, and it’s a very difficult thing to sell out to the public, and perhaps with some 

justification, perhaps the way they look at this particular function. But it is the basis of our democratic 

system, Mr. Speaker. I believe a lot of people sacrifice a lot of other things, and I suggest that the salary 

increases for members of this Assembly, and this particular salary increase, is within the guidelines. I also 

believe that it is reasonable, and I would ask all members of this Assembly to support this bill on second 

motion. 

 

Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, referred to a committee of the 

whole later this day. 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

751 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 28 – An Act to amend The Police Act 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave of the Assembly to introduce first reading of 

An Act to amend The Police Act. Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of An Act to amend The Police Act, 

1983. 

 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the bill ordered to be read a second time later this day. 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 28 – An Act to amend The Police Act 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to move second reading of The Police Amendment Act, 1983. 

This bill arises as a consequence of the implementation of The Northern Municipalities Act. Prior to the 

proclamation of The Northern Municipalities Act, policing services were provided by the province in all of 

the northern Saskatchewan administration districts, except in the towns of La Ronge and Creighton. This was 

confirmed by the provisions of section 44 of The Police Act. However, now even towns under The Northern 

Municipalities Act are included within the northern Saskatchewan administration district, and section 44 of 

The Police Act is inconsistent. 

 

The proposed new section 44 will clarify that the government is responsible for providing policing services 

in the northern Saskatchewan administration district, except in towns with a population of 500 or more. 

Thus, if a municipality wishes to receive town status under The Northern Municipalities Act, it must be 

willing to accept responsibility for providing policing services. This proposed new section 44 will also 

clarify that towns which now provide their own policing services will continue to do so, but if the population 

of these towns falls below 500, policing services will, at that time, be provided by the government. 

 

So basically, Mr. Speaker, there really is no change provided in this from what was in place prior to the 

implementation of The Northern Municipalities Act. It relates to the towns of La Ronge and Creighton, for 

clarification of the opposition members, and all members of the House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with that I move second reading of an Act to amend The Police Act. 

 

MR. YEW: — Mr. Speaker, I just simply want to raise a concern I have with respect to the amendment 

before us. The amendment clearly states that the municipalities of Creighton and La Ronge will not fall 

under this act in terms of the provision for policing services by the province. And my concern with respect to 

that is the fact that over the course of the past year and a half or so, economic activity in those two major 

centres have declined tremendously – economic activity in relation to employment has declined drastically. 

Therefore, I say to the minister that those communities generally have an insufficient economic base for 

them to provide this type of a service. 

 

When you take into consideration the limited amount of revenue that they have as compared to what they had 

in former days, my conclusion is that, economically speaking, they’re not as well off. They’ve been touched 

by the recession. They’ve been affected. Therefore, I wonder if your government has taken into account that 

those communities will definitely need some encouragement from the province – some support from your 

government in terms of making those services available to them. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to make some very brief comments on this. I  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

752 

 

am troubled by this bill because of its impact on The Northern Municipalities Act, which we just passed 

earlier. The act, as I understood it, contemplated that communities like (and I’ll pick out two) Sandy Bay and 

La Loche might try to get town status at some time in the future, and they are now LCAs or local community 

authorities, unless we’ve changed that name, and that’s, in essence, the status they now have. 

 

What this bill says is that if they attain town status, they have to pay their own policing costs. Both of them 

would be over 500. Certainly, La Loche would. And I think we all know that policing costs in La Loche, for 

example, are no small item. This strikes me as being an almost impossible impediment to a place like La 

Loche ever becoming a town, unless we find sources of income for a town like La Loche which are not now 

visible. 

 

I think the effect of this is to say that places like La Loche will not achieve town status for a very long time 

to come, unless a new basis of financing those communities is found. And that goes for a goodly number of 

others. As I got through the list I could think of practically none, with the possible exception of Buffalo 

narrows, which would have any tax base which would permit it to even look at town status. I, of course, in 

my remarks, am excluding La Ronge and Creighton because they . . . While my colleague, the member for 

Cumberland, is questioning your applying this rule to La Ronge and Creighton, you have the argument that 

that rule has applied to La Ronge and Creighton in the past, and that argument has a fair amount of 

substance. 

 

What you are doing, I am suggestion, is deciding that a great number of other communities, the bulk of all of 

the other communities, will not be able to go up the ladder to town status unless new methods of financing 

are found. And I query, I query strongly, whether or not it would not have been wiser to keep the policing 

costs out until these communities could have got some more financial base, and could have at least aspired to 

town status without having to face what are going to be very heavy costs. I make that point. I’ve got a couple 

of other technical points which I’ll raise in committee. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, with reference first of all to the comments of the hon. member from 

Cumberland who raises the two particular towns, La Ronge and Creighton, I noted that the Leader of the 

Opposition recognized the argument that I will use, and that I have used in that case. That is, that both La 

Ronge and Creighton now provide their own police services and did prior to The Northern Municipalities 

Act. So if that’s the case, and really that was the very intention of this bill, to make sure that remains the 

case, and, in fact, in the case of those two communities, La Ronge and Creighton, for the hon. member’s 

edification, I believe, that, in fact, they are both recipients, now, of more money under the revenue-sharing 

formula provided for in The Northern Municipalities Act than they were as a community before. So they are 

not unhappy about this. 

 

With regard to the points raised by the Leader of the Opposition, they are good points. There is no question 

about that in terms of the communities such as La Loche, and I’m the first to recognize, and I think all of my 

colleagues will recognize, certainly the Attorney General, to whom this act would fall, recognizes that a 

community like La Loche, with a large population, certainly policing costs would be just cumbersome and a 

tremendous burden on a community like that if they were to aspire to be a northern town under The Northern 

Municipalities Act. 

 

I note that there are, as well, other communities in the southern part of Saskatchewan – I think of my own 

community that I come from, Meadow Lake; I believe Carlyle is another; I believe Kamsack is another – 

where there are special circumstances in terms of the formula for the provision of policing services. I don’t 

know what those provisions would be, but I would say to the hon. member, and I will undertake to place on 

the record, that when it came to whether or not La Loche should become a town, certainly policing services 

and the provisions of those services and the expense that would have to be considered by the community and 

by the elected people there would have to be a major consideration that we would look at as well in allowing 

that. And I would undertake to make sure that that would happen under the Attorney  



 

December 12, 1983 

 

753 

 

General’s department. 

 

Motion agreed to, bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, referred to a committee of the 

whole later this day. 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

 

Bill No. 24 – An Act to repeal The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, it’s my pleasure to introduce my staff, Mr. Peter Grady, deputy 

minister of labour, and Ron Hewitt, with the Department of Justice. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, when do you anticipate that this act will be proclaimed into law? 

What date is your target for having this act become effective? 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, it will be coming into force on the day of assent. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, have you received any representations from the construction 

industry or the trade unions with respect to the repeal of the provision – I think it’s section 17 – which 

prohibits subsidiary companies as the mechanism for avoiding certifications? Have you had any 

representations from either the trade unions or the construction industry? 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Member, we have had representations from both sides, 

actually, as far as section 17 is concerned. Unionized contractors had requested that we amend the act and 

remove section 17. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I only have a very few questions here, Mr. Minister. Have any owners of 

construction companies or any individual trade unions expressed any reservation about what you’re doing? I 

know that the council of trade unions is in support of what you’re doing, as is the construction association – I 

don’t know the formal name for it — Saskatchewan Construction Association. Have you had any expressions 

of concern from any individual trade unions or construction companies? 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, we have had about seven or eight months of discussion with 

both parties – the building trades and the unionized contractors – on the extension of the agreement, and the 

original request did come from the building trades themselves. And both sides have indicated that there’s 

parts of the act that they are not happy with, and it was our decision, of course, to repeal the total bill and 

look at . . . Their desire was to have a new act – that we would spend the next few years looking at doing just 

that. 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, I was going to ask you that. There is not now, of course, a contract 

in existence. I gather there is on the table a 066 offer from the trade unions and no acceptance of that offer. 

 

You indicated you see a need for some alternative to this, and not simply rely upon the ordinary provisions of 

The Trade Union Act. Within what time frame do you see that taking place? And I would like the minister to 

be a little more expansive in describing what you see happening over the next, well, couple of years, as you 

put it. 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Chairman, it may be that we will not bring in any new act. It may be that 

the parties will be happy with the situation as it now exists without the bill. And we won’t tie ourselves to 

any time frame of looking at it; that will be up to the two parties themselves. 



 

December 12, 1983 
 

754 

 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — Do you have in mind any sort of formal mechanism, any sort of formal advisory 

committee set up to review or study this? I think of . . . And the . . . (inaudible) . . . committee was on a 

different subject. But do you have in mind any sort of formal committee or structure to consider this 

problem? I think I say, Mr. Minister, that I admit that this didn’t work, although I think that it might have, 

with a little more leadership from the Department of Labour. But that’s behind us now; it is not working 

now. I am equally apprehensive, Mr. Minister, that the provisions of a Trade Union Act aren’t going to work, 

given the nature of this industry, and I wonder if you have anything in mind except waiting to see how bad 

the situation gets before you take some steps to find a better system. 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Well, Mr. Chairman, at this time maybe I have a little more faith in the two 

parties to carry out what they have been offering to do over the last few months. And without our help in this 

area over the last few months, we wouldn’t be sitting here today repealing bill 88 as far as the Department of 

Labour is concerned. 

 

The possibility of a committee could be set up, and we’ve discussed that already. But we have no intentions 

of doing that, unless here again, that the two sides requested, and that suggestion has been made, and we will 

certainly watch progress, and assist them if that’s their desire to form a committee. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 

Bill No. 26 – An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act 

 

Clause 1 

 

MR. CHAIRMAN: — Will the minister introduce his officials? 

 

HON. MR. McLAREN: — Mr. Speaker, I have no officials with me tonight. I am confident we will be able 

to answer the questions. 

 

MR. YEW: — I gathered as much that you mentioned that you wanted some continuity with the Northern 

Municipal Council in place until . . . provide for the Northern Municipal Council’s gradual phase-out from 

the former act to the present. I wonder, Mr. Minister, if this is the case with the Northern Municipal Council, 

have you or have you not received . . . I thought you mentioned that you have received their endorsement to 

this transition that you spoke about. I wonder if you may elaborate on that. 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, as the member may well know, in fact, there is one member 

for sure from the district at Camsell Portage – I’m sure the member knows Mr. Tokar, who was a member of 

the NMC, who no longer lives in the area, and, in fact, there would be a need for a by-election. The Northern 

Municipal Council doesn’t see the need to hold such a by-election when we’re, in fact, in a transitional or 

phase-out period for the Northern Municipal Council’s functions. That is the one case. 

 

In the second case, and what makes this much more a need, is that, under the normal circumstances, had the 

Northern Municipal Council carried on, there would be a need for an election in, I believe, February to have 

that election, and to have people take office in about that time for a period of about a month and one-half 

prior to the Northern Municipalities Council going out of existence, which would take place on April 1 . . . 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

755 

 

The provisions of The Northern Municipalities Act, as the member will recall, provide for the Northern 

Municipal Council to remain in effect for six months following proclamation of The Northern Municipalities 

Act which was October 1st. So that makes it April 1st that they would be going out of existence. And what 

the Northern Municipal Council has said to our people in the municipal services branch, there’s no need to 

go through the expensive process and go through the process of those elections when it’s in this phase-out 

period. And I concurred with that. 

 

MR. YEW: — Mr. Chairman, I have two more questions and I’ll let my colleague, the member for 

Elphinstone, raise a few of his concerns with regards to this bill. 

 

Mr. Minister, I wonder . . . have you had any presentations via the Northern Municipal Council from the 

unorganized hamlets in northern Saskatchewan? My understanding is that not all communities will attain a 

higher status of local government. Some will have to remain as unorganized hamlets or unorganized northern 

settlements. Therefore, their role will basically be a local advisory council. 

 

Have you received any submissions from a number of those communities via the Northern Municipal 

Council, as to what their aspirations are in terms of dealing with your government, with the municipal 

services branch in respect to programs that they have been traditionally involved in, like housing, the 

economic development branch via the local loans committees, local school board route, etc.? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, the small and unorganized hamlets that the member refers to 

will be – and this is one of the reasons for the six-month phase-out period of time so that they could get 

themselves used to the provisions of the act which provide for those small communities to become what 

would be called northern settlements. 

 

And those northern settlements will have an advisory type council as they now have under what the LAC’s, I 

guess they are in some cases. But they’re even smaller than that. I guess they’re even smaller than what we 

now know as LAC’s. So they will deal with the municipal advisory branch of the Department of Urban 

Affairs soon, but certainly the municipal advisory services branch of municipal affairs. And as the member 

knows, they’re very, very small communities and there’s no way that they could adopt village status or 

anything of that nature because they’re far too small. 

 

So, as far as your specific question about a specific submission from those communities through the 

Northern Municipal Council to me – not formally in that sort of route, but the northern municipal councillors 

have indicated to us that the communities are pleased with the situation as it will relate to them under The 

Northern Municipalities Act. 

 

MR. YEW: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the complete elimination on March 31st, 1984 of the Northern 

Municipal Council, how many communities do you see falling under the wing of the municipal services 

branch? How many communities? How many Local Advisory Councils, Mr. Minister? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — You know, Mr. Chairman, I’m not sure. I can’t give you an exact number. I really 

don’t know. I would say probably . . . I think it’s best that I don’t speculate about the number. I’m not 

exactly sure, because there is some question in some of those cases about some of them that would like to 

attain village status and so on, and there’s some question about their population. So I won’t speculate on that 

one. 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I’ve looked at this act and I just think of 

what we’ve done tonight. We did something on revenue and financial services act, 1983, and we did 

something on The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 1983, and then did a bit on the Vehicles Act, 

1983. And I wondered whether we could rephrase this to be the “correcting the latest batch of errors act,” 

mark one and mark two and mark three. Do you think  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

756 

 

we can get six months in before we start amending this one again? We didn’t with respect to the member for 

Regina South’s effort. And certainly we didn’t get six months in in The Vehicles Act. And this one was 

declared on, proclaimed on October 1, did you say? And we’re busy amending it on . . . Well, we’ve got two 

and a bit in there. 

 

I want to ask a serious question on 3, 4, 5, and 6. I have not checked those and I’ve not had our staff to check 

them. Can you give the House the assurance that 3, 4, 5, and 6 are housekeeping amendments and do not 

change the substance of the act? 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Yes, as for the member’s second, and serious, question, I will give the House that 

assurance. And as it relates to the act, I remember, Mr. Chairman, that member, the Leader of the 

Opposition, at the time that we were going through The Northern Municipalities Act, saying that it was a 

very complicated act: and it was. We both agreed on it at that time. So we make no apology for the fact that 

we have a very slight amendment here to an act that was very complicated when it was passed, and we think 

it’s serving northern Saskatchewan very well. 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 

Bill No. 27 – An Act to amend the Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

 

Clause 1 agreed to. 

 

Clause 2 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — I just want to add a very brief comment to what the minister said on second 

reading – that these are always difficult bits of legislation for us to deal with. But I want to confirm what he 

has said with respect to the payment of MLAs. I will not deal with the question of people who have 

additional duties, but with respect to MLAs, I do not think they are overpaid. And I think it’s important that 

we ensure that people who do not have other means of financial independence can stand for the legislature. 

Those of us who have had the responsibility of attempting to get people to stand for the legislature, searching 

out candidates, have known how many people who have family responsibilities have said that they would 

like to think of serving their province in this area, but they felt that the financial sacrifice which would attach 

thereto to their family was too great for them to consider it. 

 

They always indicated that they would consider it later and sometimes they did. But I think it’s not a good 

thing when you cannot talk to, let us say, a school teacher who was, while a reasonably paid person, was not 

one of the highest paid people in our community and urge him to run for the legislature and he says, “Under 

the circumstances I am unable to do it. It would mean a substantial cut in my income and I don’t think I can 

do that because of the impact on my family.” Accordingly, I have always felt that — I speak particularly of – 

private MLAs ought to be paid a reasonable remuneration so that they could offer for public service and so 

that parties could ask them and apply some pressure on them, if possible, to stand for public office. 

 

While it is particularly difficult for us, I think, because as the member for Kindersley, the Minister of 

Finance, has indicated, we’re dealing with our own pay. I think that we ought to keep that in mind and we 

ought not to assume that people who are private MLAs ought to assume an extra burden of financial 

restraint, since that is the way to close this legislature to all who do not have some way to augment their 

income via farming or ownership of a small business or the like. That would be an unfortunate development 

and one which in the long run would not be in the best interests of this province or any other province. 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

757 

 

Clause 2 agreed to. 

 

Clause 3 agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 

Bill No. 28 – An Act to Amend the Police Act 
 

Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 

 

The committee agreed to report the bill. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

Bill No. 24 – An Act to repeal The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — I move the said bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 26 – An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act 
 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 27 – An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said bill be now read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

Bill No. 28 – An Act to amend The Police Act 

 

HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move the said bill be now read a third time and passed under its 

title. 

 

Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 

 

ROYAL ASSENT TO BILLS 

At 10:56 p.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber, took his seat upon the throne, and 

gave Royal Assent to the following bills: 
 

Bill No. 1 – An Act to establish the Women’s Secretariat 

Bill No. 2 – An Act respecting the Department of Science and Technology 

Bill No. 3 – An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Department of Science and Technology Act 

Bill No. 4 – An Act to repeal The Science Council Act 

Bill No. 11 – An Act to amend the Statute Law 

Bill No. 12 – An Act to amend The Surrogate Court Act 

Bill No. 7 – An Act to repeal The Transportation Act 

Bill No. 8 – An Act to amend The Highways Act 

Bill No. 9 – An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from certain changes in  



 

December 12, 1983 
 

758 

 

the name and functions of the Department of Highways and Transportation 

Bill No. 10 – An Act respecting the Department of Highways and Transportation 

Bill No. 14 – An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Assessment Act 

Bill No. 15 – An Act to amend The Local Improvements Act 

Bill No. 13 – An Act respecting Planning and Development in Urban, Rural and Northern Municipalities 

Bill No. 20 – An Act to amend The Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Act 

Bill No. 5 – An Act to Provide for the Taxation of Minerals 

Bill No. 6 – An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of The Mineral 

Taxation Act, 1983 

Bill No. 16 – An Ac to amend The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act, 1980 

Bill No. 17 – An Act to amend The Automobile Accident Insurance Act 

Bill No. 18 – An Act to amend The Department of Revenue and Financial Services Act 

Bill No. 21 – An Act to provide Financial Assistance to Encourage and Promote the Development and 

Expansion of the Agricultural Industry and to establish the Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 

Bill No. 22 – An Act to provide for the Postponement of the Tabling of Certain Documents 

Bill No. 23 – An Act to amend The Vehicles Act, 1983 

Bill No. 24 – An Act to repeal The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act 

Bill No. 26 – An Act to amend The Northern Municipalities Act 

Bill No. 27 – An Act to amend The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Act 

Bill No. 28 – An Act to amend The Police Act 

 

His Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:00 p.m. 

 

MOTIONS 

 

House Adjournment 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Legislative Assembly I move, seconded by my 

seat-mate, the member from Meadow Lake, that: 

 

When this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and 

time set by Mr. Speaker upon request of the government, and Mr. Speaker shall give each member 

seven days clear notice, if possible, by registered mail, of such date and times. 

 

Motion agreed to. 

 

HON. MR. DEVINE: — Mr. Speaker, before moving an adjournment motion, I would like to take this 

opportunity to express our appreciation and thanks to all the staff of the Assembly for working in 1983, for 

their efficient and prompt help and service to all the members of the legislature. 

 

And I would like to take this opportunity to extend to members opposite and members on this side of the 

House and members of the media, a very Merry Christmas, and indeed, a prosperous 1984. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. BLAKENEY: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with the Premier in expressions of 

appreciation to the staff, and I know that the Clerk will convey these best wishes to the members who are not 

here – the pages and other who are not here. 

 

We have been well-served, as the Premier has suggested. We, I think with considerable magnanimity, 

include the press in our best wishes and I join with the Premier in extending to . . . I see the member for 



 

December 12, 1983 

 

759 

 

Kindersley is weighing that proposition. I join with the Premier in extending our best wishes to everybody 

for the Christmas season and on into 1984, which we hope will be a fine year for Saskatchewan. 

 

HON. MEMBERS: Hear, hear! 

 

HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now stand adjourned. 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — Before I put the motion on that question, I’d like to also extend Christmas greetings to 

all of you, and wish you all the best for the coming year. 

 

The Assembly adjourned at 11:03 p.m. 


