






















































Hansard: April 19, 1983


1163 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 19, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, 11 grade 7 and 8 students seated in the west gallery, from the Crane Valley 
School. They are accompanied here today by their teacher, Mr. Richard Strubele and bus driver, Terry 
Ray. I hope they find the proceedings through question period informative and perhaps educational. I 
will be meeting with them at 2:30 in the rotunda area for pictures and downstairs for drinks. I would like 
all members to join with me in welcoming them to the Assembly and wishing them a safe journey back 
home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you and to this Assembly, a 
group of students from Moose Jaw, Prince Arthur School, of 51 students, grade 1 to 3; and our teachers, 
Trena Templeton and Ruth Davis; and their chaperones, Leone Novak, Connie Shook and Linda 
Hoffman. I certainly hope they have an interesting stay in our Chambers today and wish them a good trip 
home. I ask the legislature to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

SGI Rate Increase 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My question is to the Minister of industry and 
commerce with respect to his decision to increase the deductible on July 1, 1983. Mr. Minister, I want to 
suggest to you that you’ve gone down for a third time on this issue. To the voice of the opposition has 
been added the vociferous complaints of the public, and the scathing criticism of the province’s 
commission which suggests that the whole fiasco is unnecessary. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: 
will you now reconsider your headstrong refusal and delay the implementation of the increase in the 
deductible until a decision on the legality of your action is received from the court of appeal? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, first of all let me say that those words come from the member 
who so strongly opposed the public utilities review commission concept for four years in a row, while I 
sat in the opposition of this Assembly. And I want to also say, Mr. Speaker, that it is a safeguard, 
certainly, for the citizens and the taxpayers of this province. They are pleased that the public utilities 
review commission is as effective as it is. To answer the hon. member’s question: no. At this point in 
time, the answer to his question is no. 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1164 

Mr. Shillington: — Well, perhaps Mr. Speaker, at this point in time the minister could tell us why his 
answer is no. 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve answered that question many times in this House, in 
this Assembly, and we were advised of this information this morning via the media. We received the 
notice of it just prior to my coming into question period this afternoon. We haven’t had time to review it, 
and to consider the position. Certainly that there are some options available but at this point, as I repeat 
again what I said earlier, that at this point I am not reconsidering it. However, anything can happen. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I’d remind the minister that the decision by the public 
utilities review commission was taken after receiving copious material from the SGI, and after studying 
it for some weeks. Are you suggesting that you do not accept the decision of the public utilities review 
commission that the revenue increase on July 1 is unnecessary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — I’m not sure what the question was, but I’ll attempt to answer what I 
understood it to be. We are still of the opinion that we need the increase, if that was your question. And 
the only thing that can happen, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the delay in increasing the minimal amount 
that we were asking for is that ultimately we’ll have to be asking for a lot more. So if that was the gist of 
your question, then that’s my answer to it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I know the minister has some difficulty with these matters, so I’ll try and 
rephrase it in a simpler fashion. You refuse to accept the decision of the public utilities review 
commission that additional revenue on July 1st is necessary to the corporation. The minister’s having 
trouble hearing me because of the advice he’s getting from the Attorney-General. Let me try it again. 
You refuse to accept the decision of the public utilities review commission that a revenue increase on 
July 1st is necessary. How is the public utilities review commission and the public to interpret that as 
other than an expression of lack of confidence in the commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Well, the public utilities review commission have made a decision. If we 
accepted the decision as being the ultimate answer we wouldn’t have made the application for the 
increase in the first place. If we accepted that the commission is right in not allowing any increase in the 
application, then it would follow that we would not have submitted an application to begin with. So I’m 
not going to contradict our own application, if that’s what you’re suggesting. All I’m saying is that the 
SGI application to the public utilities review commission was, in our opinion, necessary and needed to 
maintain a break-even, as I’ve indicated before. Now that we don’t have that then the potential for losses 
exists. That being the case, and the deficit position that your government created over the period of time 
that you were attempting to run that organization is going to have to be addressed sooner or later. And 
whether that’s now or next year, all it means: that if we’re going to recover the deficit that your people, 
or your organization, or your government created in the first place, then the increase that we’ll need will 
be even greater than what it is today. So I don’t know why the member would ask me to contradict the 
application that we made. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, you indicated on Thursday you felt the 
appeal to the court of appeal by the public utilities review commission was something that in some 
indirect way the opposition should accept responsibility for. Is today’s refusal to accept their decision an 
extension of that  



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1165 

expression of a lack of confidence in their impartiality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — No, I think the hon. member asking the question is having difficulty with his 
own questions. We have all - I’ve indicated that earlier today - the confidence, and we believe in the 
concept of the public utilities review commission. We introduced it. We brought that act into this 
legislature, and introduced it to this Assembly, and you, when you were government, opposed it when I 
introduced it. I was the member who introduced it for three years in a row, sitting on the opposite side. 
And you opposed it then, and when we brought it in this year, you opposed it again. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So you started all this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — So, yes, that’s right. That’s right, I did. If you’ll remember going back three 
years, four years, I was the member who introduced it in this Assembly. I’m still very pleased about that. 
I’m still very pleased that this government followed through on our commitment because we lived up to 
the promises that we made, the commitments that we made to the people of Saskatchewan. So we 
haven’t changed our position. We may not want to accept some decisions, but that’s fair ball game, I 
would have to think. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary. Mr. Minister, why not salvage the integrity of the public utilities 
review commission and save the taxpayers a good deal of money and yourself a seemingly endless 
amount of embarrassment and accept the amendment which we have proposed to the act, which would 
make it clear that the public utilities review commission has jurisdiction over the deductible, something 
we all intended initially? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, I am not in the least bit embarrassed by the decision made by the 
public utilities review commission. The public utilities review commission (and I would say it again) 
was introduced, passed in this legislature for a reason. That reason has been demonstrated today, or 
yesterday, whenever it was. And Mr. Speaker, we will assess the situation in due course. The court of 
appeal will make a ruling that we think will rule hopefully in our favour, that the deductible (and this is 
what the court of appeal is deciding on), that the deductible is in fact not a rate but part of the package, 
and part of the product that we are offering to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to direct a question to the minister in charge of SGI. 
Mr. Minister, you clearly indicated to the House and to the public that you were making an application 
for an increase of 6.7 per cent. Now that the public utility review commission has, in fact, not allowed an 
interim increase, your general manager has indicated, at the hearing April the 5th, Black also said if the 
commission didn’t grant an interim increase, the company may seek an average increase of more than 
6.7 per cent at the full hearing scheduled in June. What I am asking you, is not the application that you 
submitted one which you were asking for the needed increase, or were you dependent at that time, that in 
fact you were expecting interim? Why the necessity now of changing this mission and asking for a 
further increase if, in fact, you were not depending upon an interim increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in the first place, I haven’t suggested that, that we are going 
to ask for a . . . change the application of the amount of the increase. However, again I want to remind 
the members opposite, and you, Mr. Speaker, that our application for a 6.7 per cent increase was 
basically for a break-even position, dating April 1 to the end of this year. We delayed the implementation 
of, first of all the $500  



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1166 

deductible, and secondly now, we refused the 6.7. And if that is to say, Mr. Speaker, that in due course, 
as a result of not receiving these revenues to assist us in a break-even position under the act, that we will 
have to, in time, ask for much more. And that’s all that we’re saying. Whether or not, we make that 
decision to change application for June, or withdraw it all together, those are options. Those are options 
that we’ll be reviewing and discussing with management, and no decision has been made, and if they are 
made, it will be made in due course. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Supplemental, Mr. Speaker. I would like to ask the minister then, from your answer, are 
we to take it that we cannot depend on your announcement as to the percentage increase of rates, that in 
fact you have asked for? Because in fact, you’re indicating unless you got exactly April the 1st 
implementation, which I don’t think you could possibly assume, that you had no right to go out and 
announce to the public that it was going to be a 6.7, when now, on your own admission, you’re 
indicating that you have to increase it. Are you not, in fact, deceiving the public in your whole 
announcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member is really reaching, at this point in time. Again, 
mathematically it makes sense that, if we don’t get what we ask for to achieve a break-even, that sooner 
or later we’re going to have to ask for more. 
 
They also forget something else I said in this Assembly recently, and that is that the 6.7 - as I recall, I 
can’t remember the exact phrase that I used - but the 6.7, if we were denied that increase and weren’t 
able to implement that, that we had another option, as well. Not another option but another alternative, 
and that would be to try and attempt to operate even more effectively than we have been doing, and 
perhaps allowing making up for some of those deficiencies. But, Mr. Speaker, we have certainly reduced 
the cost of operation and the expenses in that corporation and it can mean a number of things, it can 
mean a number of options or alternatives that we may have to look at in due course. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I direct a question to the minister in charge of SGI, and I refer to 
the fact that the public utilities review commission has not approved the rate increase, that the minister 
indicates that there will be a loss of revenue, and the minister indicates that he is considering options to 
deal with that. Would he advise whether one of the options is to increase the deductible still further from 
$500 to a higher figure, which he constantly asserts he can do without the approval of the public utilities 
review commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, no, that is not an option. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Does the minister say that that would be within 
the power of the government: to increase the deductible beyond $500 without the approval of the public 
utilities review commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, that question is very speculative, and I don’t think it deserves an 
answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister in charge of SGI. Would the 
minister give the public a firm commitment that the SGI will not be attempting to raise the deductible 
about the $500 figure in the next 12 months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, I answered that question - to the first question  



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1167 

he asked. Yes, I will. We won’t. That is not an option. We will not increase it beyond the $500, and 
that’s what you asked the first time, and I answered it. 
 

Employment of Bruce Flamont 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a question for the minister in charge of the crown 
investments corporation. Does the crown investments corporation have a Mr. Bruce Flamont under 
contract as a consultant? If they do, what are the terms of his contract and what are the duties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, no, we do not have him under contract. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Did you have a Mr. Bruce Flamont under contract? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we did. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A supplementary question, Mr. Speaker. Was he, in fact, 
terminated then because he was spending his time on public pay-roll helping to organize an alternative 
Metis alliance - an alternative Metis organization, the National Metis Alliance of Saskatchewan - rather 
than working on affirmative action programs in the crown corporation sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — No. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Could the minister then - supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Could the minister then specify to 
this Legislative Assembly what the duties of Mr. Flamont were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, I’d be happy to answer those questions in crown corporations 
review committee. 
 

Water Development Programs for Farmers 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Premier. As a result of your water review 
committee that travelled around Saskatchewan, have you changed your position as to the kind of help 
you provide farmers, or assistance they’ll get, or looking after their water development programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we received a great deal of advice from the public in 
Saskatchewan as a result of those hearings. Part of the advice was the concept of a new water public 
utility to a large extent to help finance public projects, community projects, with respect to water . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
You want to know if you’re eligible? Well, for individual farmers, we’d have to look at this specific 
project. I mean we’ve received an awful lot of very positive advice on the kinds of things we could do 
with water. I believe that we’ve identified $2.5 billion to $3 billion worth of water projects which don’t 
include irrigation, so beyond that you could look at perhaps several hundred million more dollars that 
will be spent privately, and so forth, with respect to irrigation projects for individuals. So to that extent, 
we will look at each individual situation, and his farm, and see what can be done with respect to water 
supply and irrigation. 
 
Drainage was another problem. Sewer was another one. So there will be several facets in terms of 
information that was accumulated as a result of the hearings. 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1168 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a new question. I have before me a clipping from the Leader-Post 
from yesterday and 16 jobs were eliminated in the family farm improvement branch. Included in the job 
cuts are six water technician positions. Is this why you laid off 16 people at the family farm 
improvement branch, because the request came in for more water assistance and no need for farmers 
having water? A well driller was in to see me and said that cutting family farm improvement branch 
meant that each well was going to cost him about $160 more because he’s got to buy his supplies from a 
retail outlet rather than from family farm improvement branch. So I can see that. But my question is: is 
that why you cut the technicians positions, six technicians? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I believe as a result of that most of the positions have been 
repositioned into other departments. There’s a possibility that seven may not be, from the information 
that I‘ve been provided. The kinds of programs and projects that the public in Saskatchewan, rural and 
urban, would like to have are now so much more than was provided under the previous programs. So 
they’re very happy to hear about a new crown corporation. There’s the public utility, plus 8 per cent and 
12 per cent money in terms of the offers that we’ve provided, plus the renewed interest with respect to 
irrigation, as well as water supplies and drainage and so forth. So there will be so much more that will be 
done because there’s so much more that we can be as a result of water hearings and a utility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — In fact this is the first time that there has been province-wide hearings in the 
province of Saskatchewan about water. This is the first time that we’ve had, that we’ve designed a public 
crown corporation to deal with water - for all aspects of water in the province of Saskatchewan. Well, 
what we’re looking at is a complete expansion in terms of economic development and the kinds of funds 
into water development that this province has needed for 30 years. 
 
Mr. Engel: — One supplementary, Mr. Speaker. The Premier didn’t seem to understand the question. 
There are farmers that need wells. They need technical assistance. These six or seven people that you 
suggested - there were six laid off and one was a vacancy, so there are seven involved - that were the 
technical staff that provided assistance to farmers obtaining groundwater supplies. And you say that the 
hearings to provide a Diefenbaker water line is something that’s going to help those farmers that need 
individual wells. Those technicians provided individual assistance. Where are these farmers supposed to 
go for assistance? Who do they go to now, if they want to know, ‘Can I drill a well on my farm? Is the 
water 2,000 feet or 1,000 feet or 200 feet?’ Where do we get that technical assistance? They got it from 
family farm improvement branch. You laid them off. Where are they supposed to go under your 
administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — If you would like some information about water on your farm or an individual . . . 
(inaudible) . . . farm, two things have happened recently. One, there’s a single department now, a single 
department, that will be looking at water, all aspects of water. The legislation will be brought forward, 
and that’s where they can deal with it. Second, there’s the construction of a water utility to also deal with 
water projects. 
 
And there’s an awful lot of people around rural Saskatchewan who have supported both those concepts: 
a separate department for water, that your administration should have had years ago; and second, a 
public utility to deal with water, to help finance it. 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1169 

Those two issues now, those two concepts, are going to be introduced into the province of Saskatchewan 
for the first time, with the blessing of thousands and thousands of farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a question to the Premier. In light of his statement that the 16 people 
who are going to be losing their jobs in the family farm improvement area, can you explain why you 
would dismiss them at this point in time when you just made the statement that you’re going to be hiring 
people in another area, a crown corporation, or another department? Why wouldn’t you wait until that 
was established and move the individuals? Why do you choose to fire 16 people who will now have to 
go out and look for jobs, added to the 139 that we questioned the Minister of Highways on? Why would 
you fire them rather than transfer them to the new department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can’t deal with specific individuals. I’ve said that in this 
House many times in department after department after department. There’s something like 29,000 
employees. The minister can deal with those specifically when he’s here. All I can say conceptually is 
that we have taken two concepts that the public in Saskatchewan have wanted: one, a new department of 
water, so we can deal with it all in one place; and, second, a public utility in water. And those are very 
popular. So any time the member for Shaunavon or the member from Assiniboia-Gravelbourg would 
like some information for water, there’ll be two brand-new institutions to deal it. I think they’ll find 
them very acceptable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the minister who we are to inform our 
farmer friends, many of them who have been calling me in the last few days, who they should go to in 
search of information on deep-water wells in south-west Saskatchewan, which they are now in the 
process of beginning the drilling program. Who do they go to today before you get around to bringing in 
the legislation which we have been calling for for the past two weeks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I will get the name and the address of the local ag rep in your area, 
and if you want some information, I’m sure that the ag rep will be more than glad to provide it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Use of Government Symbols in Constituency Newsletter 
 
Hon. Mr. Currie: — Mr. Speaker, regarding notice of question. Yesterday during question period the 
Premier took notice of question from the Hon. Leader of the Opposition. This question related to a 
legislative report that was distributed in the Wascana constituency, and in view of the fact that I am the 
MLA for that particular constituency, I wish to respond at this time. 
 
I would say that I was certainly in error - I was certainly wrong for not ensuring that the finished product 
met the required standards. I regret sincerely that this occurred and I apologize to the members opposite. 
I apologize to the members of this House, and I assure them, in addition, that I shall take every measure 
and be most careful and 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1170 

vigilant to ensure that this doesn’t happen in the future. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I said in the House last Wednesday that I 
would review a situation that was of particular concern to me, and that was the staff positions and the 
deletions at the Valley View Centre. This review has been completed and I am satisfied that the staff 
deletions at this centre are consistent with the government’s desire to protect those services to the 
residents there. The position deletions will proceed as planned. Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, staff in my 
department are making every effort to assist those people whose positions have been deleted to exercise 
their rights under their collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to comment on the ministerial statement whereby she says 
that she has reviewed the situation and found that the dismissal of six or seven people at Valley View 
Centre are in order. I well imagine that she would agree with it when the letters of dismissal were sent 
out by her deputy minister, and for the record I would just like to read part of one: 
 

I regret to inform you that your permanent position as a speech therapist will be abolished 
effective May 31st. 

 
And it’s signed by the deputy minister. I think that, given that, it’s a little difficult for the minister to say 
that she was not aware. I find it dismaying that she would express shock and dismay that her department 
would do something like this, in one ministerial statement, and then take an opportunity to rise in the 
House, and say that in fact it was an order. Well, I can assure you that it was an order because she gave 
the directions that had happened. But I’m also concerned about the fact that as of April 5th, . . . 
(inaudible) . . . one day after this individual received his dismissal notice as well as the other individuals, 
a circular was sent out by the Department of Social Services dated April 5th. ‘The applications will be 
received in accordance with article 902 of the CUPE agreement for the following positions: community 
therapists . . .’ And it lists four positions, one of them including Valley View, and I find it shocking that 
people would be dismissed out of hand, and the day after the minister sends a circular around hiring 
people who may easily fit into that position if they had been given an opportunity. 
 
I find this kind of action by the minister to be completely disgusting, where you’re using people, 
throwing them out of work, and then going around and rehiring people who better fit the mould that you 
would see them fit into. And Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to those employees who are being fired out 
of hand, that it is not an appropriate way for them to be treated after many years of service - especially 
Mr. Maharaj, who has had an illustrious career, both in Canada and Saskatchewan as well as throughout 
the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

RULING BY MR. SPEAKER 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Members will note that resolution no. 24, standing in the name of the  



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1171 

member for the Quill Lakes, proposes to discuss matters which have already been debated during the 
current session, and includes references to subjects substantially the same as those contained in the 
amendments to the budget motion which was disposed of on April 8th. Therefore, I must rule the 
proposed motion out of order on the grounds of anticipation. I refer all hon. members to Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Rules and Forms, Fifth Edition, paragraph 340, page 119; and Sir Erskine May’s 
Parliamentary Practice, 19th edition, page 371; and to a ruling of this Chair of March 20, 1979, 
Journals of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 1979, page 75. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (NOT DEBATABLE) 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, motions for return (not debatable), 1 through 16, with the 
exceptions of item 5 and item 9, I move: 
 

That they be made debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Exceptions were no. 5 and no. 9? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — With the exceptions, Mr. Speaker, of item 5 and item no. 9. I will speak to them 
later. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Items 1 to 4 debate. Items 6 to 8 debate. Items 10 to 16 debate. 
 

Return No. 95 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 95 showing: 
 

(1) The name of each person whose services were retained after May 1, 1982 under a written 
contract under which such person was paid or entitled to be paid an amount of $1,000 per month 
or more by or with the crown investments corporation; (2) the date on which each written 
contract was entered into; (3) the amount, terms and conditions of remuneration for each 
contract; (4) the experience and qualifications of each person retained under contract; (5) the 
duties of each person retained under contract; (6) a copy of each written contract. 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I would ask that this matter be referred to the legislative committee on crown 
corporations. It calls for a personal employment contracts for CIC. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I’m advised by the Clerk that the only choices we have at this stage are either they go 
to debate or they’re agreed to, and the recommendation that you made is not possible at this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Number two, Mr. Speaker, debate. 
 

Return No. 99 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney moved that an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 99 showing: 
 

(1) The total dollar amount paid by the Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan during 
the period May 8, 1982 to April 12, 1983 to  



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1172 

commercial airlines for airfares. (2) The name of each individual for whom airfare has been paid 
and the amount for each individual. 

 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Debate. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 16 
 

Desecration or Burning of the American Flag 
 
Mr. Rybchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak today of a very unfortunate and shameful event that took 
place in Winnipeg outside the Consulate General of the United States of America, on March 23, 1983. 
The national flag of our neighbour, our most reliable friend, the United States of America, was burned - 
burned by fanatics whose thoughts and feelings are poisoned by the hatred and blind commitment to 
ideologies so detrimental to our supreme national interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the national flag is the sacred symbol of any nation - a symbol of pride, dignity, and 
history. We have only to look to the establishment of our own Canadian flag. Everyone here will well 
remember the many months of input by all Canadians before our present flag was accepted. Now that we 
have our flag, I assure you that I would feel greatly offended, as I’m sure all Canadians would be 
offended, should some other nation burn our flag in the manner that it was done in Manitoba. No one 
should be allowed to desecrate such a treasure of the spirit of a nation. 
 
And yet, several representatives of the Manitoba government dared to participate in such a profane act. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, two Manitoba New Democratic Party cabinet ministers, and six other members of the 
Manitoba NDP government caucus, attended the anti-American demonstration. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it only appropriate that at this time I read to you the names of those NDP MLAs and cabinet 
ministers who participated in this sad day in Manitoba’s history. 
 
They are: the Deputy Premier and Minister of Tourism and Economic Development, Muriel Smith, 
MLA for Osborne; the Minister of Natural Resources, A.H. Mackling, MLA for St. James; and other 
members of the NDP government caucus, namely: Phil Eyler, MLA for River East; Harry M. Harapiuk, 
MLA for The Pas; Elijah Harper, MLA for Rupertsland; Andy Anstett, MLA for Springfield; Don Scott, 
MLA for Inkster; and Gerard Lecuyer, MLA for Radisson. 
 
Surely members on the other side of this House are deeply ashamed of their fellow-member NDPs in 
Manitoba - ashamed of the party in which they belong. Perhaps that is why they have been so noticeably 
quiet about this shameful act their cohorts participated in. I would hang my head too, if I was you. 
 
The action of the New Democratic Party will not be taken lightly by the people throughout this nation. 
The anti-American activities of the New Democratic Party ministers and caucus have seriously damaged 
the goodwill which has traditionally existed between the people of Manitoba and Canada and the people 
of the United States and have caused embarrassment to the people of this country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the United States government is not too pleased with this incident. It has formally 
protested the attendance of the two Manitoba cabinet ministers at the flag-burning demonstration. In a 
note to the federal External Affairs department the  



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1173 

U.S. government said it wanted to protest strongly the participation of ministers of the Government of 
Manitoba in this event. And U.S. officials said they would appreciate assurances that such official 
support of hostile demonstrations will not be repeated. 
 
Two members of the North Dakota Senate have also denounced the burning of the American flag. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the comments of the American officials directed toward the Manitoba government 
are fully justified. And it is also my belief that Manitoba Premier Howard Pawley should have 
apologized immediately for the actions of his government members. But he has refused to do so. 
 
Premier Howard Pawley admits two Manitoba cabinet ministers showed bad judgement when they 
attended a demonstration outside the U.S. Consulate in Winnipeg where a U.S. flag was burned. But the 
Premier said that he does not expect the Attorney-General’s department to do anything out of the 
ordinary to investigate the matter. ‘If there is no offence then that would be the end of the matter,’ Mr. 
Pawley said. ‘I do not want to add fuel to the fire.’ 
 
He passed the issue to Attorney-General Roland Penner the day he received a copy of the protest note 
sent by Washington to the Canadian External Affairs department. I cannot believe, Mr. Speaker, the 
arrogance of the Premier of Manitoba. It doesn’t take much to admit you made a mistake, but it does 
take real courage to apologize after admitting a mistake. Obviously, the NDP in Manitoba lack the 
courage of their convictions. I would be ashamed to be affiliated with such a questionable group. 
 
He will not apologize on behalf of Manitoba to the U.S. Consulate General and to the government and 
people of the United States for the unprecedented, unfriendly and insulting actions by members of the 
Executive Council and the NDP government caucus of Manitoba. Premier Pawley refuses to apologize 
because he says he cannot be held responsible for the individual actions of his minister. And not 
surprisingly, Manitoba Attorney-General Roland Penner, a former member of the Communist Party, I 
must add, stated that burning a flag is not an offence, and Premier Pawley added that if there is no 
offence then that would be the end of the matter. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Is he a communist? 
 
Mr. Rybchuk: — That’s what he was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the Canadian parliamentary system cabinet ministers speak for the government and 
represent the people of the jurisdiction they serve. They cannot divorce themselves in their public 
activities from that representative responsibility. Foreign policy is the responsibility of the federal 
government and surely the members of the Pawley government, regardless of their dislike for the present 
American administration, should not have aided a demonstration which resulted in a most serious insult 
to our best friend and ally. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, the NDP provided no action, not one word of regret. It is a shameful act on 
the part of the Manitoba government. Trying to save face for the province, Mr. Speaker, the Progressive 
Conservative opposition in Manitoba took steps to show the United States of America that not all 
Manitobans and Canadians stood for the unheard-of actions that occurred on March 23rd. They 
introduced the following motion in the Manitoba legislature, and it reads: 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1174 

Whereas on Wednesday, March 23, 1983 the Deputy Premier and Minister of Tourism and 
Economic Development, Muriel Smith, MLA for Osborne; the Minister of Natural Resources, 
A.H. Mackling, MLA for St. James (and it goes on to list the other six government caucus 
members) . . . participated in an anti-American demonstration in front of the United States 
Consulate in Winnipeg, staged in support of the Marxist Government of Nicaragua and 
ostensibly to protest alleged United States military involvement in Nicaragua; 
 
And whereas the flag of the United States of American was burned during the course of this 
demonstration; 
 
And whereas the Premier of Manitoba and the NDP cabinet and caucus clearly sanctioned the 
participation of its members in the demonstration; 
 
And whereas under the Canadian parliamentary system, cabinet ministers speak for the 
government and represent the people of the jurisdiction they serve, and cannot divorce 
themselves in their public activities from their representative responsibilities; 
 
And whereas the Premier of Manitoba has refused to tender an apology on behalf of the 
Government of Manitoba to the United States Consul-General and to the government and people 
of the United States of America for these unprecedented, unfriendly and insulting actions by 
members of the Executive Council and New Democratic Party government caucus of Manitoba 
who freely associated themselves with such anti-American activities; 
 
And whereas the aforesaid anti-American activities by the New Democratic Party ministers and 
caucus have seriously damaged the goodwill which has traditionally existed between the people 
of Manitoba and Canada and the people of the United States of America and have caused 
embarrassment to the people of Manitoba; 
 
Therefore be it resolved that, because of the refusal of the Government of Manitoba to apologize, 
the legislature of Manitoba hereby tenders to the government and people of the United States of 
America its apology and regret for the irresponsible, inexcusable and insulting anti-American 
activities by members of the New Democratic Party cabinet and caucus; 
 
And be it further resolved that, while recognizing that such activities do not represent the 
thinking and beliefs of the people in Manitoba, this legislature reaffirms the friendship and 
mutual respect which exist between the people of Manitoba and the people of the United States 
of America. 

 
At the same time the following news release was used by the PC opposition: 
 

The legislature of Manitoba will be asked to issue an apology to the government and people of 
the United States, because of the NDP cabinet and caucus participation in a demonstration last 
week at the United States Consulate in Winnipeg, in which an American flag was burned. Hon. 
Sterling Lyon, Leader of the Opposition, has filed notice of a resolution he will move, 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1175 

asking the legislature to apologize, because of the refusal of Premier Howard Pawley to do so. 
The resolution noted that the participation by the ministers caused embarrassment to the people 
of Manitoba, and does not reflect the thinking and beliefs of the legislature and people of 
Manitoba. 
 
In the debate which has taken place since the demonstration on March 23rd, Mr. Lyon has asked 
for the replacement of Natural Resources Minister, Al Mackling, as head of a Manitoba 
delegation going to Washington to oppose the Garrison diversion. He has also repeatedly asked 
the Premier to apologize for the participation of cabinet and caucus members in the 
anti-American demonstration. Both requests have been refused by the Premier . . . However, the 
people of Manitoba know the NDP are wrong. 

 
Mr. Speaker, several of my constituents have discussed the flag-burning incident with me, and all of 
them have voiced their dismay and condemnation of such barbaric behaviour, so detestable and alien to 
the true Canadian mentality. My ancestors originally came from a country that has a government that 
practises policies that are against their beliefs. That particular government has initiated many policies 
that are very much opposed to by my ancestors, myself and, for that matter, by many Canadians. 
However, I am sure that none of us would involve ourself in such a low act as burning the country’s flag 
to show our disapproval of their actions. Certainly we have matured to a level where we can use a more 
diplomatic way of showing a government of a country we disapprove of their particular policies. 
 
I know that we still have radicals in our midst and because this is a democratic country they will be able 
to participate in such irresponsible acts. But certainly, government members who represent a parliament 
system should rise above that level taken by the demonstrators in Manitoba. 
 
I’ll be looking forward to the comments from the NDP members opposite. 
 
I am certain that the overwhelming majority of citizens in this province would want to convey their 
deepest regret to the people of the United States. The people of the United States have always been 
warm and congenial to their Canadian visitors. You have only to meet them at campgrounds, or 
restaurants, motels, hotels, and they are excellent hosts. During the big game hunting season some years 
ago, when the Americans could purchase hunting licences more freely here, I had the privilege of 
meeting many American citizens. Whether it was on a hunting trail in the bush or socially at the end of 
the day, they were always friendly and cordial. It was truly a pleasure to be associated with them. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, Canadians and Americans have enjoyed warm relationships. Let us hope that the 
irresponsible and inexcusable anti-American activities by members of the Manitoba NDP cabinet and 
caucus have not destroyed such a relationship. Let us hope that we can reaffirm the friendship and 
mutual respect that exists between the people of Canada and the people of the United States of America. 
And with this in mind, I would like to believe that all members of this Assembly, with no exception, will 
support the following motion: 
 

That in the opinion of this Assembly, differences of opinion between Canadian citizens or 
governments and citizens or governments of the United States should be settled by discussion 
and negotiation, and this Assembly rejects as insulting to the people of the United States, and 
unrepresentative 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1176 

of the feelings of Canadians, the desecration or burning of the American flag and condemns the 
actions of those who acquiesce or participate in such provocations against a neighbour. 

 
I move, seconded by Cal Glauser, Saskatoon Mayfair. 
 
Mr. Glauser: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with my colleague from Regina Victoria. 
However, it is most regrettable that we would have reason today to be discussing a provocative act 
performed by citizens of this country against a neighbour. As a neighbour, it is certainly better to be a 
Canadian than a Pole, for we have great advantage from the giant next door. 
 
In the 1980s, we are in a critical phase of our relationship with the United States. An illusion that spurs 
us is that there is a solution, some understanding that would end all the conflict, settle disputes by rule of 
law, or perhaps do away with the laws altogether. The first principle to accept is that crisis is normal, and 
more often than not, therefore, no crisis. 
 
We should be better equipped psychically and institutionally to cope with flaring rows, and at the same 
time to detect long-range factors which threaten the basic equilibrium we have slowly established on this 
continent over two or three centuries. Mr. Speaker, perhaps a better understanding of our past would 
equip us to cope with the relationship which is centuries old and likely to last indefinitely. Mr. Speaker, 
historical recollection of times and past when after accumulation of festering grievances and awareness 
reached the highest levels of consequences, of breakdown, there would follow the appointment of a joint 
commission, a conference, or an exchange with a president, a round of settlements and a fresh start. 
 
It was shortly after war broke out in 1939 that we became closely associated with the United States in 
matters of supply and defence production. Mr. Speaker, another close association was to follow. The 
United States had not yet become involved in what was to become a world conflict, and young 
Americans came to this country and joined the Royal Canadian Air Force. Mr. Speaker, it is 41 years ago 
this month that I was training on an airfield outside this city, the city of Regina. We were a class of 20, 
and, Mr. Speaker, seven of those were Americans - American citizens. Mr. Speaker, every class of 
aircrew trainees contained many young Americans until the United States became involved following the 
attack on Pearl Harbour on December 7th, 1942. 
 
Upon graduation, Mr. Speaker, some of them remained in Canada and became instructors in the 
Commonwealth Air Training Program. Others went overseas to join Canadian squadrons in England and 
elsewhere. Many served with distinction and very many did not survive the ordeal. Mr. Speaker, they 
were Americans who served with Canadians under the Canadian banner, which they did not burn. 
Becoming allies during and after the Second World War added an element of solidarity to a relationship 
which for centuries was . . . (inaudible) . . . cordial. 
 
Our defence production sharing arrangements lapsed quickly at the end of the war. When there was no 
common cause, our natural state was revealed as competitive. As a nation, we had matured; we had 
come of age and had come to the realization that if we could work with our friendly neighbour in time of 
war what reason would change in times of peace. The American presence was a fact of life. 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1177 

This presence is not only felt by Canadians but also by many other continents and countries of the world. 
And it continued, Mr. Speaker, following World War II and the Marshall Plan that played a significant 
role in assisting with the rebuilding of Europe and other states. No one took any provocative action 
against the United States in those days and least of all Canada, who was the greatest beneficiary, as 
funds from the Marshall Plan provided the ready exchange to pay for goods which came from Canada. 
That action had a critical effect in turning the Canadian economy around. Radicals were not standing 
around protesting. There were men and women who upon returning from overseas were in attendance at 
universities or engaged in the work-force. They did not have the time or indeed the inclination to stand 
around and burn a friendly neighbour’s flag - a friendly neighbour, Mr. Speaker, who has always stated 
that an act of aggression against Canada would be considered an act of aggression against themselves 
and would be repelled. 
 
Yes, American presence is a fact of life. It has long been Canada’s best trading partner, and in 1978 
provided 70.6 per cent of Canada’s imports at more than $35 billion, and bought 70.4 per cent of 
Canada’s exports valued at more than $37 billion. 
 
During 1979 the United States directly invested $50 billion, and this represented three-quarters of all 
foreign direct investment in Canada and one-quarter of all United States direct investment abroad. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the same year, our principal export partners were: the United States at 65 per cent; Japan, 6 
per cent; United Kingdom, 4 per cent. Our principal import partners were: United States, 70 per cent; 
Japan, 3 per cent; United Kingdom, 3 per cent; Venezuela, 2 per cent. Mr. Speaker, with trade of that 
magnitude, it is only fitting that we condemn the actions of those who would be party to a provocative 
action against a neighbour. 
 
That is not all, Mr. Speaker. Let us examine the figures for 1981 - a year when world economies have 
suffered a dramatic downturn. Our exports to the U.S.A. were 69 per cent for $60 billion, and imports 
were 69 per cent or $58 billion. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, there were the neighbourhood quarrels of 1982. Hard economic times and 
conflicting political views in 1982 created what some critics called the worst climate of the century 
between Canada and the United States. Canadian politicians blamed high interest rate policies of the 
Reagan administration for even higher Canadian interest rates, but no flag-burning. Business men on 
both sides of the border went bankrupt by the thousands. Canada was criticized for overly generous 
social policies. Canada has protested the United States cut-back in environmental protection budgets. 
Acid rain in both countries caused Canadians to lobby United States legislators to take action. 
Americans become angry over Canada’s foreign investment review agency. It has been said that our 
law-makers are acting like little kids on the block who see a bully and really can’t cope with the bully. 
So they stand on the corner of the street, and throw stones at him, then run. They don’t have any form of 
maturity to deal with the bully to convince him that things really shouldn’t be done that way. Mr. 
Speaker, I submit that is akin to flag-burning. Canadians lashed out at the United States for influencing 
other nations from co-operating with Soviet plans to build a natural gas pipeline from Siberia to Western 
Europe. I wonder if those same Canadians had ever considered burning a Soviet flag. There are aspects 
of the American government’s attitude towards Central America which many have found disquieting. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I must inform the hon. member that his time has elapsed. 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1178 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I want to say that as legislators, time is one of the most important 
previous commodities. Time to study legislation; time to review the government’s spending plans in 
detail; time to fully debate important issues of the day on behalf of the people of this province. Today, 
more than ever before, there is, I think, a long list of issues which the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s a very narrow motion that we’re discussing. I’d ask the hon. member 
to discuss the items that are in context of the motion. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to indicate, Mr. Speaker, that I will be moving an amendment at the conclusion 
of my remarks. And I want to say that before us we have a resolution - a resolution that does not in fact 
deal with the day-to-day issues facing this province. It is a resolution which goes to an incident over in 
the province of Manitoba; a resolution based on a . . . based, in fact, on an incident on the evening of 
Wednesday, March 23rd where about 250 people gathered outside the United States Consulate in 
downtown Winnipeg. 
 
And I want to say in respect to this, this resolution which the individuals on the member’s side say that 
rule 16, that which provides the opportunity of this Assembly to debate very important issues, I want to 
say that what they have placed before this Assembly is not a resolution of major concern, but rather a 
resolution which indeed, is a smoke-screen to keep the attention off of this government opposite. 
 
I want to put in context the situation in which in fact led to the bringing about of the resolution. On the 
evening, as I said, Wednesday, March 23rd, about 250 people gathered outside the United States 
Consulate in downtown Winnipeg. They gathered to protest the Reagan’s administration policy in 
respect to the Central American country, Nicaragua. There have been scores of news media reports both 
from inside and outside of Nicaragua that the Reagan administration is supplying arms and other 
assistance to the right-wing guerrillas who are waging a war against the left-of-centre government of that 
Central American country. And that has been a source of concern, Mr. Speaker. That has been a source 
of concern, not just for a few people in the world-wide peace movement, not just for the left-of-centre 
politicians and their supporters, but for many, many others as well, Mr. Speaker. And for the information 
of the Conservative back-benchers, no fewer than six congressional committees in Washington, D.C., 
are currently holding hearings on this aspect of the American foreign policy. 
 
They’re concerned because last December the United States Congress passed a law, the law which 
prohibited the Reagan administration from taking any action, and I quote: 
 

for the purpose of overthrowing the government of Nicaragua or provoking a military exchange 
between Nicaragua and Honduras. 

 
So there is concern about the Reagan’s administration actions in Nicaragua and it is widespread concern, 
concern that goes all the way to the United States Congress. It was against that backdrop that 
demonstrators gathered in Winnipeg on March the 23rd, and they marched and they spoke out against 
the actions of the United States. Eight out of the 250 or so people who took part were NDP members of 
the Manitoba legislature. Two of those eight members were cabinet ministers. They, like all people 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1179 

there, were exercising their fundamental democratic right of freedom of speech and freedom of 
assembly. And after the demonstration had broken up and most of the people had left, an unidentified 
individual burned an American flag. None of the eight NDP members of the Manitoba legislature who 
were at the demonstration knew that this was going to happen, in advance. None of them took part in the 
flag-burning incident and I challenge any member to bring forth the facts. All of them dissociated 
themselves from the actions of the unidentified individual. 
 
So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Sterling Lyon and his ultra right-wing disciples here in 
Saskatchewan are basing their entire attack upon falsehood. Because one unidentified person on the 
periphery of public demonstration burns an American flag, everyone they say, is guilty of having burned 
an American flag. And that’s the ridiculous position which you have to buy if you are to believe the 
members opposite. If you are going to buy the argument put forward by the Conservatives members are 
putting forward today, it’s guilt by association. I haven’t heard that doctrine put forward, Mr. Speaker, 
since the early 1950s under Senator Joseph McCarthy. 
 
The Conservative members should be careful trying to brand all NDP members in Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan with guilt-by-association doctrine. They should be very careful, Mr. Speaker, because I 
want to say if they’re going to in fact condemn all NDP members by guilt by association, then let me 
refer the members to some instances which in fact I think, will enlighten their thinking. 
 
I want to say there used to be a Conservative member in the Manitoba legislature by the name of Bob 
Wilson. I say he used to be, because my information indicates that Mr. Bob Wilson is presently serving 
time in jail, serving time for drug trafficking. I want to say, because they sat with him, because the 
Conservative members sat with him in the same caucus does that make Mr. Sterling Lyon and the 
Conservative members of the Manitoba legislature . . . Are they to be all identified as dope pushers? Of 
course not. That’s a ridiculous proposition. But no more ridiculous than what the Conservative 
back-benchers are trying to peddle today. And let’s bring that point closer to home. 
 
I want to give another example. Last December, the Conservative member of the Saskatchewan 
legislature from Canora made certain statements which were indicated to be racist statements about 
native people and recent immigrants to Canada. Today I want to say, Mr. Speaker, today he still sits as a 
member of the Conservative government’s caucus in this legislature. Does that make the Conservative 
Government of Saskatchewan a racist government? Mr. Speaker, the government members say no. They 
point out that the Premier dissociated himself and his government from the racist doctrine spouted last 
December by the member for Canora. 
 
Well, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of Manitoba, the Premier 
of Manitoba has dissociated himself and his government from the burning of the American flag, which 
took place on March the 23rd demonstration. 
 
I want to say, you are telling this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan that your Premier acted 
properly last December by simply making a public statement dissociating himself from a clearly 
regrettable act of the member from Canora, even though the perpetrator was a member of his own 
caucus, and still sits as a member of that caucus. How then can you suggest that the Premier of Manitoba 
has not acted properly? How can anyone say that the Premier of Manitoba has not acted properly? He 
has publicly dissociated himself and his government from an incident which happened  



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1180 

on the periphery of a public demonstration, even though the perpetrator was not a member of the 
government, but an unidentified individual. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I trust that this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan will see this debate 
for what it really is: a clear sign that the Conservative government back-benchers are out of touch with 
reality, that they are setting up a smoke-screen to detract from their actions here as a government. They 
have no solutions for our unemployment problem; they have no . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House today, also to debate this motion that 
has been put forward by the member for Regina Victoria. And I find it quite demoralizing that the 
member of the Conservative Party would take the important time of this legislature to debate an issue 
that has taken place over in Manitoba. And I want to first make it very clear, Mr. Speaker, that I totally 
deplore anyone who burns a flag, but for the member from Regina Victoria . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — But for the member from Regina Victoria to get up in this legislature and indicate to 
this House, and to the people of Saskatchewan, that somehow six NDP back-benchers and two cabinet 
ministers, NDP cabinet ministers from Manitoba, had anything to do with the flag-burning in Manitoba, 
I think totally shows their irresponsibility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When one takes a look at the facts surround the demonstrations that took place in Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker, and the burning of that flag, you will see that, yes, the six members, back-benchers, and the two 
cabinet ministers did take part in the demonstrations in front of the United States Consulate. But, when 
the flag was burnt, Mr. Speaker, they were not there. 
 
As a matter of fact, that demonstration had broken up, the individual that burnt the flag was a masked 
person, did it on his own. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that no way are the eight members of the New 
Democratic Party . . . No way did they have anything to do with it; no way did they know that this was 
going to take place. They were out exercising their rights as Canadians. 
 
And I think that it’s a disgrace that the Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, and a back-bencher, would 
get up in this House and take precious time that we need in Saskatchewan to discuss important issues - 
important issues that concern the people of Saskatchewan, such as all the lay-offs that we’re getting in 
this province, the high unemployment, the large numbers of individuals who are on welfare. 
 
This is what we should be discussing in this situation, Mr. Speaker, today, not discussing something that 
has taken place in Manitoba by a masked individual, that nobody knows who done it. But they are 
accusing . . . They are accusing by this motion; they are accusing the New Democratic Party of being 
involved in the burning of the flag. 
 
I’m sure that the 1,200 employees that were laid off at Ipsco (Interprovincial Steel and Pipe Corporation) 
would sooner see us as legislators in here discussing they lay-offs 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1181 

and how we can get them back to work. I’m sure they would appreciate that a lot more, Mr. Speaker, 
than they would seeing all the legislators in Saskatchewan in here debating the burning of a flag by a 
masked individual. 
 
I’m sure that the citizens in northern Saskatchewan would like to see their legislators in here, Mr. 
Speaker, debating the serious problem that we have in northern Saskatchewan, and new statistics that 
just came out today indicating all towns are 85 per cent unemployment. They’re not concerned; I’m sure 
they’re not concerned, Mr. Speaker, about a masked individual who burned a flag. I know they deplore 
it; I deplore it; all of us deplore that. But let’s not point fingers, Mr. Speaker. That masked individual 
could be anyone. 
 
But, let me say, to bring this type of a motion into this legislature when we have the serious problems 
that we’re facing in this province today I think is a disgrace, and it’s something that should not take 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I take my seat, I will not be supporting this motion, and I would like at this time to 
move an amendment to the main motion: 
 

That the motion be amended by striking all words after the word ‘Assembly’ in the first line, and 
adding thereto: Canada and the United States have had a long, warm friendship as trading 
nations, and further, that in order to maintain this friendship it is the view of this Assembly that 
there must be frank and open discussion and debate of all issues which concern the people and 
their governments in both Canada and the United States. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by my colleague from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Hopfner: — Mr. Speaker, it seems to me the members opposite are squirming a bit. The United 
States government has formally protested to our Canadian government, the External Affairs department, 
and they protested to the fact that there were ministers and six government back-benchers attending and 
participating in a demonstration which involved the burning of the American flag outside the American 
Consulate in Manitoba - in Winnipeg, Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these government-elected officials are a part of the NDP party of Canada, and are affiliated 
with the NDP party of Manitoba. They are the government; they are part of the Government of 
Manitoba. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we have in this Assembly eight NDP members which are affiliated 
with the NDP party nationally. This is what’s going to bring me to a point that I want to discuss here 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Deputy Premier Muriel Smith and Natural Resources Minister Al Mackling, along with six 
of these government back-benchers, publicly were dissociating themselves from that flag-burning 
ceremony. But they can’t do that, Mr. Speaker, because they were there. Mr. Speaker, I don’t care, I 
don’t care what the demonstration was for. The fact is that they were there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the air must be cleared. Some of our American friends who are senators across the border 
have also denounced this burning of the flag. A couple of them were quoted as saying, ‘I am surprised 
and disappointed’; another saying that, ‘I am confident that this is the action that reflects just the attitude 
of a few Canadians, a few Canadian citizens.’ I hope this is true. 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1182 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, in order that we can be assured that this Assembly is free from any affiliation 
with the Manitoba NDP party and the eight NDP opposition members in this Assembly must disaffiliate 
themselves from the national NDP party. That is the only what that this Assembly can be assured of this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you and I know that if the 56 of us that are government here went out and robbed a bank 
and we were caught, a few of us were caught (but we were all involved), we would all suffer the same 
consequences. And there is no difference from that in this philosophies and the beliefs of a political 
party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we let our American neighbours believe that we, as a province, or as a country in a 
whole, condone this type of thoughtless action, I would be concerned that there would be a loss of trade, 
tourism and American investment in this province. 
 
The NDP across the room say that we’re using previous time in this Assembly to debate this resolution. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we as the Devine government, the Progressive Conservative Government of 
Saskatchewan, have been trying desperately to sell potash, for instance, to the Americans. Mr. Speaker, 
you know as well as I do how important it is to sell potash to the Americans. It creates jobs; gives the 
government dollars in its coffers to carry on with its programs . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I hear a hiss coming from across the room - a hiss. There’s only three things that I know that 
hiss, Mr. Speaker. That’s a goose, a snake, and a fool, and maybe one of those members opposite would 
like to stand to be recognized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in the Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan are a government and a 
party who are open for business. But unless the members opposite clear the air and prove to the people 
of Saskatchewan and of Canada that they will not be part of a party that takes pleasure in such 
demonstrations, we cannot as a government rest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this country, democracy is the best, the most effective, and the most equitable form of 
government ever devised. I am thinking of ideals under which this country has developed: the ideal of 
elbow room for individuals, initiative and intelligence, and industry, and the rewards of these in the 
national climate of self-reliance - the ideal. Indeed for freedom, as we in North America know it. Mr. 
Speaker, a free society has within itself the weapon to curb injustice that might result from the selfish 
and blind use of power, which we have, evidently, been a part of by the NDP party of this country. 
 
So when these individuals, the NDP party . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, to take part in this 
demonstration in which the American flag was burned, they must now face this weapon and live up to 
the consequences they must suffer. The NDP are masquerading in a country that believes in democracy. 
Let no one underestimate the undermining of such a political party. Mr. Speaker, this is a party that does 
not believe in peace. The NDP do not believe in peace, in getting along with their neighbours, or their 
allies. They do not believe in that. The story of the human race, Mr. Speaker, has always been war. 
Except for maybe a brief and precarious interludes that there has never been peace in the world. The 
truth, Mr. Speaker, is indisputable. You know panic may resent it, malice may distort it, but the truth is 
always there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, radicals are individuals to me who hang around with their feet in the air. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the NDP are known to have many socialist radicals within their ranks. The burning of the U.S. flag 
symbolizes what socialism is all about. That primarily is in 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1183 

which socialism creates nothing but hate and despair. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I feel that this is only right and proper, on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan 
to ask the eight members opposite for their resignation in this Saskatchewan legislature, if in fact they 
fail to endorse this resolution presently before them - before this House. Mr. Speaker, I in the most 
strongest way support this resignation. It saddens me, it saddens me to have to stand up in this House 
and look at the members opposite, and see that they will stand in defence of an NDP party that condones 
that type of radicalism, to put it in a situation where another country comes and asks if this is really and 
truly Canadian belief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it takes me back a few years. It takes me back to the years of the Vietnam war. I, as a 
tradesman, in the province of Saskatchewan, am one that know that there wasn’t jobs available at that 
particular time. Well, Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t one to sit on welfare or unemployment or anything. I got on 
the phone and I phoned down to the United States. Well, I went to work for North Central Airlines in 
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Mr. Speaker, the Americans did not stop Canadian people from coming into 
the country. They treat us like we were a brother or a sister. They gave us jobs while their boys were 
over in Vietnam in the war under a system where socialism had caused such despair, such bloodshed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t allow this to carry on in this country. The members opposite know fair well that if 
they condone that kind of stuff and they go out into their ridings, they, the people out there in their 
ridings, would just love to get their hands on them. Because, Mr. Speaker, they resign, and I’ll tell you 
we will have another eight members belonging to the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I must advise the member his time is up. I recognize the member for 
Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to become involved in this debate on the 
rule 16 motion. I think that rule 16 motions have taken a new turn from where we have debated in the 
past, I think from both sides of the House, issues that were current and very relative to Saskatchewan and 
the economic situation which we find ourselves in. I think debating a policy or debating an issue which 
occurred in another province, as frivolous as this matter is as it would relate to the economy of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, leads us to wonder where such things as the Crow rate are in the minds of 
these people, or where such issues as the water policy is which they have been studying and touring 
around the province on, or, Mr. Speaker, the 60,000 people who are on welfare, or the farm fuel costs, or 
the many other issues which we could be dealing with rather than the rule 16 and the burning . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I’ve cautioned the members that they must stay with the subject that’s 
under discussion, and the wide-ranging debate is not permissible at this time. I’d ask the member to stay 
with the subject. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I will attempt to stay closer to the topic, although it’s very, very 
difficult to because it has so little to do with anything relevant to the Saskatchewan situation. But we 
have attempted to establish here today that guilt by association is not the way that we should be 
attempting to arrange our thoughts. And the member from Canora incident was brought up and Bob 
Wilson, the member from  



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1184 

somewhere in Winnipeg, or somewhere in Manitoba. The fact that he was involved in drug trafficking, 
and was charged, and is now in a penitentiary has little to do with the members in this House, or the 
members in the Manitoba legislature. Because if you’re going to have guilt by association, whether it’s 
flag burning, or whether it’s pushing drugs, or whether it’s racism, that when the minister or the Premier 
apologizes for people who say certain things in his caucus, then we accept that. 
 
The members who were at the flag-burning demonstration in Manitoba, the members of the caucus, the 
NDP caucus, have said over and over again that they had nothing to do with the incident; in fact, it 
occurred after the event was over. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that is different than another individual of the Manitoba legislature, one Sterling Lyon, 
who in the debate that occurred in the Assembly, it was brought to his attention that he had been present 
at a flag-burning ceremony as well. The only thing, this was a Russian flag that was burned at that time, 
and when he was asked to comment on it, he said that was different, that Russians flags could be burned, 
and there was nothing wrong with it. And this from an individual who comes from a wheat-producing 
province who are attempting to sell their wheat to Russia, and you’re talking about individuals taking 
positions on flag-burning incidents. I think you should check your own record a little closer before you 
come to the belief that you are totally pure on this. And, Mr. Minister, it’s quoted in Hansard from the 
Manitoba legislature that this kind of a thought and discussion did take place, and that the member, the 
Sterling Lyon, the Leader of the Opposition, took that position in a different flag-burning ceremony to 
deal with another country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Cut Knife-Lloyd attempted to say that because those individuals, the six 
MLAs and two cabinet ministers, were at the event, that somehow they were responsible for it. We could 
assume that the members who were unidentified could have been Conservative people who were 
attempting to discredit the rally - how do we know? I’m not saying they are, but they certainly could 
have been, and it would be just as easy for us to stand in the Assembly and accuse the members opposite 
of having something to do with the people who burned the flag. Mr. Speaker, the individual who burned 
the flag had a hood on his . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s very difficult to hear what the member is trying to tell the 
legislature. I would ask that you silence the House so that we can hear what the member is saying. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it was getting a little difficult to hear myself and keep my line of 
thought going there on this most important issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I want to get back to the statement made by the member from Cut 
Knife-Lloydminster who said that because the six MLAs and two cabinet ministers were present at a 
rally which was protesting war and the situation in Nicaragua, that somehow they were associated with 
the flag-burning. 
 
Well, I want to extend that a little further to the example of, let’s say a hockey game, where the fans in 
the stand are accused under the same premise of being involved, or being accused of having some 
connection to a brawl that occurred on the ice. Or let’s say a bank robbery where the person is in 
depositing money - are they now to be, 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1185 

under his theory, guilty of robbing a bank if they happen to be at the scene of a crime? The proposition 
that the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster makes is preposterous, and it will be very difficult to 
attempt to understand what he is referring to by accusing everyone of guilt by association. 
 
I don’t want to spend a long time on the fact that these people are speaking out of both sides of their 
mouth on this issue. The Bob Wilson case is well known, where a member of the then government in 
Manitoba, Sterling Lyon’s government, was involved in a certain type of carrying on which none of us 
are proud of, and I’m sure that the members opposite are not interested in defending it any more than we 
will defend what some kooks at a protest when they burn a flag. That’s not up to us to defend. But I can’t 
understand why you people want to become so involved in it. I think it’s basically because you don’t 
want to discuss the economic problems that you have in the province of Saskatchewan at the present 
time. 
 
The members mentioned that this could cause them to lose sales to the Americans of potash, but I think 
that they’ll need all the help that they can get in trying to get back to where we were in the NDP in terms 
of selling potash. And because of that, the Premier’s having to go on a little tour to try to bolster sales 
which are flagging under his administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from the Manitoba Hansard the statement made by the Hon. Howard 
Pawley in terms of what his opinion was on this matter. And I quote. 
 

I suppose we must have different views of freedom. I did not consider it to be a mob when I 
appeared as one of the speakers in opposition to the meddling of the Soviet Union in the affairs 
of Poland on the steps of the legislature. Also, Mr. Speaker, I did not consider myself to be part 
of a mob when I spoke against the Soviet Union’s intervention in other matters in other 
countries, such as Afghanistan. Also, Mr. Speaker, I did not consider myself as being part of a 
mob when I also said I was opposed to the intervention of the United States of America in the 
affairs of Central America. Mr. Speaker, I also do not consider that the Minister of Economic 
Development and the Minister of Resources any other members who were part of a mob when 
they spoke out against the United States policy in Central America, which does involve 
intervention in the affairs of Central America. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the record stands clear as to what the six members and the two cabinet ministers 
of the Manitoba legislature, their role in the demonstration against the American role in Nicaragua was. 
And for these members to attempt to slur all members of the Manitoba legislature and the government is 
a discredit to them as a government when we could be spending this very important time dealing with 
bills or other matters relevant to the Saskatchewan situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dirks: — Mr. Speaker, this most serious of debates is now drawing to a close, and I submit to you 
that we must not and we cannot, indeed, we dare not, take this matter lightly. The member from Quill 
Lakes has said that this motion does not deal with important issues of relevance to Saskatchewan. The 
member from Shaunavon has said that this is a frivolous matter, that we are wasting the time of this 
Assembly. 
 
Well, I want to ask all of the members of this Assembly: do you honestly believe that if we  



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1186 

went to the people of the province of Saskatchewan and talked to them in the streets, in the homes, and 
asked them whether or not this wasn’t an important issue, do you think they would say this wasn’t an 
important issue? Of course, they would - a very serious issue. And I want to tell you why this is a very 
serious issue. 
 
Those people who burn the flag of another nation, Mr. Speaker, they are guilty of an odious offence 
against the unwritten laws of nationhood. They are guilty, Mr. Speaker, of a monstrous political and 
social profanity, because a nation’s flag, Mr. Speaker, is its most sacred possession. A nation’s flag is its 
most precious symbols. And to publicly burn that most sacred of national possessions and to publicly 
violate that most precious of symbols - that, Mr. Speaker, is to profane and to desecrate that which is 
cherished by every patriot and every citizen of that particular nation. 
 
And for this reason, Mr. Speaker, for this reason, no act is more calculated and no act is more designed 
to destroy amicable relations between countries and to rupture sentiments of national friendship and to 
exacerbate differences and to make for tension rather than peace, than the burning of a foreign country’s 
flag as a means of protest. 
 
And I was therefore most upset, most exercised when I heard that the flag of the United States of 
America, the flag of our friendly neighbour to the south, had recently been burned, before or during or 
after an anti-American demonstration at the U.S. Consulate in Winnipeg, Manitoba. And as a legislator, 
I was shocked and outraged to learn that certain members of the Manitoba legislature, certain elected 
members of the New Democratic Party - specifically two NDP cabinet ministers, including the deputy 
premier of the province of Manitoba - were participants at this demonstration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not talking about youthful protestors being carried away by some imprudent acts of 
irrational idealism. We’re not talking about hot-headed revolutionaries. We’re talking about the deputy 
premier of the province of Manitoba and certain other elected colleagues. 
 
As far as I know, Saskatchewan, as far as I know, they made no attempt to halt this flag-burning. They 
did not immediately dissociate themselves from this event - immediately. They didn’t run to the press 
immediately after the flag was burned and say, ‘We had nothing to do with this.’ As far as I know, Mr. 
Speaker, by virtue of the fact that they associated with people at this anti-American demonstration, 
whether or not the flag was burned before or during or after is inconsequential. They are now associated 
with the event and that is the important issue. That is the impression that has been created across this 
country, indeed across North America, and that’s the issue that has to be addressed. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the impression has been created in the eyes of the people of North America that 
even though they did not put the match to the flag, the might as well have put the match to the flag, as 
far as the impression is concerned. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, today perhaps they regret their actions. Perhaps they regret their actions. Although I 
wonder, Mr. Speaker, I wonder if they really do. For I have yet to hear that they have apologized for their 
actions and for the impression their actions have left - actions, Mr. Speaker, which are an embarrassment 
to every patriotic Canadian, actions which are an insult to so many of our citizens whose forefathers 
emigrated from the United States and came here generations ago. Actions which are an embarrassment 
to every resident of Saskatchewan. Those actions, Mr. Speaker, are also an affront 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1187 

to the dignity of their position as elected members of Her Majesty’s provincial government in Manitoba. 
Those actions, I submit to you, Mr. Speaker, are an affront to every member of this Assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, those who burned the U.S. flag and those who stood by and acquiesced have broken faith with 
the long and noble tradition of Canadian diplomacy and statesmanship, which instead of burning flags, 
builds bridges of reconciliation; instead of burning flags, buries the hatchet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those members of the Manitoba legislature who participated in this demonstration have set 
a shameful example for all of Canada. They have cast a dark cloud upon every provincial legislature in 
this country. The very presence of provincial cabinet ministers at such a demonstration, in the words of 
the Leader-Post editorial writer, ‘can be regarded as an expression of Manitoba policy towards the 
United States.’ How utterly un-Canadian, Mr. Speaker. They should resign. 
 
Canadians, Mr. Speaker, have always chosen the way of peaceful dialogue to overcome national 
differences: the way of diplomacy, the way of restraint. Nothing, Mr. Speaker, nothing is more 
uncharacteristic of Canadians. Nothing is more un-Canadian than to burn the flag of the United States. 
Fanatical Iranian revolutionaries might burn the flag of the United States, but sensible, peace-loving 
Canadians would never dream of desecrating American’s most cherished and sacred symbol. 
 
To those perpetrators of this monstrous violation of the U.S. flag, we say: Hang your heads in shame. 
Learn what it means to be Canadian. To those New Democratic members of the Manitoba legislature 
who participated in this demonstration, we say: Resign. You cannot hide behind the cloak of private 
citizenship. You cannot divest yourself of your ministerial responsibility when it suits you. You are 
public figures who represent the province of Manitoba. Your very presence at this demonstration, and 
your refusal to apologize and to condemn the flag-burning suggests strongly that you might condone it. 
To Premier Pawley of Manitoba, we say: Banish those cabinet ministers who have disgraced us all. 
Apologize for this affront to America, lest we all come to believe that you, too, condone this hideous 
action. And to the New Democratic members of this Saskatchewan legislature opposite, we say: Unless 
you condemn this shameful act, your party image will be that of extremists, of flag-burning 
sympathizers. Your counsel to the people of the world will be that of public demonstrations, of 
anti-Americanism, of hatred for one’s neighbours. You will be leaving a shameful legacy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m afraid the true colours of the NDP in Canada may now be showing. With this 
demonstration, the anti-American sentiments of the NDP have suddenly become blatantly obvious for all 
of us to witness. We have always known that the NDP have in certain of their policies been 
anti-American. But now the curtain has been drawn back, Mr. Speaker, and we have witnessed the full 
extremity of the hostile sentiments that exist in certain elements of the NDP party. And I say to the 
members of that party, and of their party in Canada: Take care. Your true colours are beginning to show. 
And I warn you: the people of Canada are watching, and the people of Saskatchewan are watching. Now 
to our American friends, what can we say? To our American friends I say, ‘Hold your flag high. Hold 
your flag high.’ 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dirks: — Hold your flag high and parade it before the nations because it is a glorious flag. It is a 
flag that is rich in the heritage of freedom and democracy, and as Canadians, we are indeed proud to be 
your neighbour. 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1188 

To our immediate friends across the border in the Dakotas and in Minnesota and in Montana, may it 
never again happen that our friendship might be called into question. May it never be that Canadians 
would be humiliated and embarrassed because some naive self-seeking individuals would shamelessly 
desecrate your precious flag. And if they have no honour to apologize for this grievous profanity, then 
we apologize. Those individuals are not characteristic of Canadians. They are not characteristic of 
residents of Saskatchewan. Certainly not characteristic of the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
To the members of the Legislative Assembly I say: let us take this opportunity to reaffirm our belief in 
settling national differences through discussion and negotiation. Send the message to the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people of Canada and the people of the United States, that this Assembly is 
unanimous . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I must inform the member that his time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Parker: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to make a couple of comments with respect to the 
motion put forth by my colleague from Regina Victoria. I speak in support of the motion. I find it very 
embarrassing to be a citizen of western Canada and a citizen to a province adjacent to an incident such as 
we have related to recently happening in the city of Winnipeg. 
 
I find it hard to understand that even after 11 years of trying to raise the walls around the province of 
Saskatchewan, the NDP government was unsuccessful and they should recognize that every one of the 
United States, every state in the United States, interacts with Canadian provinces. And when they feel 
that this matter is not worthy of the time that we are paying to debate it this afternoon, I believe they’re 
sadly mistaken. 
 
The 14 border states provide 62 per cent of the interactions with the Canadian provinces, and of that, the 
Midwest alone, 31 per cent. So they’re certainly aware of what’s going on and they’re certainly aware of 
the disgrace and the dishonour that was shown to our American friends by the incident in Winnipeg. 
 
In the area of tourism, for example, the Minister of Tourism herself attended this function. I wonder if 
she’s aware of the fact that over $2 billion is spent annually by Americans in Canada, by American 
tourists, and of that, $80 million approximately, is spent in Manitoba. And if our NDP colleagues in 
Saskatchewan don’t feel that this has any bearing on what happens in Saskatchewan, approximately $30 
million is spent in Saskatchewan by American tourists. And how would you feel if you were an 
American tourist considering the possibility of going north for a vacation next summer and you heard 
that your flag was being burned on the legislative . . . on the steps in Manitoba? Would you decide to go 
to Canada? Not likely. 
 
I can understand the coolness that the members of the party opposite might feel towards our American 
allies and our American friends. They have a natural feeling of discomfort when in the company of 
American neighbours. They don’t like to be associated with terms which cause them to squirm, terms 
such as free enterprise and private sector growth. 
 
But I’d like to point out that trade with the United States, even with a federal Liberal government and the 
odd provincial NDP government, still flourishes and makes up approximately 70 per cent of our total 
trade both ways - imports and exports. And when we compare it to other countries such as United 
Kingdom’s share, 3.5 per cent, 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1189 

roughly, and Japan’s share of 4 to 6 per cent, we see what an important contribution trade both ways 
with the United States makes. Exports to United States have expanded in just about every area of our 
production: fabricated materials, lumber, newsprint, chemicals, iron and steel, aluminium, industrial 
machinery and auto products. And I find that it’s extremely disappointing that members of the provincial 
legislature in Manitoba would participate by being involved to any degree in this type of an incident. 
 
And I’d just like to take this opportunity to fully endorse the motion put forth by my colleague, and I call 
on the support of the NDP members from Saskatchewan to also support that motion. There’s nowhere in 
that motion that indicates any political alliance. We’re condemning the actions that were taken, and I 
find no reason that we shouldn’t receive full support for this motion. 
 
I’d like to also indicate that as well as our tourism, and as well as our reliance on trade both ways with 
the United States, they also play a very important role in our defence. And I think it’s common 
knowledge that without an ally such as United States, and on the terms that we are on with them, we 
would find ourselves in a very, very unfortunate position in terms of defending our borders. 
 
The Americans, now that we will be soon having a Progressive Conservative federal government, and 
pretty well every province in Canada having a Progressive Conservative provincial government, I’m sure 
those figures of 70 per cent trade - import and export, with United States - will increase, and increase 
substantially. And I think that our American friends are now becoming aware of the fact that the borders 
are open, and the walls are down, and we’re encouraging them to come to Canada, and we’re 
encouraging them to come to Saskatchewan. And it’s a black mark against Saskatchewan when our 
neighbours from the south see the type of reaction that they’re receiving in Manitoba, a close bordering 
province to Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d just like to say, Mr. Speaker, that the tourism and the jobs and the capital that United States sends to 
Canada are very, very important, and they’re very, very worthy of debate in this legislature, and I find it 
very, very difficult to accept any excuse by the members opposite on behalf of their counterparts in 
Manitoba. You can call it guilt by association if you want, but it’s guilt whatever way you cut it. They 
were there and they have to be responsible for the fact that they were there. 
 
I think that, Mr. Speaker, the motion pretty well says it all, and it’s very straightforward, and I call on 
members from both sides of the House to stand united in condemning this act which we find to be very 
shameful and very embarrassing as a neighbouring province to that type of an incident. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to address a very few words on this debate because I think 
that the debate is itself an important aspect of the approach by the government opposite to problems of 
freedom. A couple of quick facts: on the basis of the facts available, the members of the legislature in 
Manitoba were not there when any flags were burned. Fact number two: the Premier of Manitoba made 
as clear as he could in the Manitoba legislature, and I will quote his words: 
 

I do take the strongest exception to any flag-burning ceremony, and particularly the one that 
apparently was involved in the demonstration in front of the U.S. consul general’s office. 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1190 

I speak, Mr. Speaker, from the Hansard of the legislature of Manitoba, and I think we’ll all agree that 
that’s authoritative. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. It’s my duty to inform the members that the 75 minutes allotted for 
debate under rule 16 have elapsed. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 19 - Social and Economic Needs of Senior Citizens 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few moments to talk on the fact of the failure of the 
government to recognize the economic needs of our senior citizens and its failure to provide adequate 
programs and services for them. I find it unfortunate that we were attempting to move through the 
agenda very quickly when we had thought that motion no. 4 would be the one debated in the Assembly, 
but having gone down very quickly to motion no. 11. I’ll take a few minutes to speak on the lack of 
action by this government when it comes to dealing with senior citizens programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first area that we see drastic cut-backs to the senior citizens programming is in the area 
of the home care program. What we are finding is that in many areas the cost of home care to individual 
senior citizens in their own homes is having to rise and having to increase fairly drastically. 
 
I find it interesting in reading the Swift Current Sun the other day. In the paper they were talking about 
the home care board there having to raise the rates for meals from $4, I believe, to 4.50, or an increase of 
11 or 12 per cent. This, Mr. Speaker, is resulting totally because the government has not funded that 
program properly since it came to government. 
 
And members opposite will say, ‘Yes, but we increased drastically the spending on home care this year,’ 
and the numbers that they show in their estimates would indicate that spending is increasing. But I want 
to remind them that that increase comes after the November 24th budget which in fact decreased the 
home care spending by $3 million. It’s a bit of the smoke and mirrors that we’ve become used to from 
this government in terms of spending on peoples’ programs. You take it away with one hand, and give it 
with another, like the Minister of Highways who cuts the spending in highways in the North from 6 
million to zero and then announces a great program of 1.5 million. And the smoke and mirrors that we 
find in that department are the same as what is going on in the Department of Social Services and the 
Department of Health in terms of senior citizens programming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the home care program is a program which was established in 1978. It was a program 
which was established to take care of the basic needs of seniors who were using their option of 
remaining in their own home rather than going into nursing homes, and it is a program, and has been a 
program, which has served that function very well. Mr. Speaker, in fact it is the first program in Canada 
which is totally community-based, where there are locally elected boards which run the 45 home care 
districts, and I must say that those people who donate their time do an excellent job of serving the needs 
of the seniors throughout the province. And there are thousands and thousands of seniors who are able to 
remain in their own homes as opposed to moving into nursing homes or other facilities which they 
would have to if it were not for the services of nursing care, Meals on Wheels, a home repair program, as 
well as a home 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1191 

maintenance program, which is provided for through that program. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I say this is another example of the undermining of social programs which is taking 
place as a result of this government’s underfunding of this program. And as the rates will increase, as we 
are seeing happening at the present time where meals are increasing, in many areas, by 10 or 15 per cent. 
The people who are attempting to use these programs will not be able to afford them. And when they’re 
not able to afford them, the Conservative government will then say, ‘Well, our statistics show that these 
programs are not being used,’ and will begin the cut-backs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say that it would be a much more honourable position if the government does not believe 
in social programs, simply to come out and announce that because of their philosophical beliefs that 
home care isn’t appropriate, but they will not do that. They undermine the social programs, whether it be 
the dental plan or the home care plan, to the point that they are ineffective, and then they take the money 
away and take the program away. And I say that this is only one area of concern in terms of senior 
citizens programming or the lack of it. 
 
Another area, Mr. Speaker, is in the area of nursing home construction itself. We have seen, with the 
shift of responsibility of nursing homes from the Department of Social Services to the Department of 
Health, the deletion of $2.4 million in construction of nursing homes in the province of Saskatchewan. 
In the November 24th budget, there was $6.4 million allowed for the construction of nursing homes in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And this would have gone some way if this trend had continued to 
meeting the drastic problems which our seniors face in the province at the present time. 
 
The waiting list, for example in Saskatoon, has grown and grown quickly over the past year to the point 
where seniors who need level 4 care are having to wait for 4 years, or two and one-half years. And what 
that means is most of those people, a good part of them, will not be able to move into nursing homes, but 
will have to make other arrangements, much, much less acceptable arrangements, rather than move into 
the nursing homes that were promised, simply because in transferring the budget from Social Services to 
Health, the Conservative government took that opportunity as well to cut that budget by $2.4 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of nursing home construction, I was in Wakaw the other night to speak to a group 
of concerned people in that area. They had received a letter from the Minister of Social Services saying 
that they should go ahead and tender their nursing home in that area. Well, last week they received a 
phone call from the minister’s office, saying that they should not go ahead, in fact, that it should be put 
on hold until the funding arrangements were finalized. And I say that this is happening in a number of 
areas where nursing homes were promised and expected, but I think that people will be waiting a long, 
long time in areas like Assiniboia, and other areas who were expecting nursing homes, but I don’t think 
that this government has much intention of moving quickly with that kind of construction. 
 
The 144-bed nursing home which was promised for Saskatoon is nowhere to be seen in this budget. And 
I find that hard to believe when there are 10 members, I believe, from the city of Saskatoon who sit in 
the benches opposite. And those 10 members cannot put the pressure needed on this government to see 
that that nursing home would be forthcoming. 
 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1192 

On a point dealing with nursing homes as well, I find it deplorable that the Minister of Social Services, 
last year in July, raised the nursing home rates from $390 to $417, in order to raise an extra $3 million 
for the provincial government. Mr. Speaker, that increase in nursing home rates meant that the seniors of 
this province who are in nursing homes had $3 million less to buy the necessities that they found that 
they needed on a day-to-day basis. And it’s not surprising I guess when you look at the litany of 
programs that have been cut by this government and the groups of people that they choose to get their 
money from. 
 
The senior citizens who are in nursing homes, of course, are unable to come to the Legislative Building, 
and are unable to lobby in a very effective manner, very simply because of the fact that they’re in nursing 
homes. The Conservative government knows full well that this is an area they can continue to take 
advantage of. And I predict that over the next year we will see even further drastic increases for those 
individuals who find themselves in the nursing homes in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find that that kind of an approach to social programming for our seniors is deplorable and 
something that we will attempt to make known to the people of the province in a way that the 
government will have to respond in terms of building more senior citizens facilities, and also attempting 
to maintain a rate which allows senior citizens to live with some dignity and to be able to afford some of 
the amenities that life can provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another area that seniors are having to deal with is in the area of public assistance for the 
aged. I know that the minister has in many ways attempted to put a lid on the ever-increasing welfare 
cases that she has in the province, but it’s gotten completely out of hand. I believe that the estimates 
show that $171 million will be spent this year on social assistance and that many, many thousands of 
people are being forced onto the welfare rolls as a lack of decisions, bad decisions, being made by this 
government in terms of economic programs. 
 
Today we find that there are 14,000 families, for example, who are included in the unemployed 
employables on welfare, which is up approximately 100 per cent from this time last year. But, Mr. 
Speaker, even though the welfare rolls have increased drastically, when you take a look at those seniors 
who require social assistance, you find that in that area there is a cut in assistance, a cut of almost 20 per 
cent in the amount of money that the Department of Social Services is allowing for assistance for aged. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is the exact opposite approach of what should be happening in the province. I 
think these pioneers who have built a province and who have built the system that we are now enjoying 
deserve to be able to call on the public assistance if they need it; that the Minister of Social Services 
should check her priorities in cutting back in that area of social assistance for those seniors who are 
having a difficult time and who need a little extra cash on a monthly basis. 
 
There are other areas that the government have let the senior citizen down in. I mention only in passing, 
the promised free telephones which was a big issue in the last election, which is nowhere to be seen in 
this budget. These people will not forget that they were taken advantage of and misled at the time of the 
election last year. And rather than free telephones they are finding that the government is attempting to 
increase telephone rates by 19 per cent - not only for those of us who can afford it but also for the senior  



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1193 

citizens who on April 26th were promised that they would have free telephones in each and every home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the senior citizens and the pioneers of this province, I think that one of the 
most upsetting things to them that the Conservative government has brought about is that the fact that 
many of their children and grandchildren are among the 60,000 people who now find themselves on 
welfare as a result of the misguided and ill-conceived economic strategy that this government is bringing 
forward. And I have talked to many of them who say that they will be able to make it even though 
nursing home rates are going up and telephone and power rates are going up, but what really concerns 
them is the fact that many of their children and grandchildren are unable to find meaningful jobs in the 
province of Saskatchewan at the present time. 
 
Quite contrary to the theme of bringing the children home, Mr. Speaker, we are finding that there are no 
jobs for the young people of the province, no jobs for the university students who are coming out of the 
university at the present time. I say that in dealing with senior citizens’ programming, one of the main 
areas of failure of this government is providing adequate jobs for the children and grandchildren of the 
pioneers and the seniors of the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say that in moving this resolution that I would hope that members 
opposite would rise as the debate goes on, and take part in what has to be a very crucial issue for many, 
many people in the province - those people who (as I mentioned) have built the province, and who 
deserve a better treatment than what they are getting under the present Conservative government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to add a few words to this debate. There are a 
number of areas where programs of governments are inadequate insofar as the needs of senior citizens 
are concerned, and that is certainly true of the government opposite. 
 
I want to touch on three or four important areas. I want to touch first on pensions, superannuation 
allowances, the very stuff of which a retirement is made. I would like to refer hon. members to a brief 
prepared by the Government of Saskatchewan in 1981 to the national pensions conference, which has 
some important and valuable information gathered in a convenient form. It points out that the number of 
elderly people are growing in Canada. It points out what I think we all know: that an adequate retirement 
income is the economic base on which an improved quality of life for the elderly can be built. And it 
points out that we in Canada are far from achieving that, far from offering to elderly people in Canada an 
adequate economic base. It summarizes the problem in Canadian terms in these words: 
 

More than three-fifths of unattached elderly persons live in poverty. More than one-fifth of 
elderly family units live below the poverty line. More than 50 per cent of persons over age 65 
receive full or partial guaranteed income supplement payments and would be below the poverty 
line if it were not for this income-tested program. More than 15 per cent of all old age pensioners 
receive the maximum guaranteed income supplement, which means that they have virtually no 
other source of income. Almost half of all the income of elderly persons is from the basic old age 
security and guaranteed income supplement programs. A much greater proportion of elderly 
women than men live in poverty, and the proportion of elderly persons living below the poverty 
line increases with age. 

 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1194 

That then outlines in summary form the situation in which elderly people in our country find themselves. 
 
The situation in Saskatchewan is no better than in other provinces. In some ways it is worse. In some 
ways it is worse because many of the people who are now elderly lived through particularly difficult 
economic times in Saskatchewan in the 1930s and early ’40s and were not able to provide anything for 
their retirement years. It is no better because we have had an economy and a society based upon farms 
operated by owner-operators who did not in a systematic way make provision for their retirement 
income. There’s no pension plan when you operate a farm. 
 
Many farmers are able to buy land and to see it appreciate in value and thereby provide themselves with 
retirement income, but that has been a feature which has been much more prevalent in recent years than 
was the case earlier. And, accordingly, there are a good number of people who do not have a pension 
other than the government pension, or sold their land at relatively lower prices, and have seen what they 
hoped to be their adequate retirement income eroded by the ravages of inflation with which we are all so 
familiar during these last 10 years. 
 
Now these problems are not going to go away, Mr. Speaker. The need for making provision for a 
retirement income for elderly people is great and is not being substantially reduced. Some progress has 
been made in Canada with an old age security system which is universal in its nature, not unreasonable 
in terms of national comparisons. We also have a guaranteed income supplement which assists some 
people but only brings incomes to what everyone must agree to be quite inadequate levels. 
 
An increasing number of people are benefiting from the Canada Pension Plan. But we still have a very 
large number of people who have no private pension, or who have a private pension plan which is 
grossly inadequate. In order to strengthen the pension plans on which people will rely in short years 
when they retire, measures have been put forward to assist workers to be assured that their private 
pensions were adequate, that they didn’t have loopholes, that they didn’t have provisions which in effect 
would disentitle the person to his pension, his or her pension. 
 
The work done in that regard has been extensive. It has been done by the pensions branch of the 
Department of Labour. It has been done in a way which has put Saskatchewan modestly in the forefront 
in Canada. Our provisions to regulate private pension plans offers somewhat more protection for the 
recipients under those plans than any other laws in Canada. That has been brought about by the work of 
the pensions branch, the pensions branch which is being savaged by the budget just introduced by the 
government opposite. There is no way that that pensions branch can continue the work it has done in the 
past and continue to offer some protection to senior citizens, or people soon to be senior citizens, with 
the cuts in staff which have been introduced by the government in the current budget. 
 
Nor have we heard anything from the government opposite by way of proposals for urging the federal 
government to expand the old age security provisions, or the guaranteed income supplement provisions, 
or the Canada Pension Plan provisions. The position of the Government of Saskatchewan, so far as I am 
aware, is one which does not encourage further action on those fronts. The position of leadership that the 
Government of Saskatchewan took in the 1970s has been relinquished and old age  



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1195 

benefits will accordingly be less in the future than they would be if we had a vigorous government 
policy. 
 
One might expect under those circumstances that the government itself would move in. If it is not going 
to insist that pensions offered by private employers are adequate and contain no loopholes, no provisions 
whereby workers can lose their benefits, then you would expect the government to increase its payments 
to persons who are in need. But such is not the case. I see no provisions in the budget which will serve to 
increase the provincial old age pension plan, the supplementary income benefits provisions which have 
been in force in this province for some years. So far as I’m aware, no increases are intended. The same 
number of dollars are to be paid, notwithstanding the fact that we all know and fully appreciated that it 
costs more to live this year than last, and more to live last year than the year before. Any program of 
income support which offers the same number of dollars in 1984 that were paid in, let us say, 1982 is a 
program which is being eroded. That I suggest is what is happening with respect to the government’s 
programs for income support for senior citizens. So we see no initiative on the part of the government 
opposite to support either private pensions, or to increase public pensions by representations to the 
federal government with respect to federal pensions, or by putting money in the budget with respect to 
provincial supplements. I think this is a clear demonstration that, in so far as this government is 
concerned and its assessment of priorities, the priorities of senior citizens are not high on their list. 
 
This lack of priority for senior citizens is demonstrated in a number of other ways. I know that hon. 
members have noted that grants for senior citizens’ services have been cut in this year’s budget. And 
when I say cut, I mean not that they have been increased less than 7 per cent - the average increase of all 
items in the budget. When I say cut, I mean that they’re getting fewer dollars in 1983-84 than they’re 
getting in 1982-83, and that is certainly a cut. 
 
The same can be noted with respect to the programs offered by the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, 
and particularly the ones that benefit senior citizens. Members will be aware that the amount of money 
provided for grants to senior citizens to repair their homes has been cut. I think all of us say that we 
believe that the senior citizens should stay in their own homes. We believe that they should have the 
opportunity to have homes which permit them to live as normal a life as possible. We believe, or say we 
believe, that money ought to be provided by the state, by the province in our case, to senior citizens so 
that they may have an opportunity to fix up their home, and thereby perhaps be able to stay there a few 
more years, rather than moving to some sort of sheltered or nursing home accommodation. None the 
less, notwithstanding the fact that we say that, we are providing less money rather than more, less money 
in the budget which will be under discussion in this House from time to time. 
 
The same is true for money provided for the rehabilitation of existing dwellings. That is not all for senior 
citizens. Certainly not, but some of it is. And to that extent, there is less money to assist senior citizens 
to stay in their own homes. Similarly, there is less money to assist people who are wishing to convert 
their homes to deal with a disability. Where some person is physically disabled and still wishes to stay in 
their own home, there has been a grant program under the home improvement for disabled persons 
program, which grant program has been cut back. 
 
Now, of course it is true, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that not all disabled people are senior citizens. But a 
significant number of people who are suffering from a physical disability  



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1196 

are senior citizens. A significant number are people who would wish to have their home converted in 
some way to make it possible for them to live in their own home with their disability, whether it be the 
installation of a wash-room on the main floor, or an elevator, a little personal elevator, or one of the 
other devices which have become much more common, and which have permitted people to deal with 
their disabilities. That grant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has been cut back, and I think that shows where this 
government’s priorities are. 
 
It is generally the case, Mr. Speaker, running through this budget as my colleague, the member from 
Shaunavon has indicated, that there is a cut-back in those non-government organizations which have 
served senior citizens, and there is a cut-back in the direct programming offered by the government 
opposite. 
 
All of this suggests to me, Mr. Speaker, that while the government opposite asserts that senior citizens 
and their concerns are a priority, and while undoubtedly they are providing some additional funds which 
will be used by senior citizens, perhaps in general hospitals or elsewhere, the support programs which 
have been developed in this province over many years, and under more than one government, are not 
being added to, but in fact are being eroded. 
 
I can only express my regret at this. I express my regret in personal terms, and I express my regret in 
financial terms. Dealing first with the finances, I cannot help but believe that in narrow financial terms, 
we are better off as a society if we provide support for senior citizens so that they can remain in their 
communities, and in many cases, be very active contributing members to their communities. 
 
And in personal terms, and these are much more important, I express my regret that we are not 
acknowledging that we have a substantial duty to make life for older people a rich and full life, and to 
provide the support which is necessary, the support in human terms, and the support in financial terms. 
 
I think we’re all becoming much more conscious of the fact that the programs which have been in place 
and which have done such a good job in the past need to be not cut back and not run at their current 
level, but rather need to be augmented. I think particularly of ways in which we can find, ways that we 
need to find, to provide financial support for people who have not been in the work-force. We are aware, 
of course, of the position of disabled person, but more particularly, people who have been the 
housewives, or have - whether male or female; they’re overwhelmingly female - who have made their 
life in looking after the family and the household, and who have not, therefore, been participating in the 
work-force, and who, therefore, do not have a private pension plan provided through an employer, and 
who therefore do not have a Canada Pension Plan - those persons are ones who most deserve our 
attention. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no simple and easy way to solve that problem. Many people have 
addressed the question of how we could provide Canada Pension Plan coverage for persons who are 
homemakers, and we have not come up with the right answer. But this does not mean that we should not 
be pursuing it. We are troubled by the fact that the Canada Pension Plan seems to be the appropriate 
vehicle, but on the other hand, the Canada Pension Plan was thought to be an actuarially sound - or more 
or less sound - pension plan, and was not thought to be a vehicle for providing benefits to persons who 
need the benefits, but who have not been contributors. 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1197 

All of us are aware - if I may indulge in an aside - of the fact that the economic and the financial 
soundness of the Canada Pension Plan is being called into question, as in the United States the social 
security plan there is being called into much more vigorous question. So clearly we need to address that. 
But we need to address the collateral problem of how we provide for the money in old age for persons 
who spend their lifetime as homemakers. That has not been addressed. 
 
I don’t expect the government opposite to come up with a solution to that difficult problem. I would 
have expected that they would have addressed some of them, that we would have heard some statement 
of policy, that we would have expected, or we would have heard them make some follow-up statement 
of policy, similar to the one that was made two years ago by the previous government. We have not 
heard that. And not only have we not heard it, but the persons who were working on those very real 
problems in our society are by and large going to be dispensed with. Their services are going to be 
dispensed with by the government opposite, and we will not have an opportunity to have this 
government address what are real and pressing issues in our society. 
 
These can, Mr. Speaker, be sometimes stated only in financial terms as perhaps I have been doing, but 
they are very real personal problems as well. And they surround the delivery of services in the whole 
area of social services. I refer hon. members to a clipping which was in the Star-Phoenix on April 8th. 
And it’s a story of an elderly woman who simply did not have any place to go. And I’m not being 
particularly critical of the government opposite. If it had happened three years ago, I think she wouldn’t 
have had a place to go either. I am not suggesting that there’s been, in this case, a substantial dereliction 
of duty on the part of the government opposite, save only to say that we need to continue to examine 
ways to deal with the increasing number of senior citizens who are somehow falling through the net of 
security programs which we have erected in this province and in this country. 
 
The elderly woman, it says, was wearing only a nightgown and slippers when she fell on the neighbour’s 
doorstep a few months ago, in the middle of a winter night. It goes on to tell her story and a story of a 
very real personal tragedy it is. It points out what I think we all know: that an increasing number of 
people living longer are creating some serious problems for our special care institutions. 
 
A particular narrow problem which we need, I think, to address is what sort of institutions we offer for 
people who are, in a mild way, mentally disordered, and who therefore have difficulty being cared for by 
regular nursing homes. My memory is slipping as to whether these people are categorized as level 4(a) 
but I believe that that’s the right designation. It doesn’t matter what we call them. They are people who 
have some mental infirmity usually associated with old age. I think perhaps the largest single group 
would be people who are suffering from Alzheimer’s disease, or maladies of that nature. They present a 
very real problem for society. There is no question that we need to look at what we should be doing. 
 
I’m sure you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and other hon. members, have been approached by citizens who are 
in nursing homes, or where relatives are in nursing homes, and had raised with you the difficult 
problems that are presented when a resident of a nursing home has some mental problem - not such as 
would require them to be confined in an institution because they might be a danger to society but rather 
problems which caused them to be an annoyance, and perhaps a substantial annoyance, to other members 
who are in that nursing home, to other residents. Again, I suppose they are people who may have a 
number of maladies but perhaps Alzheimer’s is the commonest. 



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1198 

No one can suggest that this is not an increasing problem in our society. In another age, many of these 
people would have died earlier because of diseases like pneumonia, which used to sweep through the 
elderly population. That age is now gone, and we need to address these problems and they’re very real 
problems. 
 
Unfortunately, I have not seen any indication that the government opposite is prepared to grapple with 
those problems, is prepared to perhaps have special wings in nursing homes for dealing with the people 
with these particular problems and thereby providing relief and succour for other patients in nursing 
homes who are not so afflicted. 
 
I could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, continue at some length on what I think are the shortcomings of the 
programs of the government opposite. I could mention the reduction of social workers in rural areas, 
which is unquestionably going to affect adversely senior citizens in rural areas, who are frequently major 
consumers of the services of social workers. I could mention the cut-backs in the welfare system, what 
the ministers pleases to call ‘common sense,’ which affects all persons on welfare, and a goodly number 
of those people are senior citizens. 
 
I won’t burden the House with a full recital of what I consider to be the shortcomings, what had led to 
headlines such as this one: ‘No Provincial Grant Means Special Seniors’ Program Dies.’ That one has to 
do with the unique senior citizens service in Saskatchewan operated by the Yorkton Society for 
Involvement of Good Neighbours. That is typical. 
 
I won’t outline all of them, but I say to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to all members of the House: 
throughout this government’s programs run a thread of cutting back on the services to people who need 
it most, many of them senior citizens; throughout this government’s programs runs a thread of saying 
that other things will be emphasized, that the concerns of senior citizens will be de-emphasized. And, 
accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I wish very emphatically to second the resolution of my colleague, the 
member for Shaunavon, when he says: 
 

that this Assembly regrets the Saskatchewan government’s failure to recognize the social and 
economic needs of our senior citizens and its failure to provide adequate programs and services 
for them. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say a few words on this motion moved by the member 
for Shaunavon, keeping in mind that the member of Shaunavon was the former minister of social 
services. 
 
An Hon. Member: — With emphasis on ‘former.’ 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Former minister of social services. And we, Mr. Deputy Speaker, know where the 
former minister of social services is now, and but for another political party in his riding saving him he 
may not be here today, none the less. 
 
I find it unfortunate, quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the opposition would choose to move such 
a motion. We on this side of the House and the Department of Social Services generally, up until very 
recently under the very competent direction of  



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1199 

our hon. member for Swift Current, and now under the very competent direction of the hon. member for 
Indian Head, and notwithstanding those two hon. members, a government that has not made just a 
commitment to social services, but to everyone in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to the seniors 
in particular. 
 
I really do feel, as I sit here and listen to the former premier and the former minister of social services 
moving such a motion and condemning, quite frankly, this government’s failure to recognize the social 
and economic needs of our senior citizens, and telling us that we’ve failed to provide adequate programs 
and services for them. 
 
Now, that’s the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to really emphasize that I’m very disappointed to 
see these members move such a motion, because I would think that sooner or later the hypocrisy of the 
opposition would cease, somewhere along the line it would have to stop. I’ve been looking for that. 
Every day when I sit in here, and I look across there, and I remember sitting there in opposition and what 
it was like when they were 43 strong here, 44. They had a Speaker and he wasn’t in on the votes. I recall 
what that was like. And I said to myself, well, you know, I can sit here and criticize and be cheap and 
chintzy, or I can put my head to the issues of the day and offer very constructive solutions to problems 
that are presented to all of the people of Saskatchewan, and in particular senior citizens. 
 
Now the opposition knows full right well that that was the role that I had taken. It placed the government 
of the day in a very difficult situation to say the least, Mr. Deputy Speaker, inasmuch as I took the time 
to personally, on my own time, not at government expense nor at taxpayers’ expense, to study the plight 
of the senior citizens in the province of Saskatchewan. I did that; I made recommendations to the 
government of the day. I had recommended that they take the care of senior citizens from the 
Department of Social Services and move it over to the Department of Health and apply a universal room 
and board fee. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you know, the previous administration just prior to its defeat on 
April the 26th undertook to do just that with the one exception. They removed the one care for level 4 
out of Health and move that over to Social Services. I certainly disagreed with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
But I felt that generally speaking, the policy of adopting a more universal fee across the board was quite 
acceptable because it was in my recommendations when I was in opposition. 
 
Now this afternoon, I have heard of course the member for Shaunavon, the better part of his speech, and 
the former premier speaking as well. And you know, I failed to pick out of any of their comments, any 
constructive solutions that they would be offering us as a government. And I was really listening for that 
and that’s why I say I’m very disappointed in the motion. I had hoped that they had moved the motion 
maybe in good faith. I mean, I’m not even going to go over the motion. The motion could have read far 
more positively. It could have read something along the lines that we, as an opposition, would like to be 
part of government and be part of this Assembly and providing solutions, and then proceed from that to 
offer one or two or a half dozen solutions to our government, and in particular to our minister 
responsible for Social Services, and in fact our Minister of Health as well, who is responsible for the 
care of our elderly as it respects our special care home beds. 
 
Now none of that happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wasn’t able to pick out one word, not one word. And 
they were bankrupt of ideas when they were in government and certainly they’re still bankrupt of ideas 
now in opposition. 
 
Now I say that quite frankly, this legislature really only has 56 members and it might be  



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1200 

fair to say that we really only have 55, since we have taken from our 56 and placed one of those in as 
Speaker and of course yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well. And so maybe, you know, we’re down to 
54. But we certainly do not have, nor do the people of Saskatchewan have, the assistance in any way, 
shape or form of the opposition in working as an Assembly. The election is over. They don’t seem to 
understand that. The election is over. 
 
Now is the time for those members, as opposition members, on issues like have been identified in this 
motion, to speak positively and constructively. You know, it’s very easy to criticize. As I said, I knew 
what it was like to be there. It’s very easy. And I use this argument: when you’re opposition, you’re right 
all the time, but when you’re in government, you’re lucky to be right half the time. 
 
Now obviously, Mr. Speaker, when they were in government, they had some problems too. Now I heard 
in his closing remarks, the former premier speaking. He was really, you know, disappointed that in the 
government of the day’s announcements on policies respecting senior citizens that there were no 
statements like had been made by the previous administration some two years ago, he said. And wonder 
what were those statements he was referring to. 
 
Well, I have some of these statements that were made by the previous administration, by the government 
of the day and their approach to caring for the senior citizens. And I have to take a look at some 
information that I have here. It’s dated July 13th, 1978. And let’s see what was the government of the 
day’s priority. What was it? Now, you know, I just don’t know who the Minister of Social Services was 
then. It might have been the member for Quill Lakes. I don’t know, really. But it doesn’t matter. It 
respects what the government’s position was and it reflects on what the former premier stated. This is as 
he was closing remarks about their statement some two or three years ago. The only one I have in hand 
states that the government’s position then, was: 
 

The preference of the elderly to remain in their own homes, plus the fact that we have some 
7,800 special care beds currently in operation throughout the province, has prompted government 
to place a moratorium on the development of any additional special care beds and focus attention 
and priorities on the delivery of basic home care services, including: homemaking, meal service, 
nursing, and minor home repairs. To this end, the department has embarked on a home care 
program that is expected to encompass the provincial population within two to three years. 

 
Now, here we are in a situation, Mr. Speaker, where this government had 11 years in office. Think of 
that, Mr. Speaker, 11 years in office, to solve the problems of the people of Saskatchewan, and in 
particular, as it relates to this motion - the senior citizens and special care home beds. Now, were they 
able to accomplish that in 11 years? No, Mr. Speaker, they were not able to accomplish that in 11 years. 
What they were able to do was absolutely next to nothing, and leave us with a terrible situation, Mr. 
Speaker, to be borne by us now as a new government. 
 
And here we are, only within that first year of government, still within our first year - still within our 
infancy, if you like, Mr. Speaker - as a new government. And I reflect as I just read this into the record, 
the statement by the previous government as to the policy as it relates to special care homes - a 
moratorium, a moratorium on special care homes. 



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1201 

Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s my first very valid observation. Now, if we move along and just take a look, 
and just be sure we have this, you know, Mr. Speaker, I want to be sure this point is well made. The 
shortage in special care home beds did not occur overnight. It occurred over 11 years while the NDP 
were in office - 11 years. 
 
Now, if we can just take a look, Mr. Speaker, at some of the evidence that I have, and just point out, you 
know, in a very brief form, some of the direction that’s been taken by this new government. And as I 
said, in its time when it would normally . . . a new government would be floundering to find its way in 
putting itself together, but it did that very quickly. And it was able to come up with a lot of good 
approaches to a lot of problems that we faced in the province of Saskatchewan and in particular our 
senior citizens. 
 
Now, one does not have to look hard, or, you know, or far, for that matter, to find supporting evidence 
for this. If we just take a look at some of the province’s capital expenditures on long-term care facilities 
in the last few years, and then bring that up to date to what we are doing as a new government. Just for 
the people of Saskatchewan, just for the record, Mr. Speaker, they introduced a motion, and I feel it’s 
very incumbent upon me, and it’s my responsibility as a member to set the record straight: ’79-80, in 
1979-80 - that was the NDP government - their commitment, 213,000; 1980-81 - that was an NDP 
government then, Mr. Speaker - 832,000; ’81-82 - now we’re still dealing with an NDP government - 
834,000. 
 
Now, this summer, what did the new government accomplish? What was their commitment, Mr. 
Speaker? This summer, $6.1 million was approved for the construction of 132 new beds, and the 
upgrading of 197 beds to level 3 standards. 
 
Now that is performance, Mr. Speaker. That’s a commitment. And this opposition, in its debate on this 
resolution, has been trying to indicate to the people of Saskatchewan that we are in some way misleading 
the people of Saskatchewan, saying that we have a commitment to our senior citizens when in fact we 
have no evidence to prove that. I have just given the evidence to prove, Mr. Speaker, that we in fact do 
have a commitment for the senior citizens of Saskatchewan. We do have that commitment. I’ve just read 
that commitment into the record. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are concerned about dollars and cents. That proves whether you have the 
commitment or not. The commitment is there far and ahead, head and shoulders above what the previous 
administration’s commitment was. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Quite a difference, compared to . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Yes, as the hon. member for Weyburn says, it’s quite a difference. It’s quite a 
difference between our position and that of the previous administration - a moratorium on special care 
home beds, a moratorium. 
 
In my riding along, Mr. Speaker, if, in this term of office, I am only to put one bed, just one special care 
home bed in my riding, that will be a 100 per cent improvement over what they were able to do in 11 
years. They didn’t put any nursing home beds in my riding, and as the record would indicate, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s one of the, if not the highest per capita people over the age of 65 of anywhere in the 
country, let alone Saskatchewan. And you weren’t able to put one bed in there in 11 years. And you still 
have the audacity to stand there in opposition, the former premier, the former minister of social services, 
and condemn this new government for failing to make a commitment  



 
April 19, 1983 
 

 
1202 

to senior citizens. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you know, as I said at my opening of my remarks, I wonder when the hypocrisy will 
end with this opposition. Possibly I shouldn’t concern myself about it because the more it continues the 
longer they’ll be in opposition, and the longer we’ll be in government, and the more the people of 
Saskatchewan will benefit because of it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, province-wide . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member for Athabasca is making 
a few comments, and he’s wanting to know, you know, what more I can tell him. He’s quite enlightened 
by what I’ve said so far, and he wants me to enlighten him a little further. And here’s some more 
enlightenment for the member for Athabasca. 
 
Province-wide, we have approximately 68 beds per 1,000, which indicates a generally adequate supply. 
The key problem - now I want you to listen to this - the key problem seems to be the distribution of these 
beds with, you know, some districts having as few as 26 beds per 1,000 population of people over the 
age of 65. 
 
Now we are working to rectify that imbalance. And I say that’s an imbalance, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
point out very clearly . . . And I can understand why some of the members in the opposition don’t want 
to listen too closely. And I’m sorry that the member for Shaunavon isn’t here right now, but it won’t 
matter much because the record will be conveyed to him. I’m sure the member for 
Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, who’s just coming into the House, might like to pass on this very interesting 
information to his neighbouring constituency colleague, the member for Shaunavon. 
 
And if we look at some of the figures as it relates to the numbers of beds per 1,000 people over the age 
of 65, and if we take it on a constituency basis, and it’s pretty interesting . . . And keeping in mind that 
we didn’t create this situation; it was not created by this government. It was a situation, Mr. Speaker, that 
was created by the NDP government in opposition, when they had, as I said, those 11 years to right that 
imbalance that we’re now trying to correct and make right for the people of Saskatchewan, make right 
for our senior citizens. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the figures: Shaunavon, 98.44 beds. That’s how many beds they had in the 
constituency of Shaunavon - 98.44 beds per thousand people over the age of 65. 
 
Now, let’s just take a look at another NDP constituency at that time - Humboldt, 87.78. Now, let us 
compare that. Let us compare that. Now the member for Shaunavon just come in, and I’m not going to 
run the figures by him. He knows how many beds he has per thousand people over the age of 65. I just 
ran the figures by for the member for Shaunavon in case he would like to disagree with me - it was 
98.44. All right. 
 
Now then, what are the figures for a Conservative riding at the time? And we could take the now 
Minister of Health. Thank goodness that Health has been saved. We have the Minister of Health, the 
hon. member for Indian Head-Wolseley. And how many beds did the member for Indian Head-Wolseley 
have? Now just how many? I want you to hear. I want you to hear, the member for Quill Lakes. This 
compares - 26.31 - 26 beds. That’s how many was in a constituency, a Conservative constituency - 26 
beds. 
 
Now then, they had 98 in Shaunavon . . . in a member for Shaunavon - 98 beds in his  



 
April 19, 1983 

 

 
1203 

riding; 98 there. Up in the former minister of finance’s constituency, the member for Humboldt, the 
former member for Humboldt, you had 87.78, and in the now Minister of Health, who was a 
Conservative member in opposition at that time - 26 beds. 
 
Now that’s an imbalance, Mr. Speaker, that was created by the NDP when they were in government - an 
imbalance. And again I reflect, and I say, and they have the audacity to stand there in opposition and 
criticize us as a new government for our commitment to the senior citizens of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Now I say that it’s very disappointing. It’s very disappointing for the members of this House. 
It’s very disappointing for the people of Saskatchewan. In particular, it surely must be very disappointing 
for the senior citizens of our province. 
 
If it wasn’t bad enough that they had to get over the statement made by another former premier, who was 
as well an NDP member, when he stated during the election campaign in ’78 respecting medicare: 
‘Don’t let them take it away.’ Now he scared senior citizens; he literally scared them and I think that was 
unfortunate. And now they’re using the same tactics trying to scare the public, scare the senior citizens 
into thinking that the Progressive Conservative new government is not a compassionate government, is 
not a caring government, is not a committed government to the many problems of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we know on this side of the House, the people of Saskatchewan know - they knew on April 26th 
and they know even more now - with the commitments that have been made in the budget, Mr. Speaker, 
that we in fact have made a very substantial commitment in these regards. 
 
Now I see members in opposition, Mr. Speaker, indicating that, you know, the poll is going down for the 
Conservatives. Well, again I recall when I was in opposition, the former attorney-general used to do that 
all the time - give us the old thumbs down and, you know, next election bye-bye Larry and so on and so 
forth. Well I’m still here. I seem to have an awful lot of company with me on this side of the House, but 
I don’t see the attorney-general. Where is he? Well, I would just on that note, Mr. Speaker, I would 
caution the member for Shaunavon, while he’s sitting there in his pious way, indicating that, you know, 
we’re going down and giving the old sign down . . . I would caution him, Mr. Speaker, I never did that 
when I was in opposition. I leave those decisions to the people of Saskatchewan. And I would just 
caution you, Mr. Member, I don’t think you ought to get into the same practice as the former 
attorney-general did. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have made a lot of valid points, but I have just begun as it respects this motion, and 
subsequently, Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


