






















































Hansard: April 07, 1983


(652) 653 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 7, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the committee of finance and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Shillington. 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — Mr. Speaker, because of some events which have been previously scheduled for 7 
o’clock this evening, I would move that the debate be adjourned and by leave resumed later this day. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Boutin: — Mr. Speaker, could I have permission to have leave to introduce special guests to this 
House? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you here today and through you, the Governor of the 
Lions Club, who is sitting in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Joe Saxinger. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boutin: — Beside him is Mr. John Coid from Unity and behind him is Mike Kotelko from 
Cudworth, also. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boutin: — Mr. Speaker, these individuals have walked from Saskatoon to Regina. The reason they 
have done this is for the Lions Eye Bank that Mr. Saxinger has been the spark plug actually to start this 
program going. And the reason for them walking all this way was to raise money for special equipment 
needed — and that is highly needed — in University Hospital, I believe, the equipment will be placed. 
 
However, I would like again, to welcome each and every one of you, and I know that we in s take lots of 
pleasure and pride in the honour of having Mr. Saxinger as our Governor of the Lions. Please join me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Mr. Speaker, I would just like to join with my hon. colleague, the member from 
Kinistino, to congratulate the Lions Club of Saskatchewan for their superb effort, and especially Mr. 
Saxinger, who crusaded to get the eye, Lions Eye Bank of Saskatchewan established. And I think it will 
serve many people in the years to come. And, I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Lions 
Club and you, Joe  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
654 

Saxinger. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

REPORTS OF COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Communication 
 

Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Speaker, earlier this day the, the fourth report of the standing 
committee on communications was brought forward, and was scheduled to be moved later this day. And, 
at that time . . . I am going to be, I am going to be moving the motion to concur with the fourth report of 
the standing committee on communications. 
 
Let me suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the fourth report contains one normal area, which is the area 
concerning the archive act, The Archives Act, and the scheduling and disposal of documents. The 
committee met this morning and went through all the documents, making additional changes and 
recommendations for a long-range policy that was started years ago, and slowly we’re starting to see the 
effects of it. 
 
The second part of the committee’s meeting was on the allowance of photographers from the media, the 
accredited media, to continue taking the photos that they have been allowed to, during the throne and 
budget speech, from the press gallery — which was an experiment that just about concludes tomorrow. 
And the committee is recommending they be given that privilege to continue that as long as they follow 
the rules as were outlined in the committee and later. 
 
The third portion or our report is the report re the television cameras in the committees of the House — 
basically, the crown corporation committee and the public accounts committee. This particular proposal 
was suggested that it be held for a short while, so that the caucuses could have a look at the 
documentation presented by the research staff, presented to make sure that whatever decision we make 
is a decision that we can all live with down the road, and is credible, and covers all the concerns. There 
is lengthy debate history on this particular issue in the House and in crown corporations that has 
happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first year public accounts committee ha now been opened to the press. That has 
never happened before, and now we are now asking for the last thing basically that is not opened to the 
press: the television cameras in those two areas. During . . . Since the committee meeting, I have taken 
some time to check what happens in other parts of Canada. 
 
In our report we provided with, it is indicated that certain provinces do allow the TV cameras into the 
committee, and they are Manitoba which allows the networks in, Ontario allows the networks in, 
Quebec which has an in-house system, and Newfoundland which allows the committee in. In doing 
some checking with Newfoundland today it seems that basically they cover the committee with, really 
with full sound film. The Ontario committee, they only come and cover the key issues. And in another 
area they only come in and take pictures and don’t bother with sound. 
 
So the whole data . . . What happens it seems . . . Now the history it seems is what really happens is this. 
Even though they have approval, if they don’t come too often. They don’t come too often, Mr. Speaker. 
And that was proven out in public accounts this year. As you will check in the records, we used to 
welcome the press when they  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
655 

came an hour and a half after we’d started for the last half-hour and yet they put up quite a yelling that 
they thought they should have the privilege. We gave them the privilege. 
 
And it was interesting to talk to the other provinces. They said it was a problem and they did have some 
problems, but they sort of got them ironed out as things moved down the road. And what was suggested 
this morning at our committee meeting was let’s have all the caucuses look at it to make sure that we’re 
moving properly and doing everything right. And that’s basically all that was said. 
 
And I can go back and quote April 10, 1980, April 21, 1981, newspaper columns and Mr. Romanow’s 
speeches that I could have a great length of time repeating those. And some of my own speeches would 
be interesting to repeat to the House. And I checked all that document before I rose this evening because 
I assume I may hear some of my own words thrown back across the House to me. But the interesting 
this is, Mr. Member, and I’ll quote just from a note that was made: 
 

A member who knows that he’s going to speak with something that may be interesting to the 
media will let them know just before he goes to speak in the committee. And the media will 
come in, take a couple clips of, a shot of what he says and leaves. 
 

Now that’s what’s happening. The long and short of it in Ontario and in Manitoba as well; it seems like 
that the right to film the committee is used only as background and in most cases simply because it’s too 
expensive and too boring for the cameras to hang around waiting for something good to happen. That’ 
the actual practice is what’s developed over the years. So they’ve had some history there. So let’s make 
sure whatever we do is right and sound. 
 
And the committee’s recommendation, Mr. Speaker, is very simple. Let it go back to the caucuses and 
be brought forward again for the committee to handle and make a recommendation by the House. So 
basically, my . . . The motion I wish to move, and seconded by the member from The Battlefords, Mr. 
Miles Morin: 
 

That the fourth report of the standing committee on communications now be incurred in. 
 

I so move, seconded by the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I, I, I wish to make a few comments on, on this motion. I was 
interested in our meeting of the communications committee this morning to . . . I hear words from the 
member for Rosthern where he was expressing the need to go slowly with TV and committees in this 
legislature, and I find that interesting, knowing the history of this debate, as I am well sure that, that Mr. 
Speaker is aware of the debate that has gone on over the past number of years. 
 
Only a few short months ago, in fact in December, in the crown corporations committee as recently as 
December 14, 1982, we had a debate and a discussion about whether TV should be allowed in the 
committee at that time, and the motion was brought forward even as recently as December 14 by the 
Minister of Highways, who was being very insistent that TV be allowed into the crown corporations 
committee at that time. And in part he said and I quote: 
 

We have said we have an open-door administration. I believe the people of  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
656 

Saskatchewan have the right to know exactly how their affairs are being administered. 
 

End of quote. And he went on to make the motion which read that the standing committee on crown 
corporations allow television of its proceedings by commercial television media and that we refer this 
matter to the House immediately. I think in all the statements that have been made up to today by the 
former opposition, and now government, have been that we should be moving quickly to have TV 
included in crown corporations, in public accounts, and other committees of the legislature. And I think 
it came today as a complete surprise, with a, and as a bit of a shock to us, when the member from 
Rosthern began the debate on quite a different side of the story, where he is now telling us how we need 
to go slow on this matter of getting television into committees. 
 
And I would just like to say that our position has been one of consistency, where we have said all along 
that we believe that TV should be allowed in crown corporations and other committees once it was 
established by the Assembly. I think we have reached that point in the history of this Assembly, and I 
think now is the time to move quickly in setting up an in-camera system in committees, and prior to that, 
as an interim measure, allowing commercial TV in the proceedings of our committees. And we will be 
voting in favour of this motion because I believe the motion basically says that this will allow the caucus 
of the government, as well as the opposition, a short period of time to review the matter and to get on 
with, and to get on with making a decision whether TV is allowed in committees or not. 
 
But I would just like to make the point that I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan and the press, and in 
particular, the opposition, will be surprised and a little bit amazed if the government members carry on 
with this debate of attempting to delay television in the committees of the Saskatchewan legislature. And 
so with that, I would just like to conclude by saying that we are in favour of open government, as we 
have always been in committees, once it was established in this House. We are the people who, who 
began the process, who made the decision, even while in government, to proceed along the lines of 
getting TV involved in the House, and I’m sure that all members will agree with that. I’m proud of that 
record of the past government, and I hope that this government does not stand in the way of completing 
the opening up of government which will include the committees of this legislature. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — . . . very much. I didn’t come prepared to speak on this matter, Mr. Speaker, and 
that, and that may well make my remarks three times as long as they should be. 
 
I want to, I just want to express a note of interest in the apparent hesitation in government caucus to 
allow the televising of the proceedings of the committees. The, the, the hesitation . . . I want to correct 
the member from Rosthern when he said the, the various caucuses were hesitant. There is no hesitation 
in the opposition caucus about having television in the, in the accounts committee. The hesitation is all 
in the, all in the government caucuses. 
 
I can only assume, Mr. Speaker, that it has, it bears some relation to the kind of publicity they think that 
they’ve got out of those committees, and some of it has not been all that favourable, and I can 
understand why they wouldn’t want their performance — some of them pretty dismal — being telecast 
around the province. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
657 

So, so while I can understand your concern about not enlarging the stage, I want to say that I think there 
is absolutely no logic to your hesitation. Surely if we’re going to have television in the Assembly, then 
surely it makes sense to have the committees telecast as well, and it isn’t . . . I want to say as well, Mr. 
Speaker, the hesitation cannot be for lack of interest. 
 
A year ago I might have believed that it might have been a waste of money to televise the committees, 
‘cause I frankly wasn’t sure how much interest there would be in a committee which was open to the 
public, and I say of the public accounts committee — it’s where I’ve spent all my time . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you back-pedalling now, Ned, are you back-pedalling or what? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — No, if you will just be patient I’m trying, I’m trying to, trying to fathom the reason 
for your back-pedalling. 
 
The public accounts, the public accounts committee, I frankly wondered how much interest there would 
be in it. What I discovered is that there is a fair amount of interest in what goes on in public accounts, a 
degree of interest that surprised me. I’ve also been surprised, I’ve also been surprised in the amount of 
interest shown in the televising of this Assembly. I have very frankly been surprised at the audience that 
this Assembly enjoys. The audience, the audience enjoyed, the audience enjoyed by the national, by the 
national, by the national parliament is, I think, at times pretty minimal, but I have been surprised at the 
number of people who watch the proceedings and who, on the week-end, or whenever they catch up to 
you, say, ‘Say, I saw that exchange or whatever it is, and I’ . . . and they’ll tell you how they felt about 
it. I’m surprised at the number of people who watch, watch the proceedings, and take enough of an 
interest to tell you about it later on. So, you people certainly aren’t back-pedalling because of lack of 
interest unless your experience is very different than mine. 
 
The, I just want to relate why I, one of the reason why I’m so surprised, Mr. Speaker. The member from 
Rosthern will recall, on December 1, an incident that occurred in the public accounts committee. 
Television . . . One, television media wanted into public accounts and wanted to televise the 
proceedings. My response to them was, outside the door, ‘I see no fault with it; I’m prepared to agree to 
it, but I just want to check it with the committee.’ Checked it with various members, including the 
member from Rosthern .We agreed, sure, no problem. 
 
He and I walked . . . the . . . We were then informed, Mr. Speaker, by the Clerk, that, that, that, that, that 
was premature, and that we could not . . . I see the member from Rosthern nodding his head, so I’m 
accurately relating the events . . . It was not . . . We then discovered we were premature, that we could 
not allow television into the public accounts committee until after the television was in the Assembly, 
and we therefore informed the, the television people that we did not have it within our power to allow 
them in. But it was agreed by all concerned, it was agreed by all concerned in public accounts that we 
were going to allow television in last fall, only a, something of a technical ruling prevented us from 
doing it. 
 
So I’ve heard from the, heard from the member from Rosthern who admits a degree of inconsistency in 
his approach, and it’s an interesting degree of inconsistency. I’d love to know the reason for it. I don’t 
think the member from Rosthern . . . He is so timorous  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
658 

he’s afraid that he’s going to be, going to come out badly in the, in the public accounts. 
 
I’d be interested as well in hearing from the vice-chairman of the public accounts committee, who also 
agreed to allow television before public accounts on December 1, and who similarly agreed that, that . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . Yes . . . well, I . . . Okay, I’m very interested in hearing from the 
vice-chairman of the public accounts committee, because we had agreed to let them come before the 
committee, and we had told them that. We had then, we then discovered, we then discovered that the, we 
then discovered that we couldn’t, and a technical rule prevented us from doing it, but we had agreed to 
allow them to come before the committee. And I just don’t understand what it is you know today that 
you didn’t know last December 1, and why it is your judgement on this matter is so different than it used 
to be. 
 
There’s . . . the . . . and I, I say that . . . I relate the proceedings before the public accounts committee. I 
think it’s fair to say the members of the public accounts committee are going to be disappointed if we, if 
we, if we don’t allow television in. So I hope you people, I hope you people find the courage of your 
convictions. I hope you allow television before the public accounts. We’re going to be voting in favour 
of the report, because this report does in fact decide the issue. But there is going to be a nasty rumble, I 
tell the members of the House, there’s going to be a nasty rumble, if we, if the government uses its 
overwhelming majority to prevent television from coming before the committees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to first comment with regard to the, the . . . I 
understand the members of the opposition are asking for an in-house system, and I think it’s, it’s 
fundamental that when, that we . . . We’ve had the television cameras now since this session started, and 
I think it is, has proven out very successful. I think it’s very important that we stay with the in-house 
system, as opposed to going to a, the private sector cameras, and I assume that’s what the members 
opposite are saying, Mr. Speaker. And, and I think it is proven that way, and I think that throughout the 
system I can agree with them that we should have the in-house system expanded down the road as we go 
with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t think that the government has to apologize, Mr. Speaker, for opening up the government o the 
province of Saskatchewan. Number one, with regard to the now chairman of the public accounts 
committee, I can assure those members in the House that were not here in the previous legislature that 
there wasn’t television cameras in the public accounts committee. There wasn’t any kind of media in the 
public accounts committee. 
 
We in the, on the opposition, suggested that surely we should be starting to open up the system a little 
bit to the media, but, oh, what kind of howls we heard from the members opposite: ‘It would destroy the 
whole concept of public accounts — absolutely destroy the concept.’ That was the, that was all the 
words echoed from the 44 that used to sit over here. ‘Stay away from that, stay away from that type of 
system,’ they always said, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we had. 
 
Now, in our term of 11 months, Mr. Speaker, what have we seen? We’ve seen the public accounts open 
to the media. We have seen television for the first time, Mr. Speaker, brought into the Assembly — 
brought into the Assembly by this government, Mr. Speaker. Brought into this Assembly by this 
government. So I am encouraged at least by the members opposite saying that we should have an 
in-house system. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
659 

But now they’re talking, now they’re talking, ‘Well, you know, you guy’s deficit’s too high; you’re 
spending too much money here, there, and the next place.’ So all of a sudden — zip! You know, they’re 
going to say, ‘Well, we can just go ahead and spent another $200,000 to get another system over there.’ 
The concept that we set up, Mr. Speaker, the concept that we set up in the entire legislature is a board of 
internal economy, and they were the people that budgeted for the expenditures of the Legislative 
Assembly and this particular Legislative Assembly Office. That was the function of it. 
 
Now what they’re saying is, ‘Let’s not use that any more; let’s just go ahead and spend $200,000.’ Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t hear any, any proposals by the members of the opposition who have two of the six 
members on the board of internal economy. I never heard any proposals by them, Mr. Speaker, that we 
should budget $200,000 for some television. I’m sure if we go through and peruse the board of internal 
economy we’ll find nothing of the sort, because it didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker. All of a sudden now, the 
brainwave from the minister, from the member from Regina Centre is somehow, ‘Well, just another 
$200,000.’ And that explains the way they try to run things, Mr. Speaker. Just 200,000 here, a million 
there, another million here, another million there, and then they’ve got the audacity to come up and say, 
‘Hey, we shouldn’t have a deficit.’ Mr. Speaker, I think this government stands on its record for the last 
11 months to show what we’ve done in opening up this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — We’ve, we’ve opened up the public accounts, Mr. Speaker; we have brought 
television into the Assembly, Mr. Speaker; and we’ve taken government that goes across the province 
listening to the people. And I don’t think we have to apologize to those folks over there for open 
government, and a wide open government that listens to the people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, when I, when I moved my motion, the motion earlier, I was very careful 
not to get into some of the arguments that have gone on in the long past. I referred to them slightly, but 
didn’t really want to quote Mr. Romanow, of April 21st, which indicated . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s he? 
 
Mr. Katzman: — The former member from Riversdale . . . I think he used to sit right there . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! Order, please! The hon. member is trying to make a few comments, and 
I would like to hear them, and I would ask for order so we can hear them. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — You know, he said that the whole structure of the committee had to be changed 
before we could have the media in. He said that instead of having the deputy ministers there to answer 
the questions, they had to have the politicians there. Now you noticed when this new government 
opened that committee, and the, that we didn’t bother changing to bringing in the politicians. We 
thought that the deputy ministers were quite capable of answering the questions, and the committee 
would not turn political, as you suggested when you were government, and your chief spokesman on  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
660 

all needs. 
 
I’m glad that the member from Shaunavon indicates that following the former minister, the 
attorney-general, Mr. Romanow, is, is a bad example to follow. I know that he’s looking for leadership 
over there, and that’s why he doesn’t want that man referred to . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please! We’re on a fairly narrow subject, and the debate is on the report of the 
committee, and I would ask the member to stay on the subject. 
 
Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I heed your words, and I apologize for being led astray by answering 
comments across the floor. 
 
But as I indicated earlier, and the most surprising comment came from the member from, from across 
the floor, when he made the comment: in-camera system. I didn’t hear him when he addressed us earlier, 
make any comment about using the existing media. His comment was the in-house system: the $200,000 
we should find like that. That’s what he was saying, that as they say they cry about our deficit. They say, 
‘Oh yes, but we want this for us. Therefore we should spend the $200,000.’ As the Minister of Finance 
indicated, I also sit on the board of internal economy and I heard no mention from their members during 
internal economy about additional funds for an in-house system. Mr. Speaker, that alone shows the 
flipping they’re doing. You know, I could spend, I think, a good hour referring to the May 21st, 1980 
debates as well as the April 21st debates and the reports in the Leader-Post and Star-Phoenix that all 
indicate the long debate that we’ve had on this issue. 
 
But I will tell you one thing, Mr., members of the House: this government, when it was in opposition, 
made certain recommendations. In 11 months we’ve acted on them re this committee. We have opened 
public accounts for the press to come to. There is now TV operating in the House and if the members are 
all . . . I think are all aware, the . . . where we deliver the signal to is paid for by the Assembly and is an 
expense and is going to be reviewed by that committee on what we should do after the session is over. 
 
So with all those in mind, I’m quite surprised that the members over on the other side who were . . . in 
1980 and ’81 didn’t want anything to happen, put the brakes on it, used their big majority to take the 
opposition and say, ‘No way.’ You used your majority of 44 members against 15 to say, ‘No way. You 
can’t have it.’ Now, now all of a sudden they’re concerned ‘cause the tables are turned. But I tell you, 
since we’ve been in government, we have brought in some of the things we asked for in opposition 
where it is concerning the openness of the media. We suggested, even, if I remember correctly (and I’m 
going back), that the, the photographs should be allowed. Part of this motion tonight is allowing those 
pictures to be taken. And so they will continue next week and for, for on, following the rules during the 
trial period. All these things are happening under this government, with this big majority if you want to 
call it that, because we’re doing it step by step and honestly and fairly. 
 
And therefore, I support this motion in total for the reason that it’s being sensible and responsible, not 
just saying, ‘We want, we want.’ We’re putting a set . . . We’re going to worry about budgeting and 
everything else and take it step by step. Therefore I’m pleased to have moved this motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
661 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the committee of finance and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Shillington. 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and in response to the spirited pleas from the member from 
Weyburn, I’m happy to get up again and resume the debate and pick up with the remarks where I left off 
earlier this afternoon when I was interrupted by supper time. 
 
At that point, Mr. Speaker, you may recall I was complimenting the Minister of Health on the fine job he 
is doing, and the imagination that he is bringing to his position. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — I was also saying that it was a measure of the man that the chiropody services program 
is being initiated and going ahead. I say, ‘a measure of the man,’ Mr. Speaker, because he listened and 
responded to the needs and the concerns and the requests of many residents of the province, particular 
senior citizens who had contacted him. One other thing I may say about the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker, and for the benefit of the members to my right: they have the Minister of Health to thank for 
my participation in politics at the provincial level because he was the man who talked me into running 
provincially. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — Surveys by Saskatchewan Health, Mr. Speaker, have indicated that 48 per cent of he 
general population and 80 per cent of the adult population have foot problems. Consequently the 
government will be initiating the development of a provincial chiropody program during the fiscal year 
1983-84 — real help to those people who really require it. Mr. Speaker, the measures I mentioned are 
but a few that will be implemented by the government, and the people of this province can look forward 
to excellent comprehensive health care in the years ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, turning now to another matter. In the debate on the throne speech, I spoke on the needs for 
increased technical education, the need for more spaces at our technical institutes and the need for 
high-technology programs because high technology is the future of the province. I’m pleased to see that 
these needs are indeed being addressed as a result of the new budget that was brought in. Let’s take a 
brief look at the present technical institute situation and this will become more clear. 
 
The present institute training capacity is 5,500 training places, roughly 4,000 short of the projected 
annual labour requirements for this province by the year 1990. The range of training programs is narrow, 
with major employment sectors seriously underrepresented. For example, mining, forestry, petroleum, 
manufacturing and agriculture. The present institute populations are drawn primarily from the institute’s 
city and its surrounding communities. For example, Kelsey drew 66 per cent, 66 per cent of its 1981 
population within a 200 kilometre radius of Saskatoon. Distant rural  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
662 

residents are seriously underrepresented in the institute system. To counter the imbalanced participation 
from around the institute cities, the government is proposing to provide training in major population 
cities around the province, including the North, through the Saskatchewan Skills Extension Program. 
 
Further to this, the province’s inadequate training capacity is highlighted when compared to other 
provinces. The percentage of young people aged between 18 and 24 years of age pursuing full time 
training in Saskatchewan is below 50 per cent of the average in the other three western provinces. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker and New Brunswick have the lowest training ratio in the country. To counter this we 
will be adding 1,200 new training places this year, and new programs will be initiated. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, until recently the mark of an educated person was the ability to speak two 
languages; en cole j’ai etudie la langue francais. Well now, that second language is being replaced. And 
the second language of today, the language that is the mark of the educated person, is a language of 
computer technology. It will become increasingly important in the years ahead that our students become 
comfortable with and knowledgeable about computers. So new computer-related programs are being 
introduced in Kelsey, Wascana Institute, and STI in Moose Jaw. 
 
I won’t list them all, but it is an impressive array of programs that will be in place this year and next. 
Some programs that were available only in other provinces will be added — for example, graphic arts, 
drywall construction — and many programs will be expanded. These are just a few of the exciting 
thrusts being initiated by this government. And they reflect our confidence in the future and in the youth 
of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should like to take just a couple of moments to show how the budget contains beneficial 
measures for my constituency, the Turtleford constituency. Approximately $6.5 million of capital 
construction will be injected into the Turtleford constituency this year. Included in that figure is over $2 
million for highway construction. And a couple of long awaited projects will finally get off the ground, 
for example, Highway 378, south of Spiritwood and the Blatz-Nolan access. We’ve been trying for years 
to get action on these particular roads, but to no avail. This government has delivered to the people of 
the Turtleford constituency. 
 
This will definitely be an exciting year for the town of Spiritwood, my home town. In addition to the 
$850,000 worth of construction allotted to the Spiritwood Separate School, plans are being made for the 
construction of an extended care home in Spiritwood with a value well in excess of $2.25 million. I 
remember when I was mayor of Spiritwood and also a member of the hospital board, working hard with 
my colleagues and with other concerned citizens to convince the former government of the absolute 
need in that area for Level 3 and 4 care. I made this project my number one priority as the elected 
representative of that area and I want to tell the folks of Spiritwood back home, I did not let you down! 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Turtleford will be well served by our government and this is reflected in the 
excellent budget presented by the Minister of Finance. It is y pleasure to support the main motion and 
vote against the hastily conceived and poorly contrived amendment. And Mr. Speaker, if I ay say so, if 
we need any further clincher that this indeed was a first class budget, I’d like to point out that this 
government has not imposed any import tax on haggis. Thank you. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
663 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise tonight to speak on the, on the budget, a budget that 
. . . I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I most certainly can’t concur with the member from Turtleford. His 
constituency was, was awarded with a lot of money out of that budget, and I can only say that northern 
Saskatchewan was totally left out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thompson: — I, I want to, I want to start off by making a few remarks, Mr. Speaker, on what the 
Minister of Highways had to say in here last evening. I wish that he was here right now so that he could 
hear my comments, because I think, Mr. Speaker, the programs that he was talking about were programs 
that were started by the former NDP government and stalled for well over a year, and now he’s 
reannouncing these programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to make just a couple of comments about the wild exaggerations and 
misleading information contained in the remarks yesterday by the member for Wilkie, the Minister of 
Highways. But I wish to, to concentrate particularly on the abandonment of northern transportation 
needs by this Conservative government. I would also like to set the record straight for some of the 
minister’s wild, contorted figures. 
 
First, he proudly and quite improperly boasts of a 12 per cent increase in the Highways budget. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, in a budget with an overall increase of less than 7 per cent, a Highways increase of 12 per 
cent is pretty difficult to believe, particularly with such, such a weak minister involved. Twelve per cent, 
he boasts. But let’s look at the facts. Let’s look at the figures in the estimates themselves. 
 
When we take the 1983-84 Department of Highways budget which now includes all moneys for the 
North and for transportation agency and for the highway traffic board, we get a total of 221.1 million. 
That’s on page 9 of the estimates. Now when we take from the same page 9 and from page 63 all of the 
funds budgeted for the same Highways and Transportation activities from their first budget last 
November, we get a total of 213.5 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we clearly see that instead of a 12 per cent increase that he boasts, instead of the 7 
per cent that most of his colleagues got, this minister managed to get an increase of only 3.6 per cent for 
all Highways and Transportation activities — about half of the overall average budgetary increase this 
year — not 12 per cent, but less than 4 per cent. 
 
Second, Mr. Speaker, the minister boasts so proudly of his $110 million capital budget. He was ashamed 
to compare it, however, to the total capital budget of the Conservatives’ first budget last year, which was 
not 110 million, but 112.8 million when northern highways capital is included. So on, so on his capital 
budget he has not even maintained his overall 3.6 per cent increase, but has had a natural decrease of 
$2.8 million. Now the results of this cutback in the overall capital program can be clearly seen by simply 
adding to the figures in the 1983-84 project array tabled by the minister on Wednesday. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
664 

We see a total value network for 1983-84 of 858 kilometres. When we compare that to the total volume 
achieved in 1981-82 by the NDP administration two years ago, we see that is not 858 kilometres, but 
1,148 kilometres, a 25 per cent cut in volume of improvements to our provincial highway system, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn to the issue of northern highways in particular. And the minister was 
talking about the completion of Highway 155 to La Loche. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
completion of Highway 155 to La Loche was budgeted for in the last NDP budget, and would have been 
completed but as soon as this government took over they completely cancelled that project and they 
never moved one inch on Highway 155 north of Buffalo Narrows to complete the length to La Loche. 
Not one inch of road was opened up, Mr. Speaker, totally left it out . . . just forgot about it. 
 
Then he, then he boasts about the road from, from Beauval to Dillon — that they are going to complete 
the road to, from Beauval to Dillon. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the road from Beauval to Dillon just 
had about 12 kilometres to be finished, and that was completely stopped by the Department of Highways 
and the Department of Northern Saskatchewan — only a small portion of that road was worked on last 
summer. They talk about the Dillon road to Michel village. The same thing applies there. 
 
And what happened to all this money, Mr. Speaker? The money that they, that was allotted for northern 
highways, six point some million dollars was taken out of the northern highway projects, was totally 
cancelled last year and transferred to southern Saskatchewan. But, Mr. Speaker, they transferred 
six-point-some-million from the South, from the North to the South, but they did put some back. 
Because they had a highway program this winter where they put 1.6 million back into northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think it’s pretty clear, I think it’s pretty clear just where the priorities of the Minister of Highways 
lie. And I want to, and I want to, and I want to say to this legislature, Mr. Speaker, that only a few days 
after this government took power the Minister of Highways cancelled a scheduled bus route from 
Meadow Lake to La Loche, a very important route for the people of northern Saskatchewan. Within, 
within days after this government took power, they cancelled that bus route to La Loche. Who did that? 
It was done by the Minister of Highways. He cancelled it. I tell you, Mr. Speaker, as I said before in this 
House, as soon as the election . . . As soon as the Conservative government took power I knew that the 
citizens of northern Saskatchewan were in trouble. Highways programs were cut off. Housing projects 
were cut off. It only took them a couple days to cut the bus line off. 
 
Then I want to, I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to another request that was made by myself to the Minister 
of Highways. I requested, in writing, on July 6, 1982, that a committee be set up of members of the 
legislature to tour northern Saskatchewan — on July 6, 1982. As of today the minister has not answered 
or acknowledged this letter. Has not even answered the letter. I asked that the committee be set up to go 
into northern Saskatchewan, to take some Conservative members and some New Democratic members 
and just see what the situation is in there, before they pulled out all the Department of Northern 
Saskatchewan and moved them to . . . (inaudible) . . . departments. 
 
He didn’t have the courtesy to answer that letter, Mr. Speaker. That, that, I tell you, indicates just where 
the priorities of this Conservative government is. Most certainly, it’s not with people, and it’s not with 
people of northern Saskatchewan. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
665 

Mr. Speaker, since April 26th we have seen nothing but a deterioration in northern Saskatchewan. The 
Department of Northern Saskatchewan has been pulled out, and nothing has been put back in to replace 
it. Highway programs have been cancelled, and studied, and slowed down. The bus route was . . . The 
bus route was cancelled within days. Unemployment is running from 75 per cent to 95 per cent in 
northern Saskatchewan in pretty well every town. And the minister and, and, and the hon. member for 
Moosomin . . . When I, when I bring out these kinds of figures, he sits there and laughs, and he makes 
jokes in this. He makes jokes in this. And he used to be the critic for northern Saskatchewan. And he 
was a pretty . . . (inaudible) . . . critic of northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. But now he smirks and he 
laughs when I talk about the high unemployment rate. And the member from Weyburn . . . He’s not in 
his seat neither, Mr. Speaker. When he sits over there, he smirks when we talk about the problems in the 
province. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that what we see happening in Saskatchewan today is a good indication of what is 
really going on. And, and I, and I hear the members. They’re all laughing and joking. They figure it’s 
pretty good. The member for Weyburn referred to us as hypocrites. That’s fine. He can laugh, and he 
can joke about that. But I don’t think it’s, it’s anything to be joked at. And I think it’s very 
unparliamentary . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh. And he says he wasn’t joking, Mr. Speaker. That’s, 
that’s the kind of arrogance that we have in the Conservative Party that sits across in the government 
benches. And I tell you, you guys are all going to come to your senses one of these days because, as the 
member from Moosomin said in this House, ‘History will repeat itself,’ and I want to warn you that it 
will repeat your, itself. And just think back, 50 years back, if you want to look back and think about the 
history of this province, think back 50 years ago, when you guys were in power. You were in power 
from 1925 . . . 1929 to ’34, and history will repeat itself. And I tell you, and or those who don’t know 
what happened in 1934, the Conservative government was thrown out with not one seat. 
 
So I say, with all the unemployment that’s going on in this province and you guys you say that things 
are good, I tell you they are not good. There is a serious problem out there and you’re going to have to 
answer to that. And you can smirk, and you can sit there and smirk, and you can laugh when we talk 
about the high unemployment rate, and the high welfare rolls that we have in this province. But I tell 
you, you’re going to have to answer to that. You’re going to have to answer for all that. But I say, and I 
say to the member from Moosomin who was the critic for northern Saskatchewan, and he knows of the 
problems; he was up there and had a look at them. And I think he, he is, he is an individual that should 
be, he should be, he should be supporting this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, I was very disappointed when I see a budget and I see that northern Saskatchewan is just 
about totally left out. I see where they, they’re going to put, they’re going to put in a new municipal act. 
That’s fine. Things aren’t going to get started until the northern municipal act is in there. And I say 
things have to get started very fast because they have deteriorated now for about a year, and when you 
take a look at the situation that we have, and the feeling amongst the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
it’s very, very serious. 
 
And it has serious effects, not just in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. One just has to drive down to 
Meadow Lake and go into the business community of Meadow Lake, and the first thing they tell you: 
‘What is going on in northern Saskatchewan? We just don’t see anybody down here any more buying 
any commodities.’ They’re not selling any cars and it’s, and it’s becoming very serious, and it’s and it’s 
. . . And to show you  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
666 

just how important northern Saskatchewan was, and when it was booming for, for 10, 11 years under the 
NDP government, you can go into Prince Albert and talk to business people, and you can go into North 
Battleford and they’ll tell you the same thing. Something has gone wrong in northern Saskatchewan. We 
just don’t see the folks up there any more, and the reason for that is what I have just indicated in the 
House. Nothing in the budget to solve the problems that we have. 
 
Another, they talked about training, training our unskilled labour force in the province. And the first 
thing they did, they cut $300,000 off of the community college budget - $300,000 cut, and that’s where 
their priorities are. 
 
I was disappointed when I . . . In the budget when, for Health, and I didn’t see a new hospital announced 
. . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I, I really, I really expected that new hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I want to say that I’m very, very disappointed in this budget. The citizens of 
Saskatchewan are very disappointed, and I think that time will bear that out, that this group of 
Conservatives across the floor are going to have to answer for the way they’re treating the citizens of 
this province, for the money that they’re giving to the oil companies, the removal of the gas tax. And 
who does that benefit? CP truckers who drive through this, through this . . . (inaudible) . . . And as a 
result of taking that $140 million on gas tax off . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . We now, we now see an 
increase in our premiums with SGI, where, where they were . . . Twenty per cent of that gas tax went to 
SGI to underwrite the losses. Now what do we have? We have increases in everything — increases in 
telephone, increases insurance, lack of opportunities for the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, I see my time is up, and I think it’s quite apparent that I will not be supporting the 
budget, but I will be supporting the amendment to the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Gee, too bad . . . (inaudible) . . . write a good speech. Thank you, thank you, Mr. . . . 
(inaudible interjections) . . . You guys have to be kind to me. I have a cold, so be quiet, Weiman. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker, it is good to be back. 
 
It is with some confusion and amusement that I’ve been listening to the hon. members in the opposition 
decry the deficit in the budget. I could not quite understand why they are objecting to a deficit. Could it 
be that they are really closet Conservatives? Could it be the reason I couldn’t find conservative 
economic books in the library was they were all in the NDP caucus? Could it be they have now 
embraced supply side economics and will soon demand a constitutional amendment that there must be a 
balanced budget? They probably have secret pictures of Ronald Reagan. 
 
But no, no, that’s can’t be. That explanation is too unbelievable and not feasible, because the opposition 
also objects to any cuts in government size and government spending. The opposition wants no changes 
from their big government, big-spending practices, Mr. Speaker, but the opposition also objects to a 
deficit. Therefore, the opposition must be objecting because the taxes have not been increased 
sufficiently, or at all, except for trivia like cigarettes. 
 
There can no, be no other way to put consistency in the NDP criticism except to assume  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
667 

the NDP want to increase taxes. Now, of course, an increase in taxes would be disastrous. To continue 
the NDP course of big government, big-government spending and high taxes was, and would be, 
disastrous and the people of Saskatchewan knew it and know it. 
 
As government takes more and more of a person’s or business’s wealth, several things happen. This is 
very simplistic. Anyone can understand it, but, but the province has been running for several years as if 
people, as if some people don’t. So I will spell it out. 
 
Number one, when taxes increase, people leave to other provinces, or to the United States. That is why, 
in Saskatchewan, we have lost a million people, and many of those people who left Saskatchewan are 
those with, people with initiative and drive, who could have made Saskatchewan great or greater. 
 
Barbara Amiel, in her book Confessions, states, 
 

I began to understand that one simple way to measure the desirability of a society is whether 
people can leave it when they want to, and whether more people want to get into it than want to 
get out. 

 
One can’t parallel the NDP’s Saskatchewan and the communist eastern European countries completely 
without making too light the suffering of eastern Europeans. However, it does seem in Saskatchewan, 
for the last 40 years, more people were leaving Saskatchewan than coming to Saskatchewan. As one 
person told me, ‘It took me 10 years to make enough money so I could leave.’ 
 
Number two. What happens when there’s high taxes? High taxes create a situation where more and more 
government services are required and expected. When people do not have enough money to look after 
themselves and their family, more tax supported medical services, dental services, nursing homes, etc. 
are required. When people do not have money to give to charities, recreations, and cultural events, more 
taxpayer money is needed in those areas. Now you people better listen, because I’m doing it for your 
benefit. 
 
When people do not have money to invest to build and expand their businesses, they cannot maintain 
and establish jobs for other people. Unemployment is increased, more taxpayer money must go to 
financing financial assistance programs. 
 
An Hon. Member: — See, they’re not listening. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Oh well, somebody . . . That’s all right. We’ll continue. 
 
Number three . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Great. Now listen carefully. 
 
Number three: when taxes are increased, people’s productivity and pride in their work is decreased. For 
some reason, people are willing to work harder and longer. They enjoy the work more when more 
financial rewards go into their pockets than go into the government’s pocket. For some reason, people 
like working for themselves and seeing benefit from their work. 
 
Number four. What happens when taxes are increased? The government has the resources to intervene 
more and more into the private lives of individuals. Perhaps the NDP know this. The individual has less 
resources to fight this constant erosion of  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
668 

personal freedom and privacy. 
 
Number five. What happens when taxes are increased? There’s a point when taxes are increased that 
there is less and less money in governmental coffers. When people cannot make a profit, they do not pay 
taxes. Sometimes governments get so greedy, they demand so much from the taxpayer, they cause a 
decrease in the number of taxes and in the amount of taxes collected. 
 
When taxes were cut in California, it was found that no essential services had to be cut, because the tax 
decrease stimulated the economy and thus increased the tax base. 
 
Not only has this province and country suffered through the statist mentality of the Liberal-NDP 
coalition governments, it has suffered through a pop ideology that is anti-growth and anti-business. 
Profit is seen, and has been seen, as a dirty word. Any businessman that dared to make a profit deserved 
to have the government regulate him and tax him out of business. Of course, when a business does not 
make a profit, there are no taxes paid, no jobs maintained or created. But this didn’t seem to bother 
people. By the popular myth went: it was bad to be a businessman, and worse to be a successful one. 
What is good, goes the myth, is a centrist, government-planned economy. Lorne Nystrom, NDP MP 
from Yorkton-Melville, had a very interesting article about that in a March issue of Globe and Mail. If 
one ever questions that Trudeau and the NDP have the same philosophy, it is worth while to read that 
article. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They always vote the same, anyhow. 
 
Mrs. Caswell: — Right on. 
 
There are many fine points in our finance minister’s budget. There’s an honest and successful attempt to 
streamline government. Some of those measures deserve to be quoted for those who may have missed 
the finance minister’s speech, or forgot it. Quote: 
 

Through careful management of the expenditures proposed in our November budget, we estimate 
departments and agencies of government will be able to turn back to the treasury a further 30 
million in 1982-83. 
 

We have a finance minister and cabinet that sets goals, plans how to reach those goals, and then 
accomplishes those goals. I quote the finance minister again: 
 

In my budget address in November I announced that planned government spending would be cut 
by 170 million in the 1982-83 fiscal year, without affecting essential services. I am pleased to 
inform the Assembly that we have in fact exceeded that target. 
 

This is a very, a fine accomplishment for a government that has inherited an NDP chaos and mess. 
 
I am especially pleased that in many instances the government machinery and taxpayer dollars are going 
to be used not to compete with or destroy the private sector, but are being used to return to the private 
sector capital and programs that will strengthen an economy more independent of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
669 

Mrs. Caswell: — Examples are: the agriculture division of the heritage fund will be initially used to 
find the farm purchase program. It is much better to have government help farmers own land, rather than 
help government grab land, grab land from the taxpayer with the taxpayers’ money. 
 
Number two example: our government will assist Saskatchewan business to compete for contracts from 
large firms, crown corporations and the government. 
 
Number three, our government will open a new trade office in the United States and promote 
Saskatchewan businesses outside the province. 
 
Number four, our government will give a 20 million tax reduction for small businesses. This program 
allows small businesses a rebate of 5,000 for every employee hired. The cabinet ministers and 
government communications will outline in detail to the satisfaction of the business community these 
plans. But I was impressed as I was working through Saskatoon-Westmount papers, and I realized how 
many small businesses I have in my area. It is traditionally called the union seat, and indeed there are 
may workers who will be very pleased to have a budget that helps them find jobs, helps their children 
find jobs, but also helps them in their small businesses. And this is indeed a very good budget for my 
area, Saskatoon-Westmount. 
 
We have, we have a government that is helping to re-establish in Saskatchewan confidence in the 
individual ability to control his own destiny. 
 
Thomas Jefferson said, ‘The best government is the one that governs the least.’ After years of nanny 
statism, that sounds a very strange notion. However, in Saskatchewan I believe people have confidence 
in this government because its members recognize the limitations of government. They recognize 
sometimes government creates problems by trying to solve all human problems. To quote an old-time 
CCF-NDP supporter, who is now an ex-NDPer in my constituency, ‘I didn’t mind when the NDP 
thought they were next to God, but when they started acting like God, then I had enough.’ I believe 
people will continue to have confidence in this government, because we’re not prepared to play at 
omnipotence. A vigorous and thriving economic community ultimately depends on the people who are 
willing to work and the people who are willing to take risks. I trust and I believe we are moving towards 
a government that allows initiative to be rewarded, and I congratulate the Minister in Finance in taking 
this very important step, and I support his budget. I do not support the amendment. 
 
Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to rise on behalf of 
the fine people of the Weyburn constituency, and join in the debate on the recent budget, and first and 
foremost, I would like to congratulate the Minister of Finance for an absolutely excellent budget. It is a 
budget that acknowledges the times we live in; it acknowledges the time of recession with 
understanding, responsibility and compassion. 
 
It is a budget that understands the number one problem facing people in Saskatchewan today — 
unemployment. And, it deals with it in a responsible and compassionate manner, for no one likes the 
humiliation and indignity of employment. Understanding, responsibility and compassion — that is the 
commitment of the Minister of Finance, his cabinet colleagues and the very successful leadership of 
Premier Grant Devine, that Premier Grant Devine brings to government. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
670 

It has been said, Mr. Speaker, that the measure of success is not whether you have a tough problem to 
deal with — and no one will disagree that unemployment is a tough problem to deal with — it has been, 
it has been said that the measures of success is not whether you have a tough problem to deal with, but 
whether you have the same problem that you had last year. Well, what were the problems facing the 
people of Saskatchewan last year? Number one, health care was not receiving the attention it deserves; 
number two, we had high interest rates; number three, we had burdensome gas taxes; number four, we 
had inflation; number five, the family farm was under siege, due to high interest rates; number six, we 
had unbridled utility rates complicated by massive losses at SGI, and so on, and so on, Mr. Speaker. 
And, I ask the Assembly: are we facing the same problems this year? And, the answer in a word, Mr. 
Speaker, is no. 
 
Granted, inflation is still lurking out there, but it has been relegated to the corner of the door, soon to be 
pushed right out the door in Saskatchewan. But, you only have to look at the success the Devine 
government has had in dealing with these tough problems. And you only have to look at the 
commitment that was so well put in the commitment brochure delivered to many thousands of homes in 
this province one year ago today, the commitment the Devine Tories made to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it reads, page after page, outlining the problems and how they would be remedied. 
This is the commitment they gave to the people of Saskatchewan, and this is what, in fact, has been 
carried out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The high interest rates were and are being acknowledged by programs like the mortgage interest rebate 
program and the farm purchase program, and, you know, Mr. Speaker, the other night in budget debate, 
the Hon. Leader of the Opposition was in fine theatrical style, a side of him previously not seen before 
the advent of television in the Chambers. 
 
At any rate, at any rate, the Leader of the Opposition in spectacular fashion, brought in a wad of money, 
and I believe it was 50 ten dollar bills, and with it, he was going to put the budget in perspective. He was 
busy conjuring up pictures of laying bills end to end from here to Vancouver or wherever it was. In fact 
I think if one checks the, the record, Mr. Speaker, he was actually . . . 
 
They say imitation is a serious form of flattery. And he was using a Reagan technique. And he pointed 
out how one of his favourite ploys is to illustrate just how large a deficit is, by bringing it down to terms 
which he hopes other people can understand. And to do that, the Leader of the Opposition got a pack of 
50 ten dollar bills and conjured up these pictures of laying bills end to end from here to Vancouver or 
wherever it was. And he wanted to bring the budget down to terms people could understand. Well I’d 
like to take that same stack of bills, Mr. Speaker, and put it in perspective as well. 
 
Now it took me a considerable longer time to be able to put together $500 that it did the Leader of the 
Opposition. But I was able to scrap, put it together. And to put things in perspective a little bit, Mr. 
Speaker, as the Leader of the Opposition did, and it’s a, it’s a . . . It’s a good method to use, because 
when you speak in the hundreds of millions of dollars so often in this House and in budget debate and in 
millions of dollars, people in Saskatchewan do have trouble comprehending exactly what those numbers 
mean. 
 
For example if you looked at page 93 on the estimates, ’83-84 estimates, and I just picked this page out 
because it happens to be open, Supply and Services, vote 13, item 22, central survey and mapping, 
$1,716,870. That sounds like a lot of money and the  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
671 

average person on the street and, and even maybe then not-so-average person wouldn’t particularly 
relate to what central survey and mapping and $1.7 billion budget would do. 
 
But one thing we found out from the people of Saskatchewan last year a this time was they might not 
understand that kind of number and those kinds of contexts, but tell them that a government is wasting 
thousands of dollars on a bathtub in government offices and they understand that very well. Because 
people know what bathtubs should cost and they know they shouldn’t cost thousands of dollars. 
 
But it’s hard for people to understand whether their 1.7 million expenditures for central survey and 
mapping is a good expenditure or not. So using a technique such as the Leader of the Opposition used 
with a packet of money does have its uses, and I would like to expand on those a little further. If you did 
take these bills which he was wanting to lay end to end from here to the Pacific Ocean, I think it was, I 
would have to tell him that he would have to take this pack — he was going to lay it down once. Well he 
would have to lay it down twice to equal the Minister of Health’s budget. But he didn’t use that analogy. 
You wouldn’t lay it down once. You would have to lay it down twice and you still wouldn’t equal the, 
equal the Minister of Health’s budget for the up-coming year. It’s nearly $1 billion. 
 
You know, there used to be a television program on a program about a superhuman individual 
performing superhuman feats. And this program was called, ‘The Six Million Dollar Man.’ Well in 
Saskatchewan we have our own version in the person of the Hon. Graham Taylor, the Minister of 
Health. But he’s not just a six-million dollar man; he’s the billion dollar man. No user fees in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. No shirking of the honest responsibility of health care in this province. A billion 
dollar budget shows the kind of commitment the Devine government is prepared to make for health care. 
It is this kind of commitment, Mr. Speaker, that will take Saskatchewan from number eight to number 
one in health care. Medicare will be returned to its rightful place — a billion dollar budget. 
 
And yet it was the NDP that perpetrated untruths and myths upon the public just one year ago, once 
again trying to suggest that if the Tories were elected medicare would be gone. Scare tactics designed to 
frighten people for pure political reasons; scare tactics designed to frighten the elderly people. However, 
the people of Saskatchewan were to be duped no longer. The game of deficit and distortion, or deceit 
and distortion rather, was over on April 26, 1982. Medicare under Devine Tories is alive and well in 
Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. The myth, the deceit, the distortion, the scare tactics being used on 
people will not work again by the NDP. 
 
What we have seen is increased spending on health care, rationalization of ambulance services, 
rationalization of nursing home care, new hospitals, cancer treatment facilities, and so on, and so on, Mr. 
Speaker. I, along with all the people of Saskatchewan should and in fact do applaud the efforts of the 
Minister of Health and his team dedicated to making Saskatchewan’s health care number one in the 
country. 
 
Well secondly, Mr. Speaker, if you took this stack of money you would find that you need several stacks 
to equal that being put into the bank accounts of the many people in my constituency enjoying the 
benefits of the mortgage interest rebate program. One stack wouldn’t do it for what the average person 
receives out there in benefits — 39,000 individuals receiving rebates currently at a value something in 
the order of $23 million, and it is estimated by the end of the second year of the program some $57.5  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
672 

million, Mr. Speaker. Individuals in my area every month, just like clockwork, receiving this kind of 
help, help. And in fact, if you even took the average payment that’s being made, it would take two 
stacks of money like that to make up for what’s going into their bank accounts on a yearly basis. 
 
This is help for real families. It’s security for the homeowner; it’s security for the home. Rebate 
assistance amounting to several thousand dollars over the life of the program — stacks of this kind of 
money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another question: how many stacks of this money pack and how many miles of bills if they were laid 
end to end would it take to equal the assistance provided to those young farmers out there receiving 
rebates under the farm purchase program? What an absolutely phenomenal success that program has 
been. And even this week, Mr. Speaker, farm credit corporation announced their rates have moved down 
again. And this means that with the same amount of dollars we’ll be able to help even more young 
farmers. More people like young Steven Bekker, the fourth generation farmer who like, likes the way 
the farm purchase program assisted in the intergenerational transfer in his farm. A program helping more 
farmers become owners in one week than land bank did in 10 years. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I almost have to revise that last statement. I almost have to revise the statement that 
said: helping more farmers become owners in one week than land bank did in 10 years. I keep having to 
revise it, because when I first started out I said we’d helped more people in one month than land bank 
did in 10 years. I was wrong, and I apologize to the House for that, because I was more correct if I’d 
have said we helped more in one week than land bank did in 10 years. 
 
But now I have to revise it again because I may once again be distorting the truth. And the reason I say 
that, Mr. Speaker, is: I happened to be talking to a lawyer, a lawyer acquaintance of mine the other day, 
and he indicated to me that they had on one day handled 29 farm credit corporation farm purchase 
program client files — 29 in one day. So I might really be more correct if I said: the farm purchase 
program has helped more young farmers in one day than land bank did in the whole year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hepworth: — And you compare this 29 in one day with the results of land bank in any given year, 
and I think the numbers tell it all, and I just refer once again to the annual report of land bank — the 
1981 land bank report. And it shows things in there of the purchases by lessees: in ’78 we had 31; and in 
’81 we had 25; and ’79, 42; and in ’80, 34. So it’s running between 25 and 42 in any given year, and 
here in one day we’ve got 29 young farmers becoming owners of their own land, and in fact in control 
of their own destiny. 
 
And I could continue on, in fact, Mr. Speaker, and I could continue on with some of the problems and 
perhaps I will, that we were facing in Saskatchewan a year ago, that were, are no longer here because of 
a Conservative government. 
 
And another one that comes to mind is the gas tax — the infamous sliding gas tax. The measure of the 
success of the Devine government is very evident on that one. It was a problem a year ago, and 18 
minutes, or 18 seconds after the Devine government was put in power, it was gone. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
673 

The infamous sliding gas tax was a case study in picking people’s pockets every time they filled up for 
gas going to or from work. There is $130 million or so in the pockets of Saskatchewan people today 
because this scurrilous tax was removed, cut, chopped - $130 million that will buy clothes, or fridges, or 
ca be used to take holidays, or put in the bank, or to make the care payments, or whatever - $130 
million. 
 
How many stacks would that take, Mr. Speaker? How many stacks? How many stacks, Mr. Leader of 
the Opposition? I see he’s not in the House tonight. How many stacks does it take to get a $130 million? 
I don’t know whether we’d get to Calgary or Revelstoke or to Weyburn. 
 
But I can tell you this. There’s a constituent of mine, who lives in my riding, who said that she gets stack 
of money as a result o that gas tax being cut out every year, because she drives to work a goodly number 
of miles. And that’s the kind of money she saves every year with that gas tax having gone. Every year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hepworth: — Well, enough is enough, Mr. Speaker. I think you can see that, by whatever the 
measurement, the tough problems the people of Saskatchewan were facing one year ago today are gone. 
And that is the best measure of success. They have been eliminated, or at the very least, cut down to a 
size much like the manner in which the NDP went from 44 to 8. 
 
It is amazing, Mr. Speaker, but every time I get up to take part in a budget debate, there’s one less NDP 
in the opposition. It’s a good, it’s a good thing these sessions can’t last eight ears, or there wouldn’t be 
any of them left. 
 
But back to the subject at hand. Just as the Devine government has tackled tough problems last year, 
they are prepared to tackle tough problems again this year. And I think of that number one problem of 
unemployment. And the growth of unemployment was arrested with such initiatives as the $3,000 
Build-A-Home grant program; the changes in the oil royalty structure put the oil industry back on track, 
and put people back to work in my constituency for sure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now these same ministers continue to tackle unemployment with the continuation of these programs 
and new ones. New ones like the student employment program and the very inventive nine-point 
creation program that could see several thousands of person-years of employment created. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I took the time to, to peruse a document entitled, ‘NDP: Saskatchewan 
Keeping the Promise’. And it, and it discusses the promises kept and part of it, and I’ll quote from it; it 
says: 
 

In the 1978 provincial general election your NDP government made 27 specific promises. 
 

And it went on to outline these. And under it, Mr. Speaker, just to compare what the Conservatives are 
going to do to create unemployment by getting small business going again, you only have to compare 
that to the kind of, kind of credence the NDP placed in small business back in 1978. It ranks two lines, 
two lines in this. And one of them was to improve freight and parts service with aid for local freight 
depots, which was another 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
674 

way of saying that the STC service would be expanded. I don’t know if that was the shuttle bus or not. 
That was a very moot offering to the small business community of this province, Mr. Speaker, and one 
of the reasons, I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that unemployment did become a number one problem. 
The stove had been left unattended. 
 
What do we have in Saskatchewan today is a province, the only province in the country to show an 
increase in our, in our employment. It shows programs like the Build-A-Home program and changes in 
the oil royalty structure can and do work. And they have worked in the toughest months of the year, Mr. 
Speaker, January and February. And I know employment will be beat. It will be beat by this government 
— its innovative programs. It will be beat and we’ll have it cowering in the corner like a cur dog licking 
its wounds. 
 
And the interest in these new programs — these small business job creation programs — has been 
intense. I’ve had numerous phone calls — numerous phone calls and inquiries in the, in the few short 
days since they were announced in the budget. And by the looks of it, Mr. Speaker, unemployment, 
unemployment in Saskatchewan will be broken down and under control by this time next year. We will 
not be facing that kind of problem at this time next year. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make a few specific comments, a few specific comments about some 
measures that are getting constituents in Weyburn very happy and excited about what’s in this budget. 
Specific things that relate to the Weyburn constituency . . . and one of them was the increased emphasis 
on technical education, and I’ll put it simply, Mr. Speaker, by saying that there’s been more than one 
person, many more than one person has been in my office to see me over the past year about the lack of 
space in technical schools and the difficulty of gaining entrance in them. And my thanks and 
congratulations to that fine gentleman, the Hon. Gordon Currie for his foresight and understanding of 
the situation and for his ability to determine and set priorities as he did so eloquently explain in this 
House in question period the other day. 
 
Number two, Mr. Speaker. The numerous highway projects in my constituency — projects to be 
undertaken by the very forthright and frank Minister of Highways, the Hon. Jim Garner or as he is better 
known ‘honest Jim’, a man of his word. And I think of things like the intersection work at that very 
dangerous junction of Highways 13 and 39 just outside of Weyburn. The minister drove that highway. 
That’s an important point to not, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Highways drove the highways. He was 
down on a road tour in my constituency, drove that highway, saw how bad that intersection was and 
said, ‘It’s got to be fixed because my thrust and my first priority is in having safe roads.’ He drove that 
highway, saw it was unsafe at that intersection, and gave the people a commitment to move on it, and we 
see it in this budget, Mr. Speaker. Other projects have been outlined in the budget as well; road 
upgrading in and around Stoughton is another example. 
 
Number three, Mr. Speaker, we have a budget provision for a water and sewer line reconstruction at 
north Weyburn. North Weyburn is the site of the Western Christian College, and, although final project 
details are still being hammered out, the people out there are very encouraged to see this kind of 
commitment. This was a must that goes hand in hand with their very ambitious expansion program out 
at the Western Christian College. And I had a chance to be out to their annual dinner the other evening, 
and a dinner that was attended very much by the business folk in Weyburn, because they appreciate this 
institution, not only from what it offers from an educational standpoint,  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
675 

but for the spin-off in business in the local city of Weyburn. It’s a very fine institution, and it’s much 
more secure now knowing an assured dependable water supply is on the way. 
 
This is a college that’s very much in tune with what the Premier’s been saying over the last month. It’s a 
college with world-class, class credentials, and the people of my constituency are very proud of this very 
fine institution, its faculty, staff and students. So this is very welcome news, in this budget, for the 
people in the hamlet of north Weyburn and those at the Western Christian College particularly. 
 
And, now I turn to agriculture for a few moments, Mr. Speaker. Agriculture — the backbone of the 
economy, not only in Saskatchewan, but in large measure, Canada as well — the most important 
industry in the province. Now, you’ll probably remember, Mr. Speaker, that there have been individuals 
up in debate, from the opposition, who have suggested, and I might say, have suggested wrongly, that 
the Agriculture budget has been decreased. In fact, I think one of their number was up, Mr. Speaker, 
indicating that, or suggesting, that it was cut 19 or 20 per cent. I forget the exact number he used — an 
example of not doing their homework. Another example, Mr. Speaker, of the opposition engaging their 
mouths before their mind was in gear. 
 
And, I’m not going to get into the details of the budget, Mr. Speaker. More of that will come in 
estimates, but to set the record straight — and as well, I think, the member for Rosthern made a number 
of points key to setting the record straight yesterday in this budget debate. But to set the record straight 
and to reiterate for the members in opposition, I will point out the following, and it’s a simple statement. 
The Agriculture budget, when all is considered, is up in fact, up substantially over last year; not down, 
but up. And this is consistent with the emphasis the Devine government placed on agriculture. 
 
The opposition, in their usual superficial analysis of the budget, in their usual flippant approach to the 
serious business of government, the NDP have tried to distort the Agriculture budget, and they failed to 
acknowledge that no longer is there a funny-money approach between the heritage fund, the 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation, and the Department of Agriculture. The $9.1 million transaction 
between these three jurisdictions was not unlike a dog chasing its tail — no padding now of the 
Agriculture Department’s budget or grandstanding to make this physical arrangement seem more than it 
really was. 
 
Also, the opposition carefully overlooked the six-and-a-half million dollars budgeted from the 
agriculture division of the heritage fund for the farm purchase program, and, I can see, Mr. Speaker, why 
they would want to ignore the farm purchase program, this absolute gem. Its unequivocal success is very 
much the opposition’s embarrassment. Absolutely everyone in the farming community is excited about 
this program. 
 
Long-term land bank lessees, now, given the opportunities and resources, are purchasing their land in 
unprecedented numbers. And just to emphasize to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, how the long-term 
lessees out there appreciate this farm purchase program, I’d like to review with you long-term lessees. 
This is the first chance I’ve had to review, in the legislature, land sales to long-term lessees, and since 
January 1 of ’83, we’ve already had 14 long-term lessees have purchased some or all of their leased 
land. 
 
We’re looking at something over $1.1 million in purchases, but better than that, Mr.  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
676 

Speaker, over 300 have asked for prices on that land because they’re considering buying it; they want to 
own it. And that’s impressive, Mr. Speaker, when you consider that we have 14 already having 
purchased, and in a whole year, in the whole last final year, which I reported on in the 1981 land bank 
annual report, only 25 people in the whole year purchased. So, here we have already exceeded that and 
— or not exceeded it, but in three short months we’ve already reached 50 per cent of what they did in 
the whole year. So, the land bank lessees like this opportunity to purchase their farmland. 
 
In three short months, many, or some of them, have . . . Excuse me, Mr. Speaker. In three short months, 
many have purchased some of their leased land holdings, and as you can see, these figures compare very 
favourably with purchases when the land bank scheme was in place in prior years. 
 
The response by the farming community at large has been well-documented in this House by myself and 
by many other members. And in keeping with the tradition of keeping the House informed and letting 
the people of Saskatchewan know what’s happening in government, I’m happy to bring an update on the 
farm purchase program. And this is dated April 6 and it covers the period to March 31, ’83, and it shows 
that now the farm purchase program interviews have climbed to over 6,000, Mr. Speaker; 6,107 folks 
have been in the doors at farm credit corporation inquiring about the farm purchase program. They’re 
just doing an excellent job at continuing to handle this continual onslaught of people. 
 
The other key points here, Mr. Speaker, are that 2,681 look like potential rebate clients out of that 6,100, 
and now we have altogether, with all the i’s dotted and the t’s crossed, 600 approvals worth $73.3 
million worth of land transactions. 
 
I think it was only last week, Mr. Speaker, when I was up in this House on behalf of the people of 
Weyburn constituency in throne speech debate, when I said at that point in time we had 2,488 eligible 
rebate clients. And so you can see, in a mere week, we’ve almost gone up 200 — another week where 
more people, in one week, are being put on their way to farm ownership than in 10 years with the land 
bank program, just another week in the many chapters of success in the farm purchase program. 
 
And while I’m on the subject of agriculture, I would like to welcome Saskatchewan’s hard-working 
Minister of Agriculture back to the House from his recent trip to Bulgaria where he was on a trade 
mission. And I can, certainly, I know I can speak for the farmers of Saskatchewan when I welcome him 
back to the House. I understand it was a very successful trip, and I congratulate him and his officials on 
that very successful trade mission. 
 
It is very reassuring, Mr. Speaker, to the farmers of Saskatchewan, to see that kind of dedicated effort, 
and that kind of, of devotion on behalf of the farmers of Saskatchewan. One day he’s fighting for the 
Crow in Moncton; the next day on an airplane, selling livestock in Bulgaria. A very busy Minister of 
Agriculture, and the farmers of Saskatchewan do applaud him for his efforts. 
 
Undoubtedly, Mr. Speaker, to turn to another facet of the budget . . . Perhaps one of the most exciting 
initiatives to ever be in this budget — in any budget of the province of Saskatchewan — has got to be 
the creation of an agricultural division of the heritage fund. Agriculture is, is our heritage in this 
province. Land is our heritage. And it would only be right that a responsible government do what this 
one has done: number one, let the farmers own their own land again, and not see state ownership to 
continue to be the  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
677 

order of the day; and number two, to use the proceeds from the government land sales to develop and 
expand our agriculture heritage of which we are all so very proud. The agriculture division within the 
heritage fund will be the vehicle that will, will reverse the wheels of declining numbers of farms and 
farmers, and reverse the decline of rural communities. 
 
I can think of nothing that would be more rewarding, rewarding, Mr. Speaker, than to, 10 years from 
now, be able to stand in this House and say that the number of census farms in Saskatchewan has grown 
because of initiatives taken by the Devine government in this province over the last 10 years. I hope in 
1993 (and I’m sure all members that are here today will be here then), we can stand in this House and 
say that census farms have increased. Because it’s a sorry day for Saskatchewan when you review what 
went on between ’71 and ’81 under the NDP administration. Nearly 10,000 census farms in 
Saskatchewan . . . 10,000, Mr. Speaker. And I hope that 10 years from now, when we’re standing in this 
House, and have had 10 years to develop agriculture for the farmers of Saskatchewan, we’re seeing the 
family farm, the rural communities, and the towns and small cities surrounding those farms and 
communities prospering — the revitalization of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, I know, as well, Mr. Speaker, that the new thrusts and the new initiatives that will be undertaken 
by the Minister of rural Development will contribute greatly, along with agriculture, to his revitalization. 
This agriculture division of the heritage fund will be the mechanism that will see these family farms, 
with all the traditions that are wanting to be observed from one generation to another, preserved intact. 
This is the tool that will lead the charge of agriculture into the 21st century. It is a tool, Mr. Speaker, I 
must say, that our pioneer ancestors would heartily have approved of. The heritage fund, and agriculture 
division therein, will be the springboard of agriculture in the next century. New initiatives, as broad as 
any mind can comprehend, will flourish from this fund. It will not be restricted to, just to irrigation or to 
research, but any idea with merit will be considered. It will be the vehicle that tears down the barriers to 
production and puts bridges in their place. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say once again, congratulations to the Premier and his 
ministers for this balanced approach to managing the peoples’ money in these somewhat difficult times. 
There is no doubt there will always be tough problems like these, and like the problems we’ve 
experienced in the last year; problems they have addressed and have solved, and I know this budget will 
be more of the same. It is a budget that turns sour grapes into wine. 
 
My thanks on behalf of the people from the Weyburn constituency to the Minister of Finance, and it is 
with pleasure that I will support the motion. And I cannot support the amendment, but I do urge all 
members of this House to support the motion, including those in opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is a good budget. It’s worthy of support, just as the mortgage interest rebate program was worthy of 
support, and did get support from the hon. members, and just as the farm purchase program was worthy 
of support, and the NDP opposition did support it. So I, I find some problem — I believe they must be 
talking out of both sides of their mouth, Mr. Speaker, when they tell us they can’t support this budget. 
 
They supported other sensible initiatives in this House, and I only have to refer you to the Votes and 
Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly, Thursday, December the 9th, 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
678 

and if you look at the vote on Bill 45, the, the bill to, An Act to establish a Program to Facilitate 
Financing the Purchase of Farm Land, those amongst the years included Blakeney, Thompson, Engel, 
Lingenfelter, Koskie, Lusney, Shillington, and Yew. They have the common sense, Mr. Speaker, to 
support that kind of progressive legislation. This budget is similar, it’s common sense, it’s worthy of 
their support, and just as they have supported us unanimously in this House in the past, I’m sure they 
will come to their senses and realize they should vote with us on this budget. 
 
They have demonstrated, as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, good sense in supporting the Devine government 
over the past year, and I encourage them to do likewise in this fruitful budget. Why? Because indeed it 
does turn sour grapes into a very fine vintage wine. It is no sense continuing to curse problems; it is 
better to do something about them — the kind of, of things that the Devine government has done over 
the past 11 months. And admittedly there are dark spots like unemployment, but rather than curse the 
darkness, better to light a candle. That’s this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Domotor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have this opportunity to speak on the budget, and I would 
like at this time to congratulate the Minister of Finance on his budget and the allocation of funds. It is 
also a pleasure to commend the dynamic leadership of our Premier, Grant Devine, and his capable 
ministers in allocation of funds to the different departments, and the resulting increasing efficiency we 
have in government. It is indeed a pleasure to be able to speak on behalf of the constituency of 
Humboldt in this budget debate. 
 
I listen with quite a bit of interest with respect to the opposition members criticizing the budget. The 
other day the member from Quill Lakes referred to some of the parts of the budget, and he was referring 
to dental care for four-year-olds again, on page 596. I don’t know, they must have a hang-up on this. 
The other part they are talking about on page 599 and 600 was the farm fuel rebate. Well, if they’re so 
concerned about the fuel rebate, I would like to know where they were when they were in government. 
They’d put it on once in a while, and they’d take it off. If they’re really consistent about helping the 
farmer, they would have kept it on forever, for, for the whole length of their term. 
 
They also mentioned with respect to the fact that jobs were being lost and that thee was no job creation. 
Well, we just had, in the budget speech, the Opportunities ’83 for the youth. We have also had mention 
of the opportunities for business men in which there’ll be a tax rebate. These are opportunities that 
employees will be able to get jobs and business men will be able to operate and finance. 
 
The member from Regina Centre refers, refers to his riding, refers to people living in poverty in his 
riding. ‘What should there be any poverty?’ he says. If the 11-year government that they were in were so 
concerned about the poverty, then really they should have been out of poverty a long time ago and we 
shouldn’t have to worry about it today. 
 
The member opposite also referred to people on this side being born with spoons in their mouths. Well I 
would like to suggest to him that if he looks around at every member in this side of the House, that 
everyone had to work for a living. The difference between the opposition and the government on this 
side is that we believe in the work ethic. The opposition believes that those who work should pay to help 
those who do not want to work. There is a difference, Mr. Speaker. We believe in helping the 
unfortunate, the  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
679 

handicapped, the senior citizens, but we also believe that those who are able to work should be able to 
work. 
 
The member from Cumberland was speaking about SGI premiums going up because we had reduced the 
gas tax. Well the gas tax was on before and yet the SGI premiums went up underneath their 
administration. Why didn’t they keep them down then? 
 
I notice the member from Pelly isn’t here but he was talking about the Sask Tel rates. If the previous 
administration had such a profitable arm of Sask Tel that he says we got rid of, then how come they had 
to increase their rates when they were in power? 
 
I hear the word ‘multinationals’ from the member. The multinationals are going to benefit. Well what 
about the multinational unions that he represents. Are they not going to also benefit? 
 
The member mentions the Executive Council and the salaries. What did the previous government do 
when they were in power? They did the same thing. They had members in the Executive Council and 
they’d second different members from crown corporations. They played that kind of a game . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . And from department of estimates, my friend, the member from Rosthern, 
mentions. Our change in our government is that we’ve streamlined part of the departments. We’re 
making the more efficient. 
 
There has been misleading statements by the member from Pelly saying that we’re going to let the Crow 
go. Also the member from Quill Lakes mentions about letting the Crow go. This, Mr. Speaker, is 
malicious gossip, totally irresponsible statements, same when they said we were going to do away with 
medicare. And what have we done to medicare? We’ve increased funding to medicare. The member 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood the other day mentioned about the medicare system, the way they tried 
to do the campaigning. And I totally agree with him. 
 
We have had much to-do about cutting. And I would suggest that the hon. . . . The biggest cutting that 
was done was when the hon. members opposite were reduced to eight. The next biggest cut was the gas 
tax cut. After the gas tax cut, we also brought in the mortgage reduction and that was a cut. The cut in 
the interest rates would help many more home-owners in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know . . . I don’t now if these members opposite are able to read, but if they would look at their 
estimates and they would take a look at Health and the total for Health, ordinary expenditure to be voted, 
there’s an increase from the 1982-83 year estimates — 728 million is increased up to 977,814,160. 
 
What about Highways and Transportation? They say there’s less there. Well let’s look at Highways and 
Transportation. And if you look at the subvote, it’s an increase, an increase from 197 million to 222 
million. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s 12.4 per cent. 
 
Mr. Domotor: — That’s 12.4 per cent. That’s an increase, Mr. Speaker, not a decrease, an increase. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
680 

What about Education? They refer to Education. Well let’s take a look at Education. Did you take a look 
at education in the subvotes? The total for Education, ordinary expenditure, 1982-83, it says 387 million. 
This year, ’83-84, it says 429,788,000. Is that a decrease? That to me represents an increase, an increase 
by a government that is interested in the welfare of its citizens, and a government that is going to 
continue to look after its citizens. 
 
I would like to commend the Minister of Education on the new thrust that he is giving his department. 
The opposition referred to cuts. Well, in the operating grant budget of the Department of Education, 
there will be an increase of 333.9 million in ’83-84. That represents an increase of 7 per cent in the funds 
available to school divisions in this budget year. That is an increase of 7 per cent. 
 
Besides this, the teachers settled with the government in record time, not like it did in the previous 
administration when they had to haggle for a long period of time. 
 
What about special education? The opposition has asserted that funding for special education in the 
Department of Education budget has been reduced by 5 per cent. The Leader of the Opposition 
mentioned this. In fact, direct grant support for special education has been increased by about 15 per 
cent — not a decrease, but an increase. Additional school board expenditures in special education of 
over $2 million will be recognized in ’83-84. The recognized rates for all categories of low- and 
high-cost rate will increase from $3,285 to $3,515, level 2 from 4,425 to 4,735, and level 3 from 5,000 
to 5,350. These are not decreases, Mr. Speaker, these are increases. 
 
The rate for low-cost handicapped students will increase from 1,120 to 1,198. Thee will also be a 
significant increase in the number of students recognized at these rates. For example, the number of 
level 1 high-cost handicapped recognized an expected increase from 2,228 to $2,473. The combined 
effect of these increases in numbers and in rates is that high-cost funding will increase 18.6 per cent, 
from $9.2 million to $10.9 million. Overall, the grants for special education will increase by 15 per cent 
from 13.9 million to 15.9 million. Are these decreases, Mr. Speaker? No, they are increases. 
 
In addition, funding for a demonstration project in which preschool handicapped children are integrated 
into day care program will be provided as a grant rather than a contractual payment from the special 
education subvote. Funding for special education will remain a high priority of this government. An 
increase in grants amounting to $2 million should indicate the sincerity of the government’s 
commitment. 
 
Those in specialty education need help, and the opportunity must be made available so that those in our 
society who are less fortunate than we are can have an opportunity to develop their talents to the best of 
their ability. Particularly, needs in that area to assist the handicapped are always welcome. 
 
In my constituency we have educational programs geared to assist some of these people. After they have 
completed some of the programs they are able to work at Futuristic Industries. It gives them a sense of 
pride to work, Mr. Speaker. They contracted highway stakes. Now they do lawn furniture, bin bottoms 
for granaries, flower decorations, car decorations for weddings, buttons and wooden toys, toy boxes and 
toy chests. These are a tribute to the handicapped who work in these areas, and I  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
681 

might add a tribute should be given at this time to all the teachers and personnel in all the communities 
of Saskatchewan who have taken the time and effort to help the handicapped and disadvantaged. The 
patience and hard work, sacrifice exemplified by these people, I believe, should be given special 
recognition. 
 
Further, it is indeed good news to see the emphasis being placed on technical training. When you 
consider that studies over the past few years . . . Roughly 9,000 skilled entrants will be needed in the 
labour force by 1990. The need for more technical training will be all the more required. The percentage 
of young people pursuing full-time training in Saskatchewan is below 50 per cent of the average in the 
other three western provinces. This points to the lack of consideration in this area by the previous 
administration because of its main drive to purchase and own farmland and businesses. Saskatchewan’s 
training system in the past has offered too few training places and as a result, graduates had to leave the 
province and get extra training elsewhere. And, as a result, they start employment elsewhere. This is 
going to change, Mr. Speaker. We are going to provide them those opportunities in Saskatchewan, and 
they’re going to stay in Saskatchewan. We’ll keep our youth here, and not export them as the previous 
administration was wont to do. 
 
By the implementation of an effective manpower planning system in a close relationship with the private 
sector, business, industry, labour and public, opportunities should be provided for our youth to remain in 
the province. The Opportunities ’83 program, which I mentioned before, will have been initiated and 
given benefit to Saskatchewan residents. The program will stimulate new summer job opportunities for 
Saskatchewan residents and will assist students throughout temporary unemployment to finance their 
continuing education. This will give high school or post-secondary students in ’82-83, who are enrolled 
in post-secondary educational institutions for the fall of ’83, an opportunity that didn’t exist before. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is progressive legislation. This will give employment between May 1 and September 
30, and it must be full-time. The $350 per month for each full-time job created will help the business or 
farms, as well as the students. This will give students an opportunity to develop new skills and 
experience to help in the transition from school to employment. The $2.8 million to create an estimated 
3,000 new summer jobs will certainly help the unemployment situation. 
 
This is a step in the right direction, Mr. Speaker. Many of us would like to have training in new fields, 
and being busy working are unable to attend institutes. Upgrading is a requirement at all times, an 
opportunity to assist rural areas in technical training will certainly benefit not only the people taking the 
training, but the rural talents will also flourish again. 
 
It is important that this is done, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned once before, we have many times where 
we have people that come over from Europe who have technical training and are able to go ahead and 
take any kind of a job because of their skills. It is time that we in Saskatchewan, or in Canada as a 
whole, ended up doing similar programs so that we can have this skill training ere. 
 
The opposition should also note the emphasis this government has to rural areas. The Minister of 
Education has also announced that funds allocated to small schools will amount to $8 million — this is 
an increase of 47 per cent. Is that like the opposition referred to as a decrease? No, it is an increase. The 
opposition like to talk about  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
682 

unemployment figures — Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment ratio compared to other 
provinces, along with the lowest rate of inflation. 
 
I don’t know, maybe we shouldn’t be so hard on the opposition members, after all, each one of them is 
doing the work of two men — Laurel and Hardy. 
 
The economic analysis publication of the Royal Bank, in its February ’83 issue, stated that the 
Saskatchewan economy contains the basic ingredients for strong growth in the 1980s. One of the points 
that is stressed is that the provincial government is intent upon attracting private sector investment as a 
stimulus to economic development. 
 
The three essential services, health, education and social services, will receive increases. These 
departments have a budget representing two-thirds of the funding. For health, nearly $1,000 for every 
man, woman and child in this province - $17 million over five years including $10 million for the 
construction of a new cancer clinic was announced by the Minister of Health. Does this represent a cut? 
No, this is an increase, an increase because we’re concerned about the medical health in the province 
and because we’re concerned about the citizens. 
 
The Build-A-Home program; culture and recreation facilities grant of $32 million over a five-year 
period: does this show a concern for the rural area? Yes, I submit it does. It shows us that this 
government is not only concerned about central areas, but also will give out assistance to rural 
development, by the fact that we’re going to have small businesses in communities given opportunities 
in the province. To show this, the government’s concern for new . . . The tourism and small business is 
certainly a step in the right direction. These are the types of programs and initiatives this provincial 
government is undertaking. It is certainly encouraging to see new ideas developing from the grass roots 
and bringing in the ideas to the government. 
 
Finally, I would like to commend the Premier, the finance minister and the cabinet in general for 
bringing in an excellent budget in the midst of the economic confusion that exists in our country today. 
They are to be commended, and I will be supporting the budget but not supporting the amendment. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Rybchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the budget speech, by tradition, states the fiscal and economic plans of a 
government and I’m really pleased to be able to join in this debate and support one of the most excellent 
budgets ever introduced in this Assembly. 
 
The people of the constituency of Regina Victoria tell me that economic and social concerns are on their 
mind and they are counting on the Progressive Conservative government of Premier Devine to respond 
to their concerns. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that Regina Victoria has much to be pleased with the 
budget introduced by the able Minister of Finance. 
 
The Minister of Finance and his government have put together realistic measures to make Saskatchewan 
a province that all Canadians will look to with respect and admiration. Mr. Speaker, Regina Victoria is a 
multicultural and cosmopolitan riding. My constituency has a good healthy representation of a wide 
cross-section of Saskatchewan population — senior citizens to working couples — are people of the 
various ethnic heritages that make Saskatchewan such a truly unique province. All the people in Regina 
Victoria have one thing in common. That’s pocket-book concerns. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
683 

They know what the government of Pierre Trudeau has done to help ruin Canada’s economy. Inflation 
eats at their pay-cheques and savings. 
 
The Progressive Conservative Government of Saskatchewan is doing everything possible to protect our 
people from their economic problems. I can honestly say that this . . . in this Assembly that Regina 
Victoria will benefit by the positive programs of this government. 
 
Let me outline some of the positive initiatives. In general, initiatives ranged from streamlining 
government structures and changes in taxation to new or expanded programs and policies dealing with 
adult education, municipal government, health, agriculture, business, mineral and industrial 
development, labour, co-ops and the justice system. Then, Mr. Speaker, in order to streamline and 
update the municipal practices, changes to The Planning and Development Act and The Urban 
Municipality Act will be introduced in this session. Modernization of these acts will be preserved . . . 
will preserve and strengthen local autonomy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has helped to develop one of the strongest housing industries in Canada 
and will continue to work to maintain it. Housing starts in Saskatchewan rose 14 per cent in 1982 from 
. . . over 1981, while falling 29 per cent nation-wide. Programs like the mortgage interest reduction plan, 
family home purchase plan — and I’m glad to say that’s been extended — and the Build-A-Home 
Saskatchewan have provided adequate and affordable housing for the people of Saskatchewan. Over the 
past year our government has begun to make changes in the priorities and directions of Saskatchewan 
. . . of Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. Our objective is to make Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
a partner with the private sector rather than a competitor. I’m proud to belong to a government that has 
made home ownership a reality and not a dream. That, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of government that the 
people of Regina Victoria voted on April 26, 1982, and I believe we have lived up to their expectations. 
 
There are many families of school-age children in Regina Victoria and also university students. This 
government recognizes the importance of education and will therefore introduce changes to The 
Education Act in this session. We will bring our technical and vocational training up to par to measure 
such as the completion of the expanded version of the Prince Albert technical institute and an addition of 
new training programs at the three other institutes. We are also dedicated to the improvement and 
expansion of our ability to train highly skilled manpower for complex fields. 
 
Health care means a great deal to the constituents of Regina Victoria. We continue in our commitment 
of providing the best health care in the world for Saskatchewan citizens. Our aim is to maintain and 
stabilize our health care system. The cancer program will continue to be expanded and improved. Our 
health minister, Graham Taylor, has just released the details of major new funding projects for the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation that were announced in last week’s budget. 
 
And because cancer treatment is important to my citizens, my constituents, I would like to list a few of 
the announcements. The government is committed to fund construction of a new Saskatoon cancer 
clinic. In 1983-84 a quarter-million dollars will be made available for the planning and design work of 
the new facility. In addition a total of $5 million has been made available for major equipment costs, and 
this will be allotted on a rate of $1 million per year over the next five years, any equipment funds not 
spent in one year will be carried over to the next. This will give the cancer foundation the  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
684 

flexibility to spend the money in a way it considers most practical and beneficial. A five-year 
commitment of added funds will be made available to hire additional cancer staff, foundation staff, 
beginning with $175,000 in 1983-84 fiscal year. This resource commitment will increase by $150,000 
per year ending with the funding year . . . ending with a funding level of three-quarter-million dollars 
plus annual inflation adjustments in the years 1987-88. This will dramatically improve the quality of 
care available to the Saskatchewan people requiring cancer treatment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been announced and, that as of April 1st, and we have transferred the ambulance 
program to the Department of Health where it belongs. A new funding approach will reduce the 
inequities regarding cost to rural residents. In the area of social programming we will continue in our 
determination to improve the quality of life for all citizens in Saskatchewan, better home care being a 
key example. This means a lot to the senior citizens in Regina Victoria. 
 
Mr. Speaker, programs such as the $15 million federal-provincial job creation program and the 
provincial JOBS program have enabled Saskatchewan residents to work. Our unemployment rate is 
currently 8.9 per cent and the lowest in Canada. Six thousand more persons were employed in 
Saskatchewan in February of ’83 than in the previous month. And as you can see, our programs are 
working. 
 
Government initiatives have allowed for a dramatic increase in oil industry activity in Saskatchewan. In 
an unstable world market we are prepared to act to protect our oil industry in order to retain our 
traditional position as owner of the resource. All of us are excited about the ten-year program which will 
extend natural gas to farms and rural communities, to approximately 25,000 farm and 10,000 residential 
customers. It will create jobs and provide a less expensive heating fuel for our consumers. 
 
Our government will soon be announcing details of a major high technology development strategy in 
order to develop and broaden our economic base. 
 
Further amendments will be made to The Workers’ Compensation Act. A new co-operatives act will be 
introduced to provide a strong supportive base for the future development in this area. Also forthcoming 
will be a new vehicles act; it will focus on the dangers of drinking and driving thus making our streets 
and highways a safer place to drive on. There will be an introduction of legislation to establish a 
licensing authority for cable service in Saskatchewan. We will explore addition steps to decrease the tax 
burdens of Saskatchewan residents. To help small business operate in Saskatchewan, a review of the 
requirements for the bonding on small projects will be undertaken. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would for a few moments like to talk about the proposed SGI increase in 
deductible. First I want to point out that the increase in the deductible does not come into effect until 
July 1, 1983. At the present time, the public review, utility review commission has asked the crown, the 
court of appeal, to rule on whether or not the, the increase in the deductible can be implemented by order 
in council, or must be reviewed by the commission. 
 
There were two choices available to SGI when they were deciding on rate increases necessary to try to 
achieve a break-even point in the operation of The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. We would . . . 
We could implement an average 6.7 per cent rate increase, coupled with an increase in the deductible of, 
to $500. Or they could implement an average 14 per cent increase. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
685 

The rationale behind the decision to increase the rate by the 6.7 per cent, and increase the deductible to 
$500, was that any rate increase would impact all of Saskatchewan motorists. And that would be . . . It 
would be fairer to increase the rate by the lesser percentage in keeping course with the government 
restraint guide-lines, and increase the deductible, which only affects the drivers who are found at fault in 
a collision. 
 
Since approximately 15 per cent of Saskatchewan motorists are found at fault, the majority of 
Saskatchewan motorists will not be affected by the increase in the deductible. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
point is, and I want to emphasize it, the majority of Saskatchewan motorists are safe drivers who will not 
be affected by the increase in the deductible. The old government used to penalize safe drivers; we do 
not. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget introduced by this government is a clear example of economic common 
sense. It deals with the economic realities facing the people of Saskatchewan. We realize that a job is 
essential to maintain human dignity. To prove our commitment to an individual, we have not introduced 
socialistic give-away plans. Those are the disastrous and heartless ways of the past. No, Mr. Deputy, 
Deputy Speaker, the Progressive Conservative government opted for a nine-point job creation plan. 
 
This budget, budget, budget is realistic. We know there are no quick fixes or instant solutions. The 
discredited members in the opposition change their tune so often that nobody knows what they stand for. 
They called for a job creation plan, and when this government brought forth one of the best creations in 
Canada, they said we were spending too much money. 
 
Now I want to make it very clear that this government did not establish a job creation plan just because 
of the half-hearted call from the gang in the opposition. We made it very clear in the Speech from the 
Throne that this was coming. And so the shallow NDP members jumped on the bandwagon. As usual, 
they play politics with people’s lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the days of Premier Blakeney, the order of the day was to have hidden taxation through 
such measures as a 20 per cent sliding gasoline tax, which was removed by this government. The order 
of the day was to tax people through the back door. Those days are over. This government believes that 
to maintain stability and confidence in our economy, we have to avoid significant, significant tax 
increases, and support social protection programs. I’m proud to say that is exactly what the budget has 
done. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Regina Victoria will, is well represented in this Progressive Conservative 
government because of all these measures. For all too long, Regina Victoria was represented by a 
member who was more interested in his own affairs than those of Regina Victoria. That, Mr. Speaker, is 
history. Through my constituency office on Victoria Avenue, and my person work as their MLA, I 
honestly believe Regina Victoria is served well by our government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, like my fellow members in the government side of this legislature, I am pleased to 
support the budget introduced by the Minister of Finance, and accordingly I will vote against the 
amendment of the opposition and support the main motion. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
686 

Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is certainly a pleasure to rise in this House today to resume 
debate on the budget speech. I agree with the remarks made by my fellow colleagues on the responsible 
budget our government has put forward to the people of Saskatchewan. Allow me now to comment on a 
few of the different policies and the positive moves included in that budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that the Canadian economy has suffered greatly in the last few years and now 
only is our country beginning to emerge from that economic downturn which saw interest rates soar, and 
unemployment figures, predominantly throughout Canada and in other western industrialized nations. 
Mr. Speaker, our government believes stability and confidence in the economy must be maintained, and 
that is why our budget avoids significant tax increases and supports the social protection program. Our 
government is committed to controlling spending and increasing productivity. 
 
We have introduced a nine-point program to expand job opportunities and a plan to achieve a 60 per 
cent increase in skill-training spaces. Our budget also includes a new five-year, $32 million program for 
construction and renovation of cultural and recreational facilities and a $30 million fund to help finance 
public sector funds. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are taking a positive and a realistic approach towards this nation’s economic 
difficulties. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have been known to bite the bullet and hang in there. We know that 
together with the people of Saskatchewan this province will be on the upswing again. Even though 
through the roughest times, Saskatchewan has been able to hold its own, with the current level of 
unemployment as high, the Saskatchewan economy has performed better than any other province in 
Canada, and inflation has come down dramatically in February. 
 
Saskatchewan had the lowest inflation rate in Canada. The great decline in our inflation rate is largely 
due to the positive measures we have taken since forming government. By eliminating the gasoline road 
tax, we reduced the pressure on the cost of living for the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our mortgage interest reduction plan served to protect home-owners and reversed the 
decline in housing starts and sales that occurred when the former government was in power. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the time of economic hardship in Canada is not over, but we are making steps, and 
big steps, and we are taking a responsible stand, as outlined in the budget speech of the Hon. Bob 
Andrew, whom I would like to congratulate at this time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — The people of the Redberry constituency are very pleased that this newly elected 
government has taken such a responsible and a positive stand, and they are rather amazed by the speed 
at which this government has been able to act on its promises. They were all too aware of the previous 
government’s empty promises — an empty barrel left by an incompetent administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, and the people of my constituency,  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
687 

I would like to bring to your attention the matter of the Borden Bridge. The way in which the previous 
government handled, or rather did not handle, this issue is the proof of its incompetency. Over the last 
two elections, the people of Redberry were led to believe action would be taken regarding the Borden 
Bridge just outside the village of Borden. For years this bridge, which was built in 1934, has been a 
major threat to the safety and the lives of all those who cross it. This bridge is too narrow to 
accommodate smooth two-way traffic, and the accesses to the bridges are two dangerous curves which 
create a blind spot so that you cannot see what’s coming at you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Borden Bridge has been the cause of many traffic accidents and fatalities. Since 1978, 
20 people have been killed crossing that bridge. The bridge as it now stands threatens many lives every 
single day. IN 1978, 2,500 vehicles utilized the two-land Highway 16, where the bridge is situated, 
every day. That number jumped to 3,000 in 1982. In comparison, 3,000 vehicles travelled the four-lane 
Trans-Canada Highway each day in 1978, and 3,365 in 1982. 
 
Mr. Speaker, surely the great number of people using the Borden Bridge in itself demands that 
something be done to eliminate this danger. But what? What action was taken prior to our election? 
None. Lots of talk, but no action. But our government is acting. 
 
My colleague, the Hon. Jim Garner, has announced the building of a new approaches for he bridge to 
commence this summer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — I would like to commend the hon. member for not only listening to the people of 
Redberry, but for acting in their best interests so quickly. On behalf of the citizens of Redberry, I’d like 
to that the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would now like . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gerich: — Mr. Speaker, I would now like to relate to the House a brief from the village of Borden 
that was presented to me concerning the Borden Bridge, and I quote: 
 

June 24th, 1982 
 

Mr. John Gerich 
 
Dear Sir: Enclosed is a brief on the Borden Bridge as you requested. Thank you for your interest 
in this matter. Mark Dubkowski, Secretary-Treasurer for the Village of Borden, Borden, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Construction of another Borden Bridge 
 
Introduction 
 
For years the present Borden Bridge has been a major threat to the safety and lives of the 
residents of Borden and its community, as well as any other motorist who utilizes this facility. 
Nearly every person in Borden has seen a major accident on this bridge, and knows someone 
who has been injured or  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
688 

killed upon it. The residents of Borden feel justified in their claim that a new bridge should be 
built, after witnessing some of the tragedies that have occurred on the bridge. 
 
Listed below are just a few of the reasons why a new bridge should be built, as well as some of 
the benefits the village of Borden would derive from this undertaking. 
 
Reasons and benefits 
 
Safety factor. This in itself is a major reason why a new bridge at Borden should be built. The 
number of deaths, injuries, traffic accidents that have occurred on this bridge in the past few 
years alone should convince the provincial government that something should be done in order 
. . . in the very near future before another human tragedy occurs. 
 
The present bridge is just too narrow to accommodate smooth two-way traffic, especially two 
semi-trucks meeting on the bridge. 
 
In the last few years there has been an increase in the number of accidents involving semi-trucks. 
There is probably no other place in the province where such a high ratio of semi-trucks are 
involved in traffic mishaps. Accidents involving semi-units are more severe, if not fatal, to those 
involved. 
 
One other major safety hazard found on the present Borden Bridge is the access to the bridge. 
The accesses to the bridge on both the east and west end are curves which create a blind spot as 
to what may be approaching on the bridge. One does not see what is approaching until one is 
actually on the bridge. Often this leaves insufficient time to react and results in another traffic 
fatality. 
 
Smoother traffic. Construction of another Borden bridge would provide the Yellowhead with a 
smoother flow of traffic. Because of the reputation of the Borden Bridge, many drivers become 
overcautious when approaching the bridge, causing a major slow-down of any traffic that may be 
following behind. Even if one is not overcautious, the flow of traffic is reduced in order to allow 
safe passage across the bridge. Also, accidents that have occurred on the bridge usually cause 
traffic jams for hours on end, or else lengthy detours to other bridges crossing the river. 
 
A four-lane highway. A new bridge would encourage the development of a four-lane highway 
between Saskatoon and North Battleford. This section of highway is one of the busiest in 
Saskatchewan, yet it only boasts of a two-lane highway. This often causes bumper-to-bumper 
traffic and dangerous passing situations, especially in the summer with the number of tourists 
that travel on the Yellowhead Route. 
 
Presently, one of the main reasons that this section of highway has not been expanded is due to 
the indecision by the previous government on how to solve the problem at the Borden Bridge. 
 
Village development. Settlement and development within the village of  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
689 

Borden has been hampered by the reputation of Borden . . . commuting to Saskatoon to work, 
shop, etc., because of having to constantly take the risk of crossing the bridge. The village of 
Borden has suffered because of its feeling of uneasiness about crossing the bridge on a daily 
basis. It has meant a reduction in the number of would-be residents within the village as well as 
revenue lost in the form of taxes, business and general investment from otherwise prospective 
residents. 
 
A new bridge would eliminate some of the qualms these people would have of living in Borden 
and commuting to the city on a daily basis. 
 
Reputation. Though maybe not as important a reason as the rest, the name Borden, when 
mentioned to people outside this community, is immediately associated with the bridge and the 
unpopular history of accidents that have occurred on it. People in other parts of Canada, as far 
west as the West Coast, associate the name Borden with that of a bridge and the number of 
fatalities. 
 
The village has become associated with this bad reputation created by the bridge and fear of 
having to cross the highly publicized bridge becomes prominent when even Borden is 
mentioned. Hopefully, with a new bridge built and the danger eliminated, the reputation 
associated with the name Borden will eventually dissipate. 
 
Recommendations 
 
As a majority of the accidents that have occurred on the Borden Bridge have been a result of 
opposite-moving vehicles meeting on the bridge, and also the fact that the present bridge is still 
structurally sound, it would be best to use the old bridge to accommodate one directional flow of 
traffic and have another bridge built nearby to accommodate the opposite flow. The accesses to 
the present bridge will have to be straightened out and eliminate the blind spot as well as provide 
for a smoother flow of traffic. Also, the railway overpass just west of the bridge should be 
changed as to allow semi-trucks with large or high loads to use these highways rather than 
detouring around Strong, Arelee or the Maymont bridge. 
 
It is just a matter of common sense that a new bridge at Borden crossing the North Saskatchewan 
River is the only solution to rectify the problems that have occurred there in passing. Still, the 
provincial government must be wary of how and where the new bridge is to be built without 
creating some unacceptable situation that the old bridge is guilty of. 
 

I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we received other briefs from the rural municipalities of Great 
Bend, the town of Radisson, and the town of Maymont, expressing similar concerns. 
 
The concerned citizens of Borden and district expressed great hope in our administration to me on the 
night of the Borden School addition opening, Tuesday, March the 29. I was honoured to be able to 
represent the Minister of Education at that event. Those at the opening were extremely pleased to hear 
that not more than one week later, the Borden Bridge plans are in action, and will be realized shortly. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
690 

With the previous administration, such prayers fell on deaf ears and were never to be answered. But this 
positive-doing government does more than just feign listening, as with the case with the previous 
government. We listen, and we really hear what the people are saying, and we then act quickly. The 
Borden Bridge was one of the main concerns expressed during the election of April, 1982. At that time, 
I told the people of Redberry constituency I would do my utmost to see that they got action on 
something so important to them. 
 
I, I’m proud to be able to see the realization of the plans on the bridge, Borden Bridge moving forward, 
moving forward within one year of the Progressive Conservative administration in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, through this budget we, the people of Redberry, have the new Borden Bridge in the makings. 
Therefore, I disagree with the amendment, and fully support the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meagher: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am proud to rise in this Assembly on behalf of the people of 
the Prince Albert constituency to make a few comments on this, the first budget presented in this 
Assembly, and to the people of Saskatchewan, by the newly elected government of Premier Grant 
Devine. 
 
The finance minister of the new Progressive Conservative administration felt obligated last fall to 
present to the legislature and to the people of Saskatchewan a mid-term correction of that disgraceful 
document of deceit the previous NDP administration had presented to the last legislature, and by way of 
an election, tried to sell to the voters of Saskatchewan last April 26. That document was so flagrant in its 
untrue and unrealistic projections of revenues and expenditures as to make the whole process of 
presenting a budget to the legislature a complete farce. 
 
However, by means of amid-term correction, the finance minister was able to present a much more 
honest picture of the real financial state of affairs in this province. 
 
After more than a decade of socialist policies, this province, one of the richest politically divided areas 
in the world, was faced with a bare cupboard. And the people (those that hadn’t already left 
Saskatchewan, that is) were chained down by an oppressive government bureaucracy that was busy 
thinking of new ways to rob the people and feed its fat family of state corporations, that land-grab they 
called the land bank, and scheming new ways to bribe voters with their own money. 
 
I commend the Minister of Finance, for both the mid-term correction and this budget, for this 
government’s honesty. He has restored some credibility to the budget process in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I would also like to take this opportunity to commend the other ministers of the crown 
who were able to trim some of the excessive fat from their departments. And as the Minister of 
Highways pointed out, and the member for Redberry’s announcement tonight demonstrated clearly their 
projected expenditures are real and don’t constitute a financial sleight of hand or exercise in deceit that 
so characterized the past administration. 
 
I’m greatly amused by the political and economic gymnastics of the members opposite in their various 
comments on this budget. On the one hand, they are screaming like banshees each time a bureaucrat is 
fired or laid off or even transferred, and in the next breath they’re condemning the government for 
running up a deficit. And as the  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
691 

member for Saskatoon — I can’t recall just which constituency, but it doesn’t matter — they’re all PC 
anyway in Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meagher: — They seem to be attempting to be, they seem to be attempting to be closet 
Conservatives over there, their economics. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you don’t have to be a graduate of the London School of 
Economics to know that you can’t have it both ways. You can’t spend the people’s money faster than 
they can provide it without running a deficit. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP know that. They are just continuing in their socialist tradition that 
has earned them the reputation of being masters of deceit, purveyors of doom and gloom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Meagher: — There’s almost no limit to their effort to present half-truths and outright falsehood as 
arguments in favour of their policies. It is because of their policies that this provincial government is 
faced with the difficult economic decisions they have to make. Their protestations remind me of the 
child who murdered his parents, then threw himself at the mercy of the court because he was an orphan. 
 
The efforts of this government to cut back on waste in government are to be applauded and are 
supported by the people of Saskatchewan. The majority of the people feel that government is wasteful 
and we have too much of it. And after 11 years of socialism this province has become one of the most 
over-governed, over-regulated communities in the world, either side of the Iron Curtain. What the 
socialists are demonstrating in this legislature and on the steps of the Manitoba legislature with the 
disgraceful burning of the American flag is the fact that their sick philosophy is becoming more radical 
and more pro-Communist. 
 
The member for Cumberland seemed very concerned about the testing of the cruise missile in northern 
Saskatchewan. Typical of these pro-Soviet pronouncements, he neglected entirely to deal with any fact 
that doesn’t support the current Soviet propaganda line. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, socialists have about as much respect for the truth as a tom-cat has for a 
marriage licence. I recently issued a challenge to any high-profile socialist including our Prince Albert 
federal NDP member of parliament to a public debate on the cruise testing issue. He indicated to the 
press in Prince Albert today that he declined the offer and to date I have not received any takers. There 
was a, a meeting last night of a group called the Prince Albert Coalition for Peace and Disarmament. I 
understand they debated the question, decided to decline as well. The truth is, Mr. Speaker, for the 
benefit of the members opposite as well, they want to control the debate with only the activists and the 
knee-jerk press making a contribution. 
 
It’s an amazing propaganda blitz and we have an obligation to expose it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our 
freedom, our lives are at stake. I can assure the member for Cumberland that if we do not succeed, his 
comrades will solve the 98 per cent unemployment rate he seems so concerned about. His constituents 
will be given an opportunity to take up  



 
April 7, 1983 

 
692 

the mining business — salt mines — and of course they won’t be getting any wages. 
 
Fortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have rejected that sick philosophy that 
seems to prefer a Soviet jack-boot on their throat ahead of co-operation with our American allies. It is 
our responsibilities, as legislators and as a government, to speak out and defend our freedom. I would 
like to read into the record, as a matter of fact, an editorial from that apostle . . . epistle of NDP research, 
in fact the basis of all their research, the Regina Leader-Post. ‘No Stars for Showing their Stripe,’ it’s 
headlined: 
 

Some of Manitoba Premier Howard Pawley’s pink-cheeked cabinet cohorts turned out for a gala 
American flag-burning ceremony in Winnipeg. They looked so pleased with themselves that they 
practically glowed in the darkness of their deeds. The flag-flaming was a Friendly Manitoba 
nose-thumbing over U.S. involvement in Nicaraguan affairs. No one seems to have minded this 
being a Manitoba meddling in what is legitimately a U.S. (and Canadian) concern. The very 
presence of provincial cabinet ministers at such an unholy display can be regarded as an 
expression of Manitoba’s policy. 
 

This comes, Mr., Mr. Deputy Speaker, this comes right from the NDP bible. So if it was, it was seen, at 
least by the United States, Pawley has grown coy about showing the Winnipeg copy of Washington’s 
official protest note to Ottawa, and has resorted to the usual simpering of the simple — that the 
opposition has magnified the incident out of proportion, and that the media have distorted the affair. But 
he cannot deny the facts that the flag of a friendly government was mutilated and some of his ministers 
were grinning witnesses to the humiliation. 
 

Manitoba is supposed to enjoy the same system of responsible cabinet government as the rest of 
Canada (continues this editorial). If this is Pawley’s kind of responsibility, responsibility, 
Manitoba is in grave trouble. He should banish his cabinet malefactors to the back benches and 
resign himself and take those burn-outs with him. 
 

That’s how the Leader-Post concluded its article. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the people of Manitoba will in fact join with the people of 
Saskatchewan last April 26, and give a clear message to that socialist government there. They often refer 
across the way to a one-term government in Saskatchewan. Well, I can assure the House that I . . . that 
the one-term government is to the east of us. 
 
Tommy Douglas was fond of saying, ‘Socialism is an idea whose time has come.’ Well, the people are 
saying that socialism is an idea whose time is past, not just here in Saskatchewan, but all over the world. 
 
The member for Cumberland, the member for Cumberland in his speech Tuesday referred to a meeting 
in Prince Albert a week or so ago, and he said the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan had come to the 
meeting not in a spirit of co-operation, but in a spirit of confrontation. Well, Mr. Speaker, I was at that 
meeting, and just the opposite is true. The minister pointed out to all assembled, including the press, the 
member for Cumberland, an assortment of Northerners, including some radical activists who depend on 
confrontation tactics as blocking roads and bridges to attract more government money and press 
attention . . . He told them, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
693 

confrontation tactics no longer work with this government, that this government won’t throw taxpayers’ 
money on every radical group that makes the most noise. 
 
And I support the minister, and so do the people of Saskatchewan, including the vast majority of the 
people of northern Saskatchewan. They want an opportunity to get out from under all that government 
help they’ve received under the past NDP years and be given a chance to rejoin the rest of this province 
and control their own destiny. And that’s the message from the people. Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s 
the message of this government in their new budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this, this budget has given, not just the people of northern Saskatchewan, but all of 
the people of this province, an opportunity to carryon on their own and do the things that they wish to do 
without heavy-handed government interfering in their everyday affairs. It is an honest effort to cut back 
the burden of government, free the people from government and allow this province to meet the destiny 
that I know is, is ahead for us. We could be the brightest spot in North America and all the western 
world and I’ve every confidence that that is the direction we’re moving. And this government has taken 
some major steps in that direction. And for that reason I support the motion and reject the frivolous 
amendment presented by the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before I begin tonight I just want to say that I’m 
very pleased to live in Saskatchewan now. I was one of those people who had to leave the province 
years ago to go find employment. And it is true, people are coming back here today and they are kissing 
the runways and the ground just as my friend the member for Regina North West said. You don’t have 
to go to Bulgaria to realize that. 
 
I have to, I have to compliment the Minister of Finance on this budget. It is a good, honest, 
straightforward budget. For the first time, for the first time in this province we see a Minister of Finance 
who goes out and consults with the business community, who consults with the people who are being 
taxed, who consults with the people whom we are providing the programs for. There’s some tough 
decisions to be made. It’s tough economic times. We wanted the taxpayers’ input. We got the taxpayers’ 
input. It’s a first in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now Saskatchewan is doing better than any other province and that’s probably due to some of the 
measures that we as a government have implemented. Our removal of the road tax on gas — that has 
saved thousands of dollars for school districts out there. You take a look at one of the largest costs of 
running a school district, especially in the rural areas, is the price of gasoline that drives the buses. 
Thousands of dollars every month are being saved by the taxpayers of those school districts because of 
the initiative of this government. R.M.s, for example, save money too. One of the biggest costs they’ve 
got is the fuel that goes into the road maintenance equipment. Before the removal of that road tax they 
were paying up to 20 per cent, an indirect way of taxing those people out there. 
 
The people benefit too, indirectly. It’s been said that we’ve given the trucking companies a real break — 
cut the gas tax, they don’t have to pay for the roads they use. All they did was they passed those costs 
along to the consumer. The consumer in the end footed the bill. What a despicable, low way of indirect 
taxation — despicable. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
694 

We introduced a mortgage interest reduction plan when it was needed — a comprehensive plan that 
everyone could use, and people took advantage of it, people have used it; people are happy with it; and 
we have people who still have their homes. 
 
Our farm purchase programs. If you take a look at the number of young farmers that are coming back on 
stream, if you would, now. They’ve got a chance to own their own land. They don’t have to be vassals 
and serfs as they were under the former administration. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Feudalism of the worst order. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Absolutely. Feudalism of the worst order. Terrible, terrible. I am proud of the people 
of Saskatchewan. I’m proud of Saskatchewan people and I’m proud to be part of this government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — We are a government who believe in private enterprise, and I’m not ashamed to say it. 
Individual initiative instead of big government. Big Brother, the helping hand. Real families versus 
families of crown corporations — that’s what we believe in; that’s what we stand for. 
 
And are those types of programs that we implemented working? Of course they are. Investor confidence 
in our economy remains strong. Our credit rating internationally remains high. It’s better than can be 
said for our neighbouring province of Manitoba. Private sector investment is coming back. After an 
11-year drought they can finally see a chance to make a dollar. They’re coming back in. Job creation 
programs are taking place. Jobs are being created out there, and that’s something that’s been long 
overdue. More jobs. Maybe my sons and daughters won’t have to leave and go to B.C. or Ontario or 
Alberta to get a job, like I had to when I got out of high school. 
 
Our budget outlines the nine-point program to expand job opportunities, skilled training facilities 
expansions, redirection of the heritage fund to emphasize agriculture, the backbone of the Saskatchewan 
economy. We have an improved and strengthened health care program being implemented. Research 
and development initiatives are taking place, and we’re streamlining our government — streamlining the 
government. We put an extension on our Build-A-Home program. We have a $32 million recreation and 
cultural facilities system in place. Those types of programs are good programs. The people need them. 
They supply the needs of the people. 
 
Now world conditions have been hard on us in Saskatchewan, as they have elsewhere. Oil pricing 
agreements have weakened our revenue position. Our potash sales have been down. But we’ve still done 
better than any other province in Canada — still better. We have the lowest unemployment. There’s a 
net increase in jobs. No other province in Canada can say that. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition in his reply to the budget speech neglected to mention a few things. 
He spoke loud and long and gave us a great harangue. It wasn’t very eloquent, but he kept on anyhow, 
and he gave us a real shot in he head (or so he felt) about promises that his government had not kept. But 
he didn’t mention those that  



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
695 

were. A little tax on our diesel fuel, on our farm diesel fuel, who were put there with the help of his NDP 
federal cohorts, and he’s complaining about the rising cost in fuel. The fuel hasn’t gone up; the tax sure 
has. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Pierre’s little red rump. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Pierre’s little red rump . . . Yes, absolutely. He went on about a farm fuel rebate in 
Alberta. Well, it’s funded by a heritage fund in Alberta. We don’t have much of a heritage fund here. 
How can we fund a farm fuel rebate program when the former administration used all the cash that they 
could . . . they said they were getting, building empires, literally empires for their family of crown 
corporations? It’s just not possible. Mr. Speaker, I could go on for hours and hours trying to explain all 
of the concrete, sound, innovative programs that this budget contains, but judging by the silence over in 
the opposition I really don’t think they are listening. Maybe they don’t want to listen. Maybe they can’t 
take the trust. 
 
However, I do want to dwell for a moment on one part of the budget which I find most interesting. And 
that part is the increase in tax on the diesel fuel used in railway locomotives and the aviation fuel used in 
their planes. It goes from 1.9 cents per litre to 5.6 cents per litre. This increase, this increase will bring in 
an additional $7.6 million in 1983-84. Now I was surprised. I was really surprised to find that the tax on 
the diesel fuel that was, that has been used by the dreaded multinational, the CPR and their federally 
owned and operated cohort, that monument of wonderful nationalization, the CNR, had been previously 
so low under the government that professed to be all for the little workingman and all out against the big 
corporate giants. Isn’t that interesting? 
 
Well, my curiosity was aroused so I did a little research (that’s something that the opposition should try 
to do once in a while — they might get their facts straight) and, Mr. Speaker, what I found just appalled 
me. I was shocked. I thought I got over being shocked after the first couple of months being in here after 
we opened the books and found what we found that the previous administration had left us. I was 
shocked. 
 
The 1982 January issue of Business Life, Leader of the Opposition is quoted as saying: 
 

It is clear that the railroads should get additional compensation for the grain they carry. 
 

He was apparently talking about the Crow rate and changes to it. February 8, ’82 in the Globe and Mail, 
the Leader of the Opposition, and I quote, said: 
 

We think that under certain circumstances and at some future time, the case might be made for 
increasing the level of the Crow, provided that it was given the same statutory protection. Now I 
don’t want to be quoted as saying I’m happy to see the Crow increase. That’s not so, but I’m 
realistic enough to know that times goes on and costs go on, and I think the farmers are realistic 
enough to say that at some time they should look at increasing the Crow. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Who said that? 
 
Mr. Petersen: — That was said by the Leader of the Opposition, that motley little crew in the corner 
over there. That person who has over the years come out and said that he hated those big multinational 
railroads with a passion, and here he is saying that the poor farmer in Saskatchewan should help to pay 
for their costs. Mr. Speaker, that’s 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
696 

despicable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’m going to give a little lesson in economics here to the opposition. I’d like to give 
you the total of all rail domestic commodities originating, terminating and passing through 
Saskatchewan. I’ll give you the 1980 figures. Originating in Saskatchewan and going to the Maritimes, 
we’re looking at 140,000 tons; going to Quebec, 267,000 tons; going to Ontario, 13,503,000 tons; to 
Manitoba, 1,118,000 tons; to Alberta, 316,000 tons; to B.C., 8,809,000 tons; and originating in 
Saskatchewan and terminating in Saskatchewan 613,000 tons — for a total of 24,766,000 tons. Now, 
terminating in Saskatchewan from the Maritimes to Saskatchewan, 8,000 tons; from Quebec terminating 
in Saskatchewan, 120,000 — pardon me, 121,000 tons; from Ontario, 493,000 tons; from Manitoba, 
826,000 tons; from Alberta, 512,000 tons; from B.C., 257,000 tons; and as well, that same figure 
originating and terminating in Saskatchewan, 613,000 tons — for a total of 2,830,000 tons terminating 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now passing through Saskatchewan from the east to the west: from the Maritimes to Alberta we have 
106,000 tons; from Quebec to Alberta, 636,000 tons; from Ontario to Alberta, 2,086,000 tons; from 
Manitoba, pardon me, from Manitoba to Alberta, 708,000 tons. Now, from the Maritimes to B.C. we 
have 21,000 tons; from Quebec to B.C. we have 352,000 tons; from Ontario to B.C. we have 1,030,000 
tons; from Manitoba to B.C. we have 536,000 tons. If you add that all up the total comes to 5,475,000 
tons. That’s for traffic passing through the province. 
 
So as you can see, we have, we have quite a large amount of traffic coming through and travelling 
across the province. By the way, those tons were not metric tons, those were tons as I understand them. 
 
Now, when we calculate a gas tax against the tonnage that’s moved across the province, it’s done in two 
different ways: CN as one formula and CP as another formula. The calculation of the gas tax liability by 
the railway companies is as follows: CN developed consumption factors for each type of grain, freight 
. . . pardon me, for each type of train — freight or yard or what-have-you — in miles per gallon. Miles 
travelled in each province for each type of activity is multiplied by the consumption factor for each type 
to arrive at total consumption in each province. This is multiplied by the tax rate to yield the tax liability 
in each province. Makes some sense. 
 
CP developed a computer simulation of train conditions in each province using road-bed conditions, 
number of engine units in each type of train, usage of various types of trains, etc. to allocate 
consumption among provinces. Taxes are paid to each province based on the travel within that province 
of each type of train — again freight, yard, what-have-you; of each type of composition — the number 
of cars, engines, etc., under each type of condition — curved, straight track, hills, urban, rural, and so on 
and so forth. 
 
Now what I find most interesting, Mr. Speaker, is to see that we have had that, that amount of tonnage 
being transported, travelling across Saskatchewan — from Saskatchewan to Saskatchewan, across 
Saskatchewan. My first thought was: my God but isn’t that a great place to raise some revenue? Isn’t 
that a good place to raise some revenue? And I expected full well that the previous administration had 
milked that particular source heavily, as they seemed to have been able to do with all their other types of 
taxes. But, Mr. Speaker, I found to my horror and my shock, that in 1972-73, when the people of 
Saskatchewan were paying $53.3 million in gas tax, the railroads, 



 
April 7, 1983 

 

 
697 

(remember the railroads — those dreaded multinationals), were only paying $1.7 million - $1.7 million. 
 
Well, I thought, well that might be the case, you know, but I’m sure, I’m sure that they mended the, you 
know, the error of their ways. I’m sure they saw the error, and I’m sure they fixed it. So, I went on a 
little further. And, I thought, well, 1978-79 should be a good year to look at. Well, in 1978-79, Mr. 
Speaker, 1978-79, the people of Saskatchewan paid $79.2 million in gas tax, and that dreaded 
multinational, that dreaded multinational paid $3 million. Just think of the tonnage that’s going there, 
just think of the amount of, of product that was being moved. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I thought, you know, surely, surely (you remember surely), as time progressed they 
would see the error of their ways, and being good socialists, they would figure out a way to tax that big, 
nasty multinational and that big, nasty national. So I went to 1981-82, Mr. Speaker. And in 1981-82 I 
found that the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, the taxpayers of Saskatchewan paid $117 million in gas tax, 
Mr. Speaker, $117 million out of their pocket. The school districts had to pay that. The R.M.s paid that. 
Indirect taxation to the tune of $117 million. Despicable. And I figured, well, if they do that to the 
people of Saskatchewan, they would really sock it to those big, nasty railroads, and they did. Oh, they 
sure did. They charged them $3.7 million, Mr. Speaker. A measly $3.7 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was appalled. I almost lost the three hairs that I still had. Then, Mr. Speaker, I thought, 
well, let’s just compare what the new budget, the budget of a Conservative government, a Conservative 
government would do. So, Mr. Speaker, I took a look at it. And in 1983-84 (the budget we’re talking 
about), you know what? The people of Saskatchewan don’t pay any gas tax! But you know those 
railroads, those big, nasty railroads were paying $12.1 million in tax. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Now I hope the members in the opposition have been listening to this. And if they 
haven’t been listening to it, I’d be happy to mail each of them a copy of Hansard with the appropriate 
passages marked out. I’m sure it would make appropriate reading for them. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Gone over their heads. 
 
Mr. Petersen: — Well that’s perhaps true. It may have gone over their head, but I think if we give it to 
them two or three times, they’ll figure it out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Should I run it by them 
again? I think the point’s been well made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have opposite from us a government that said one thing and did another. They taxed the 
people of Saskatchewan, and they taxed the people of Saskatchewan, and they taxed the people of 
Saskatchewan, and they let the railroads off practically scot-free. Whose friend are they? Whose friend 
are they? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s for reasons like those that I’ve just outlined that, as I said earlier, I’m proud to be part 
of this government. I’m proud to be a Canadian under a . . . in a free country. And you’re right; maybe 
each and every one of us should get down and kiss the ground and be thankful that we’re here, and 
we’re here in Saskatchewan under a Progressive Conservative government, not under an NDP socialist 
one. 



 
April 7, 1983 

 
698 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. This is only one example, only one example of the many things that 
my research has come up with. However, I think I will conclude now. I think the, I think the opposition 
has had their lesson for the day. And I’ll conclude by saying that I do not support the amendment. I do 
support the main motion. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

MOTION 
 

Appointments to Public Accounts Committee 
 

Mr. Glauser: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave of this Assembly, seconded by the member for 
Prince Albert, I would ask that I be allowed to present a motion changing two members of the public 
accounts committee. The motion that I am presenting is: 
 

That the name of Mr. Dutchak be substituted for that of Mr. Sutor and the name of Mr. Young be 
substituted for that of Mr. McLaren on the list of members comprising the standing committee on 
public accounts. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:03 p.m. 
 


	EVENING SESSION
	INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS
	REPORTS OF COMMITTEES

