






















































Hansard: April 06, 1983


565 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 6, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Rybchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you, and through you to this 
Assembly, nine adults from the life skills group, University of Regina, better known as the Gabriel 
Dumont Institute. They are accompanied by their teacher-chaperone, Bill Farley, and are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I would like to inform them that I’ll be meeting with them after question period for pictures and 
refreshments. I hope their stay here will be educational, and I’d like all the members here to extend them 
a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I had no advance notice of this. I did note that 
— by the notice on the bulletin board — that the group are located at 11th Avenue and McIntyre Street. 
That’s in Regina Centre, and I want to join with my colleagues in welcoming these students to the 
legislature. There are unfortunately too few people, students from Regina, actually come. The, I 
probably welcome fewer students than most members of the Assembly. And I’m glad to see that at least 
you people have taken an interest in the proceedings of the Assembly. I hope that you find it worth 
while, and I hope you have an enjoyable day. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

ANNOUNCEMENT 
 

Red Cross Blood Donors Clinic 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to introduce to this Assembly 
some folks who are not in the gallery. They are in Room no. 218, Mr. Speaker. They’re the Red Cross 
Blood Donors Clinic that was set up there to promote a more enhanced volume of blood from the 
Legislative Building — not only the elected members but staff and support people in this building. I 
understand that the clinic runs till 4 o’clock this afternoon. 
 
We have all, from time to time, bled a little bit on this floor. And it would be, I think, I think a very 
worthwhile cause to bleed in Room 218, and in addition we could bleed there under sanitary conditions. 
And it would be a great opportunity for members of the press to show that they in fact have a heart as 
well. 
 
And so I would encourage, I would encourage all members of the Assembly, and all staff and support 
people in the building to drop around to Room 218. And the press gallery as well. And we’ve not 
stanvike that. But we would . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Oh, are we? But I would encourage, I would 
encourage all members and all members of  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
566 

support staff to do your level best to get us, in this building, the best quota from any government 
building in the province. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Small Business Rebate Program 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker. I direct a question to the Minister of Tourism and Small Business, 
and I direct it with respect to the small business rebate program which has been announced, that in 
respect or which we have very little information to date. I ask the minister to consider this case and 
advise me whether I am correct. 
 
Assuming the normal case of a small business, which uses the calendar year as its financial year, and 
assuming that that business hires an eligible employee next month, say, in May of 1983, am I right in 
saying that any tax benefit will not be available, any refund will not be available until the year 1985, 
when he makes out the 1984 income tax return? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition is certainly correct in leading 
off with a question on a, on a program that was announced in a, that was announced in a, in a 
preliminary way in the budget speech. The . . . As I said to the, to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 
yesterday, I will repeat to him today, the announcement of the program in all of its details . . . And you 
can take whatever hypothetical situation that you might like at that time and apply it to the details that 
are announced. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member would, must wait for the, for the 
announcement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a, a supplementary question. Is the minister telling us that he 
doesn’t know the answer to the question, or that, knowing it, he will not disclose that information to the 
House? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — I am not telling, Mr. Speaker, I am not telling the members of the House that I 
do not know the information, and I am . . . But I am saying that the . . . As I said yesterday, that the, the 
announcement of the program will be coming, the, near the end of this week or at the very latest, early 
next week, as I said yesterday. And that’s where it sits. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr.  . . . Another short supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Why, why does the 
minister withhold this information from the business community when obviously he knows the answer 
but wishes to, to presumably withhold it until a more auspicious time? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr. Speaker, the, the answer to that is the, the reason that we have, have said 
that it’ll all be announced in, in one package, let’s say, rather than in, rather than in answers to 
speculative flights, is that we want to, we want to . . . How could I best say this and be, and be 
reasonable, and be reasonably well understood? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Do I understand then from the minister, that we might expect an announcement 
probably about Friday afternoon at 4 o’clock after the minister’s left town? 



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
567 

Hon. Mr. McLeod: — You can rest assured that when the announcement is made that this, this minister 
will be in town, and you will, and I will answer any questions that the hon. Leader of the Opposition 
might have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A question to the same minister. Will you at least confirm what the government has 
already announced, and that is that this program does not involve grants, but does involve deductions 
from income tax, that it is a tax-deductible program? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Well, what the hon. members says that the government has already announced, 
and what the government has, in fact, already announced, are two different things. But, as I said to your, 
your leader, and I will say to, to the member for Regina Centre, Mr. Speaker, he as well can wait for the 
official announcement and it would be fine if you were both here at the same time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The . . . I take that to be an undertaking that the announcement will be made in the 
House, as, as my colleague said, a sharp break with tradition in this government. 
 
A new question, Mr. Speaker. In light of the fact that your government has announced what you are, 
you’re stonewalling on, and that is that it is not a grant, but a deduction from income tax, and in light of 
the sheer mechanics of the Income Tax Act, which, which will mean that not a cent will be available to 
small businesses before a year has elapsed, and probably two, my question to the minister is: how many 
small businesses are gong to find a program attractive when they don’t get paid for two years? How 
many small businesses do you expect to attract into this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLeod: — Mr., Mr. Speaker, I have undertaken to inform the members that the 
announcement is coming, number one. I would, I would suggest to the members, I would suggest to the 
members that . . . Reach into your grab-bag and find an issue if you can, and carry on in a question 
period with something that is of some issue. And, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the announcement will be 
made in due course, and, and very soon, I might add, much more quickly than many, many programs 
were announced that were announced in budgets presented by that government when they were over 
here. And, so, we have no apology to make for the speed with which we make this announcement, and 
with which we put the mechanics of this program together. It will be a matter of something less than two 
weeks, which is much more, much quicker than anything that you people did when you were in power. 
 

Compensation for Disabled Workers 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I gather I have no option but to turn to a minister who 
does answer questions, and leave the one who, who refuses. My question is to the Minister of Labour, 
and it relates to the workmen’s compensation board, Mr. Minister. I would remind you that the workers’ 
compensation board amendments which we passed in the last session were flawed, and that no, and that 
no increased benefits have been paid out to any of the workers. But, my constituents, Mr. Minister, by 
way of background, have been advised by the workers’ compensation staff, that no increased benefits 
are being sent out by the board because of flaws in the legislation. My question to you, Mr. Minister, is: 
having know this for over three months, as you must have, do you intend to correct these, these flaws? 



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
568 

Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina Centre, in answer to your question, I am 
aware of the problem. It’s one word and that amendment is going to be coming in in this session. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well my question, my question, my question, Mr. Speaker, is: are you going to 
make these amendments retroactive or are you going to deny workers, the injured workers, the increased 
benefits which have been caused by your staff’s incompetence? Are you going to make them 
retroactive? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, the injured workers of Saskatchewan will be looked after. It’s one 
word, and there is not that many. It’s done on the anniversary date of the accidents. It’s only those in 
January or February that have not had their compensation, but we will have that cleaned up as soon as 
the amendment goes through. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, a new, a new question. Mr. Minister, what has prevented you from bringing 
these amendments before this? You’re denying some workers, you’re denying some workers the 
increased benefits. What has prevented you from bringing these amendments before this Assembly 
before this, and why, why the delay? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I was just brought, the amendment change was just brought to my 
attention a couple of weeks ago, and the amendment is on my desk right now. It will be going through 
the session as soon as we get it back. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Are you telling this Assembly that although your 
staff knew on January 1st that this legislation could not be administered in the manner in which it was 
passed, that they didn’t bother to tell you until two weeks ago? Is that what you’re telling the Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I’m just telling the member opposite that I was just aware of it 
two weeks ago, three weeks ago at the very most, and we’ll be looking after it, and retroactively. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. You had three weeks in the last session to correct 
these, and you had three weeks in this session and we haven’t seen these amendments, which would take 
any legislative draftsman five minutes to prepare. My question to you is: when are you going to bring 
the amendments forward and give the injured workmen the benefits to which they are clearly entitled? 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . He has not. He has said some time in this session. How soon are you 
going to bring these amendments forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been in throne speech; we’ve been in the budget speeches. 
We will have this available and cleared within the next few days. The injured workers will be looked 
after retroactively. That’s going to be done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well . . . Mr., Mr. Speaker, new question. Leaving aside the apparent inability of 
the minister and his staff to communicate, do I understand you correctly that I have your commitment 
that these amendments are going to be introduced within a few days? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question is yes. 



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
569 

Department of Rural Development 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the minister of rural affairs, pardon me, Rural 
Development. When this government, a few, last week, announced the reorganization just prior to the 
budget, they stated then that they would be beefing up rural, the Department of Rural Development. We 
see in the budget an increase of something around 4.6 per cent for the Department of Rural 
Development. Is this the government’s or the minister’s concept of beefing up rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if that’s his concept of beefing up, but it certainly 
isn’t mine. I would like to mention that the 4.6 you are talking about, increase in the revenue sharing, if 
you take the allocation for ambulances in rural Saskatchewan that’s gone into Health and add it up, it’s a 
complete 7 per cent. And legislation will be coming forth in the very near future to show that we’re 
going to enhance Rural Development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the Minister of Rural Development. It would be 
interesting to see some of that legislation that is going to improve the Department of Rural 
Development. It appears that the, the president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) is not really convinced that you are going to do what you have done, been telling them 
all along, according to his comments in the paper, which says, and I’ll quote: ‘I see nothing here to show 
that it will be strengthened.’ Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, do you not agree that because of the small 
increase that you have provided to Rural Development that this is going to place an even further burden 
on the farmers in rural Saskatchewan, because the R.M.s are going to have to increase the mill rate a 
substantial amount just to continue their operation as they have in the past year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to tell the hon. member from Pelly that we are on the 
restraint guide-lines of 7 per cent increase within the Department of Rural Development, and when Mr. 
Phelps, the president of SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) was contacted by 
the press, he wasn’t aware that the allocation of ambulance services administered through my 
department, a portion thereof, in conjunction with urban affairs, was taken out. As a result of that I think 
you should contact them and see what the results of my contact with him has been, and the satisfaction 
he has shown me since that time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Supplementary question to the Minister of Rural Development. I would really question 
whether you had a favourable comment from the minister, or the president of SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), because it appears that every local government has been critical of 
this budget and the funding that’s being provided to them. And rural development is one area that is 
been saying the same thing, Mr. Minister. What they are being told by this government because of your 
restraint is that rural Saskatchewan . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. Does the hon. member have a question? I believe that there will be 
plenty of opportunity for budget speeches later. If you have a question please get to it. 



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
570 

Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the Minister of Rural Development is: would you not 
reconsider the amount of money that you have placed in this budget for rural development, and increase 
it so that the people of rural Saskatchewan can at least maintain the programs that they have to this 
point, without having to unduly assess, or raise a higher assessment on the taxpayers of rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Pickering: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to advise the hon. member that there are 299 rural 
municipalities within this province, and I have yet to hear from one as it relates to the 7 per cent increase 
in revenue sharing that was announced in the budget by the Minister of Finance in this province last 
Tuesday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

SGI Licensing Offices 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to go, I want to ask a question to the minister in 
charge of SGI. The, Mr. Minister, I would, I would, by way of background I’d remind you that on 
March 30, Mr. Justice Vancise issued an injunction prohibiting it from closing down the licence-issuing 
offices in certain communities including Estevan. I’d also remind you that on the same date, an 
advertisement appeared in the Estevan Mercury inviting the public to attend Border Agencies Ltd. To 
pick up their licence. My question to the minister is: has the Premier asked you to take out another ad in 
the next edition of the Estevan Mercury, apologizing to the good citizens of Estevan for the confusion 
your ad caused? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, he hasn’t. 
 

Date of Increase of SGI Deductible 
 

Mr. Shillington: — I want to, I want to pursue the, the, another area of confusion, if I might, with a new 
question, Mr. Speaker. The, it, it, it has to do with the timing of the increase in the deductible. And I 
would remind you that the public of Saskatchewan are working with four different dates. There was 
your date of March 15; there was a cabinet date of March 31, March 1st, sorry; there was the Premier’s 
date of July 1st; and we now have . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, and the multiple choice is 
getting a little lengthy . . . And we now have, in the newspaper, your, your general manager telling us 
that the increase may well occur midnight on the night he gets the decision from the court. My question 
to the minister is: which one of . . . who are we to believe — you, the cabinet, the Premier, or the man so 
far who’s been calling all the shots, Mr. Black? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, it’s starting all over again, it seems, from the questions that were 
left off from last week. And the answer is still the same as it was last week. The Premier made the 
announcement in this Assembly some time ago that the $500 deductible would be . . . or the 
implementation of the $500 deductible would be delayed until July 1. That date still stands, and it will 
be implemented at that time. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A supplementary. And Mr. Black is talking through a hole in his hat, is that the, is 
that the assumption we make? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Mr. Speaker, that question isn’t even worth a, worthy of a reply. The . . . He 
wants to pick a couple of words out of a newspaper article; I’ll let him  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
571 

do that. Because it isn’t really worthy of a reply in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Speaker, a new question. Let me read you the short quotation from the 
newspaper. 
 

If the court agrees with the company that the deductible is not part of the rate, Black said the 
increase could be in place by midnight the day the court rules. 
 

Now I’d ask you: is that clearly erroneous? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Well, I don’t know what the hon. member . . . Or where he picked up his 
knowledge of the English language, but it says, and he just read it: ‘Black said the increase could be.’ He 
didn’t say it would be. He said it could be in place by midnight. That doesn’t tell me, Mr. Speaker, that 
he is going to do it the day, at midnight of that day. He said it could be. And it could, it could very well. 
But the fact is that the Premier’s announced it’s going to be on a certain date. That’s the date it will be. 
Perhaps you should know a little bit about the English language. That’s what it says to me. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr., Mr. Speaker. A new question. Let me remind you that Mr. Black’s track 
record to date hasn’t been too bad in these things. You said there was not going to be a deductible, an 
increase in the deductible. He said there was. He was right. He said there was going to be an increase in 
. . . He said you were going to close the offices, and he was right, and that clearly caught some members 
of the treasury bench by surprise. I’d ask you, Mr., Mr. Minister. He has said it, that the increase could 
take place on midnight the day that court gave their judgement. Are you telling us that he is wrong and it 
cannot take place that date, that it’s going to take place July 1st? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — I don’t know whether the member is grandstanding in front of the television 
camera or what the reason for his silly questions are becoming. I repeat what I said earlier. The fact is 
that the . . . What the president of SGI said is it could be. The fact is, and the Premier has announced it, 
that it will be on July 1. What more do you want? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Just one short question to the minister. If Mr. Black says it could be at midnight 
on the day the court gives its judgement, and the Premier says it will be on July 1, then those are 
logically impossible to be compatible unless the court delivers its judgement on June 30. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Only, only, only if the court delivers this judgement on June 30th is it possible 
that July 1 is the date, and it could be on the night that the, that the court gives its judgement. Do you 
agree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — Now the Leader of the Opposition is getting just as silly in his comments, Mr. 
Speaker, as the member from Regina Centre was a few moments ago. The fact is, and I repeat it again, 
the, the $500 deductible, as far as SGI is concerned, will be implemented on July 1 as announced by the 
Premier in this Assembly some time ago. 
 
You know, I, I would like to comment on that particular aspect, Mr. Speaker, because  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
572 

they, they have been insisting . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who’s they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — The opposition, Mr. Speaker, has been insisting for some time now that the 
$500 deductible will be, should be part of public utilities review commission, and it should be part of the 
rate adjustments approved by the, by the public utilities review commission. I would only have on 
question: if they were so sure of themselves, why did they, they introduce an amendment to the bill in 
this Assembly last week to change it? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, that was a remarkable response, but now that, now that we’re into the subject 
of due respect for the public utilities review commission and the due respect for the courts in this 
province, will you not agree — since you, since your, since your general manager says if he gets a 
favourable decision he may, he, he may well begin immediately with the increase in the deductible — 
will you, Mr. Minister, admit that you ought to wait until you get a decision by the court until after you, 
before you increase the deductible? Will you not admit, Mr. Minister, that you should not be increasing 
the deductible until you get a decision from the court since, if your proceed in advance, you may well 
have to unscramble the egg that you’ve put in effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Rousseau: — No, I do not agree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

Sask Tel Annual Report 
 

Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the minister of Sask Tel. Mr. Minister, regarding a 
news article stating that Sask Tel has made a $7.8 million profit in 1982, and they have forwarded this 
to, or discussed this with PURC (public utilities review commission), could the minister indicate, since 
it’s public knowledge now what the affairs are of Sask Tel and that there, that there have been 
completed by this government, could he indicate to this House when he’s going to table the Sask Tel 
report so that the public can be aware of what Sask Tel’s situation is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Mr. Speaker, I suppose I could continue the answer to the question tomorrow if the 
hon. member will give me leave. I’d like to give a very succinct statement of the affairs of Sask Tel, Mr. 
Speaker. They are finally in good hands. I would like to say that finally the administration of Sask Tel is 
being allowed to address the very complex technological problems that face the communication industry 
in the province of Saskatchewan. Sask Tel has announced some new programs like Phone Patrol, 
Videotex services, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . I was asked a question: ‘How are the 
affairs of Sask Tel?’ Many hon. members, Mr. Speaker, are aware of the Pathfinder series that is being 
implemented in the north-west part of the city of Regina. Mr. Speaker, we will be making significant 
initiatives in distance education. We will be making significant participation by Sask Tel in the 
province-wide ambulance service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sask Tel will be and has been heavily involved in negotiations with cable operators. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m quite aware as minister of the treasury benches as to the rules and regulations as to the time 
for the filing of annual reports. And I think that the hon. member, if he had taken the time to brief 
himself, would also be aware of the rules and regulations for the filing of the annual reports. And we 
will in fact file the annual  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
573 

report appropriately. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATE 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion of the Hon. Mr. Andrew that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the committee of finance and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Shillington. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hardy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed an honour to be able to take part in this 
debate on our first full budget that has been brought in by our new government and especially since it’s 
a very, very full and complete budget. 
 
I’d like to congratulate my colleague, the Hon. Bob Andrews, the Minister of Finance, and I think of one 
of the most innovative and imaginative budgets that has been brought into this here Legislative 
Assembly in many, many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many topics I would like to discuss today. But first I’d like to take this 
opportunity to thank the people of my constituency, Kelsey-Tisdale, for showing their trust in me in 
allowing me to represent them in this new government. I’m certainly very proud and very honoured to 
take, to have this opportunity to be part of a very new and very progressive government. 
 
And also I would like to say that I’m also very honoured to be able to have, to work with such 
imaginative people, such innovative people, such as our Premier, our cabinet colleagues and the caucus 
we have. Very few governments around this country have so much to draw in regards to talent. 
 
There are some very essential, important things to be done in Kelsey-Tisdale, which I plan to work 
towards achieving. In my home town of Hudson Bay there is a great concern to the residents about the 
lumber industry, as many are employed in the three lumber mills that operate in the area: the need to 
stabilize the wood industry; to bring some long-term planning for these three mills, and also the plan for 
the long-term forest use. We all need and want our forest industry to prosper for a long time. We want it 
to survive; we want our forests to remain with us. To do this, good forest management and proper use of 
our softwoods is a must in developing this plan. This can only be done by taking some effective action 
and do some proper planning, step by step. To avoid long-term planning would result in depletion of our 
forests. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a risk we cannot afford to take. If we look at usage of all our trees and 
the related products, usage of small woods, and the proper harvesting of selected and forest area, 
forested areas, only in this way can we expect to have a viable and lasting forest industry. 
 
Whereas many of my constituents are involved in the lumber industry, a great many others are farmers, 
who are mostly small- or medium-size farmers. Over the months they have expressed to me that they 
cannot afford to pay more for grain transportation. And, Mr. Speaker, especially with our new predicted 
price this fall. Mr. Speaker, as well, as the constituents of my riding can be assured that I will do 
whatever I can to see that our farmers continue to be the backbone of our province. As this House 
knows, agriculture is number one. 



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
574 

There’s also a need, Mr. Speaker, for improved roads in the Kelsey-Tisdale constituency, especially 
some of the roads in the Archerwill area. And, Mr. Speaker, may I advise this House the completion of 
the roads are very important, especially the one for Greenwater Provincial Park, as it is one of the most 
widely and most popular provincial parks in this province. And I am positive that it, that it will continue 
to do, be so. 
 
I’m also very fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to have the town of Tisdale in my riding, the very hub of a large 
farming area, and a very progressive town, I might say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Tisdale residents are looking forward to a new shopping mall and expanded senior 
citizens care facilities, all of which are very much needed in that area. And again, Mr. Speaker, you can 
be assured, as can the Tisdale residents, that I will be there to assist them. There’s many other towns and 
villages in my area and they, too, have a . . . contribute to the very important part of what we call 
northeastern Saskatchewan. That’s the rural type of life that we all know and love in that part of the 
province. 
 
In addition to many responsibilities that . . . a few responsibilities that I’ve had, I’ve also become 
responsible for the Parks and Renewable Resources. It’s a very new and imaginative portfolio for 
myself; I was very honoured and pleased to have got it. I feel that I can, I can, through my colleagues 
and my cabinets, contribute much towards making our parks, our forests, much better for the future 
generations. 
 
There are many branches in the government department, all of which is responsible and to become 
familiar with. Of particular concern to me is the wildlife branch, which falls under one of these 
departments. Mr. Speaker, my concern to do with this branch . . . I have some very strong feelings, and 
one of them is about uncontrolled hunting in this province. I believe that hunting is a sport. I also know 
that for some it is a livelihood, and I recognize this. But, Mr. Speaker, I believe that both these aspects 
of hunting can be maintained, but the fact of the matter is that uncontrolled hunting is hurting; it’s 
hurting both the recreational hunter and the hunter who hunts for need. 
 
It is time, Mr. Speaker, that through whatever negotiations are necessary, we must bring this 
uncontrolled hunting to a halt. We must protect and use wisely our very limited wildlife population so 
that, in the decades to come, both the children of today and tomorrow can enjoy the luxury we presently 
afford ourselves. Mr. Speaker, we must gear ourselves towards this goal: that hunting is a privilege; it is 
not a right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s so much more that we can do, be doing now and in the future, to keep 
Saskatchewan as we know it: the planting trees in harvested areas — approximately the same will be 
planted this year as last year; the restocking of fish to fill our depleted lakes and streams; the protection 
of our forests from fires; the careful management of our forests in the harvesting of them; the retention 
of our grasslands and other areas that are of a special nature; the retention of wetlands and proper 
planting of these; the protection of our farm crops from crop depredation; and the improvement of our 
provincial and regional parks. All these, Mr. Speaker, are very important. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, some other responsibilities also include the Saskatchewan Housing 
Corporation. I’d like just to take a few moments to speak about this. Housing has to be one of the most 
important . . . specially here in Saskatchewan where our  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
575 

severe weather conditions are a fact of life. We, as a new government, recognize this and have moved to 
improve the housing situation by changing some of these programs. We’ve cancelled some, we’ve 
brought in some new ones, we brought in some new ideas on housing. 
 
Our government, Mr. Speaker, through the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, will continue with the 
construction of subsidized rental housing to meet the housing needs of the limited income senior citizens 
and families. We’ll continue the senior citizens home repair program and the Saskatchewan Rehab 
Program and, under the rental housing program, funding will be provided for the construction of 1,460 
rental housing units, for a total cost of $85 million, consisting of 860 low-rental public housing units for 
senior citizens and family, 150 non-profit senior citizens’ apartments, and 450 units of market rental 
housing through the Prairie Housing Development Corporation. 
 
I also might add, Mr. Speaker, that we also will be coming on with a considerable number of nursing 
home beds. 
 
A unique new housing program is being looked at with senior citizens’ accommodations which would 
be combined with the family housing. The recreational facilities would be shared by those who could 
afford to, to pay the market rents, while those on limited income would pay 25 per cent of their income 
towards the rent. It’s estimated, Mr. Speaker, that 85 per cent of our senior citizens are able to own their 
own units, whereas 15 per cent are faced with inflation which makes it extremely difficult for them to 
live comfortably. I’d like . . . It’s important to note that seniors would be part of a neighbourhood 
community under this new concept. They’d be able to maintain their life-styles with dignity and privacy, 
as well as maintain close companionship with friends and neighbours. We think this is a new idea, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d like to move on to the rural housing program. When we became, took over in April, we found it to be 
one of the most detrimental programs there was. There was problems all over. We took and revised the 
program and, to date, Mr. Speaker, it’s gradually becoming a very popular program. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, there will be a significant increase in the rural housing program made possible by the 
government’s new direction on the building and administration of a rural housing program. In this 
manner, the program will be able to deliver more badly needed housing to the smaller centres in 
Saskatchewan, at the same time providing increased native employment and on-the-job training through 
special requirements in the tenders. 
 
And one other thing, Mr. Speaker: the onus for the distribution of these new rural housing units will be 
on the local, at a local autonomy level. It will be a local responsibility, and we think it’s a new concept, 
a new idea: putting it back to the local people who are elected at local level. 
 
As part of an overall plan for the northern housing, the units targeted for the north may not be delivered 
under the traditional rural housing program, but may include senior citizens’ housing, market rental 
housing, and some other forms of government housing which we’re working on. And it’s all part of a 
new plan to expand the range of programming available in northern Saskatchewan. The corporation 
expects to be in a position to resume construction in the North in 1983, on a basis that will ensure the 
kinds of cost overruns, to ensure that the kinds of cost overruns that were experienced in the past will 
not reoccur, while still ensuring maximum northern employment. 



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
576 

We also have a land development in this. In 1983, the corporation will have capital funds available to 
assist local communities and municipalities in developing needed building lots. The government 
undertakes this activity in those communities where the private sector, or the municipality itself, cannot, 
or does not, be able to provide the building lots needed. 
 
Just to move on to a new, another new concept that we’re looking at in housing. We’re calling it 
enriched senior citizen housing. The corporation is also looking at the concept of enriched housing, a 
concept which would be designed to operate in conjunction with the home care program, small 
community hospitals, and other community support services, in which housing would promote the 
independence and individuality of the elderly and disabled and at the same time provide the convenience 
and security of a limited amount of care and assistance. This concept could add a great deal of quality to 
the life of the elderly, and represent a cost-effective approach for the province, particularly if it forestalls 
any, or reduces the need for nursing home accommodations. Tenants at enriched housing would be 
provided with a response system based on either a voluntary system or daily checks, or sophisticated 
personal alarm system. As well, tenants would be also eligible for the basic services on all home care. 
 
And I’d like to move on just for one more moment and talk about a new program that was introduced 
last fall, and extended to August 1 in our budget, and that’s the build-a-home program. We expected an 
increased activity under the land development program because of the high level of the demand being 
generated by the Build-A-Home Saskatchewan program. Within the extension of the build-a-home 
announced in this budget to include all homes started before August 1, 1983 we expect a total of 2,800 
units creating approximately 4,500 jobs. 
 
This program is a clear example, Mr. Speaker, of the new government’s direction to co-operate with the 
private industry at providing an assistance that they need to do the job, rather than attempting to replace 
a role. As a result of Build-A-Home Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, single home ownership starts are up 
300 per cent in the province. Prospects are good for even greater recovery over the next few months. In 
February alone, building permits applications totalled 1,016 as compared to 149 in 1982. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it looks like consumer confidence is on the rise in Saskatchewan due to a few things. One, 
lower interest rates; the other, guaranteed interest rates at 13.25 under our mortgage interest reduction 
plan. And all these help boost that confidence. But in particular, Mr. Speaker, the build-a-home program 
has proven to be the incentive that has the industry moving again. Mr. Speaker, this budget is a clear 
example of a government’s commitment to an important and essential priority such as housing, and the 
protection of environment as to the most important priorities. 
 
The Department of Environment has, and will continue to ensure that those essential elements and 
continuing activities which protect the people and the environment, are not being downgraded nor 
eliminated. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we are simply seeing that the department will run efficiently, and 
improved working conditions will be the result. We have economized where we could, but I’d like to 
stress again, Mr. Speaker, not at the expense of protecting the environment. 



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
577 

Mr. Speaker, I feel the department’s record speaks for itself. It’s just the last few months we have made 
several announcements. Recently, for instance, regulations on the potash refining air emissions were 
passed by cabinet, incorporated under The Air Pollution Control Act, whereby industry is required to 
meet the standard to reduce annual potash emissions by 7,500 tonnes by January 1985. Existing 
refineries must meet the standard, and new refineries must meet the standard before the commencement 
of operation. Another example of protecting the environment, Mr. Speaker, another example of what we 
consider to be essential. 
 
I was very fortunate in February to be on a cabinet committee on water concerns. We travelled around 
the province to identify existing and emergent water issues. Every centre in our community visited . . . 
Every centre in our community we visited the participation was excellent. Concerned individuals and 
groups everywhere welcome the opportunity to be listened to, to have the opportunity to articulate their 
concerns. Every person who took time to participate presented well organized and professional briefs. 
We heard from people who had too much water, and some who had not enough. Some farmers wanted 
to irrigate, and some wanted to drain. Some communities had good water and poor sewage systems. 
Some had neither. Some wanted improvements, some wanted new systems, and many proposed ideas on 
how to upgrade the existing systems. 
 
Public hearings on water are yet another example of how our government is committed to the protection 
of environment and what we consider as essential, preservation and conservation of what has probably 
become our most precious resource, and that is water. 
 
The findings, such as those discovered in the water hearings, based on intensive research and high level 
public involvement, assist our government in determining environmental policy. This is one way in 
which our government creates a favourable climate for exchange between the public and the private 
sectors. But all of this we have identified the need for a comprehensive water resource management 
policy, and establishment of a water utility crown, both of those which will serve the needs of the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
We also introduced in the budget, Mr. Speaker, a new pesticide control disposal. We have allocated 
money into, into the Department of Environment to, in fact, go out and clean up the existing cans, and 
new cans coming on stream. And I just think this is another example of how, in working closely with the 
spirit of co-operation, and we did have good co-operation, Mr. Speaker, from SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities), from SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities’ Association), 
from the safety council, and many concerned farmers everywhere, and they all worked together to, and 
they will help to protect the environment. 
 
The Department of Environment has recently established environmental concern guide-lines for 
northern mining operations. After sitting there with a number of groups, and conferring with them, we 
have incorporated the ideas in these guide-lines, which I might add, Mr. Speaker, have been well 
received by the northern mining operations, and in particular, by the small operators. And again, in the 
spirit of co-operation, our government has worked closely with the parties involved in establishing these 
guide-lines which eliminate any undue enforcement. 
 
The Department of Environment, along with other government departments, has  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
578 

helped provide initial funding for the formal establishment of a centre for toxicology at the University of 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan at Saskatoon. Research at this centre can help determine a, determine 
appropriate uses of pesticides and herbicides, as well as the mental health effects of chemicals in water 
supplies, and the effects of chemicals in everyday products bought by the general public. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, another clear example of protecting the public and the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should be easily, easily apparent to those in the House why I’m confident of our 
government’s record in protecting the environment, for together we have worked on implementing some 
fine programs, have avoided downgrading any of the essential elements and activities which protect the 
environment. But stressing the importance of these activities, I feel it is only timely to mention at this 
point, Mr. Speaker, that our government does intend to encourage business, and also encourages them to 
participate in a Open for Business policy. But this does not mean our government will not continue to 
protect the environment, Mr. Speaker. Our government’s commitment to the private sector and 
investment level has added ground rules for business where we made clear to potential investors, and 
there will be no changes of the rules made in midstream. 
 
As I’ve stated throughout my address, Mr. Speaker, and to give an example of our commitments, our 
government will continue to closely monitor any situation as, which has arisen, or may arise in the 
future, which has direct environmental impact. Our mandate is to ensure environmental protection and 
thus we will continue to respond accordingly, and with appropriate environmental considerations and 
safeguards. And, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the constituents of Kelsey-Tisdale, who have entrusted in me 
the responsibility to represent them to their best interests, and on behalf of the Saskatchewan residents 
everywhere whose housing needs and environment interest I will continue to look after with pride, I will 
be supporting the motion and will vote against the amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise to reply to the budget debate this afternoon. I 
believe we started a new direction for the people of Saskatchewan last April the 26th, and it was 
reaffirmed this year in Prince Albert. 
 
In addressing the budget debate, as Minister of Highways and Transportation, I’d first like to comment 
on the budget speech itself. The budget address by the Minister of Finance, the hon. member for 
Kindersley, spoke to the reality of Saskatchewan’s opportunities in light of world economic 
uncertainties. Despite the negative attitude of its critics, this budget is without a doubt a fair, accurate 
assessment of this province’s prospects for the future. 
 
Saskatchewan today is a community within the federation of Canada that is just beginning to realize the 
full potential that lies here. This great province of ours was opened up by pioneers, moulded by tough 
times, and strengthened by a belief in the future. 
 
As government, this budget clearly addresses the issues of today, and more importantly, positions this 
province so that we may capitalize on the future. Mr. Speaker, citizens of Saskatchewan recognize this 
budget for not only what it contains, but especially for the direction it gives this province and the very 
fine people that live here. My congratulations to my good friend, the Hon. Bob Andrew, for providing a 
kind  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
579 

of common-sense leadership this province so richly deserves. 
 
In keeping with tradition, Mr. Speaker, my address today will detail the activities and plans for the 
Department of Highways and Transportation for the coming year. As well, I will comment on the recent 
reorganization of the Department of Highways and Transportation which will soon be brought forward 
to this Assembly in a new statute — a new vehicles act, legislation that the previous government didn’t 
have the courage or the fortitude to bring forth to the people of Saskatchewan. This is an opportune time 
to discuss in general terms a new emphasis upon which the Department of Highways and Transportation 
has embarked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, contained within the figures of announcements I will present to you today is a new 
direction of productivity and privatization. Since taking office, this government has stressed the 
requirement for public sector efficiency in meeting the needs of the province’s population without 
sacrificing the level of service now enjoyed by the motoring public in Saskatchewan. Sound fiscal 
management has resulted in a saving of some $30 million to the tax-paying public, as was announced by 
the Minister of Finance in his budget on Tuesday last. That, Mr. Speaker, is proof enough that this 
government’s emphasis on improving the productivity of the public sector is not unfounded. By asking 
for more bang for your buck, this government has shown that the same level of service can be achieved 
without the continued growth in the number of the civil service, as the previous administration has done 
for the past 11 years. Hand in hand, Mr. Speaker, goes productivity and privatization. It is a competitive 
world, and by lumping all your eggs in one basket, as the former administration promoted, this province 
has been denied the opportunity to make every cent of every dollar count for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As the Minister of Highways and Transportation, it will be departmental practice to tender more work to 
the private sector. Free enterprise, Mr. Speaker, is not just a slogan with this government; it is a 
commitment. This shift in policy will not only reap the benefits of a competitive private sector but will 
strength the private sector’s ability to be a contributing member of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
As this government’s programs and policies take hold, a more productive civil service, combined with a 
revitalized and competitive sector, will be responsible for a better province and a better way of life for 
the real families of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, not the NDP family of crown corporations. I’m talking 
about the real families of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — This government has made a commitment to those two very important objectives, 
and my address today is confirmation of that commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in keeping with this government’s commitment to productivity a substantial reorganization 
of government departments took place. That, in terms of the Department of Highways and 
Transportation, has strengthened this province’s ability to deal with transportation issues. Effective April 
the 1st, 1983, the transportation policy unit of the Department of Agriculture, the transportation agency, 
and the highway traffic board are now officially part of the Department of Highways and Transportation 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
580 

No longer, Mr. Speaker, will the transportation resources available to the people of Saskatchewan be 
scattered throughout government as what was, I guess we could say, the smoke-screen that was created 
by the NDP when they were government for 11 years. No longer, Mr. Speaker, will the people of this 
province have to knock on umpteen doors to piece together the policy puzzle of government 
departments and agencies, as has been the sorry situation of the past. 
 
Important Saskatchewan concerns, such as rail line abandonment, transportation of dangerous goods, 
motor vehicle safety, weight regulations, and commodity movements are now being addressed by one 
department. This amalgamation not only strengthens the human resources available but also eliminates 
costly duplications in transportation planning and administration. Needless to say, Mr. Speaker, with this 
government the right hand will always know what the left hand is doing because they will be working 
together, which is a different precedent as has been set in the past by the NDP, who are now in 
opposition and will remain there till the end of time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — There are those who will argue that amalgamation will result in downgrading of 
priorities within the government departments. Mr. Speaker, that is just not true. But we’ve heard in the 
budget debate so far, members opposite telling the people of Saskatchewan not to work harder, not to 
work together, just predicting doom and gloom. They have not forgot what happened last April the 26th 
when the doom and gloom hit the NDP party. The people of Saskatchewan were heard, and removed 
them from office. 
 
The highway traffic board remains intact, its autonomy and mandate unaltered by reorganization. 
Greater efficiencies will be achieved, however, by combining the administration and personnel functions 
of those two departments. 
 
Regarding the transportation policy unit and the transportation agency, a new division will be created in 
the department. Combined with present expertise, the new department will give the department and 
people of Saskatchewan common-sense co-ordination in this very vital area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the thought that has been given to these reorganizational measures has been prudent, 
practical and underscored by a desire to improve the level of service to the people of this province. No 
longer, Mr. Speaker, will politics take priority over the delivery of transportation services in this 
province, nor will it take priority over the construction of roads. Roads will be built where people want 
them and where people need them. We will not be playing politics. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, privatization has a place in the department. 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, the department’s grading and surfacing crews have been reorganized in order 
to accommodate private sector efficiencies. We have trimmed and streamlined wherever possible, and 
opened the door for the private sector to tender departmental work. 
 
This year I am pleased to announce that one-third of the highways sealing work will be tendered to the 
private sector — in past years, all of this work was performed by government forces — and secondly, 
two-thirds of the grading and oil treatment work  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
581 

normally done by government crews will now be turned to the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this marks a drastic departure from past practices, but I am confident that the private sector 
will respond favourably to the challenge, providing employment and at the same time giving the people 
of this province full value for every dollar spent on road construction in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will now turn my remarks to the activities and projects to be started by the Department of 
Highways and Transportation for the coming fiscal year. In doing so, I will detail the departmental 
budgetary expenditures in the capital and maintenance programs, announce a number of major initiatives 
to be started this year, and confirm the department’s safety priorities. 
 
Before doing so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to report what I have been telling the people of this province 
since taking office nearly one year ago. For every project I announce today, I give you my solemn word 
that work will begin on this project this year. Today’s announcements are not political promises; they 
are today’s commitment, the real dollars for the real people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — The previous administration, Mr. Speaker, made it policy to announce projects 
before money was available. Last year the previous NDP government provided the Legislative 
Assembly with a project array with only enough money to complete 30 per cent of the new work 
projects announced. This means that for every 10 roads announced, there was no money to build seven 
of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is a prime example of why the NDP are in opposition today and the Grant 
Devine Progressive Conservative Party is the government of the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, you can fool some of the people some of the time but you’re not going to fool all of the people 
all of the time and the people caught on to the smoke-screen that was laid before them by the NDP. 
Quite simply put, Mr. Speaker, the NDP were trying to lead the people of Saskatchewan down a rough 
road. They did not believe it. They now want a Conservative government that will tell the truth to the 
people of Saskatchewan and build good roads for everyone in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment is to commence work on every project listed in the ’83-84 construction 
program which I will be tabling today. To that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to inform you that the 
department’s total budget for the fiscal year ’83-84 is $222,115,760, an increase over last year of 12.4 
per cent for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Included in that $220 million figure is a total of $110 million for capital 
construction of roads. Mr. Speaker, I am happy to tell members present that despite uncertain economic 
climate that surrounds us today, in comparison to our neighbours we have increased the level of 
spending in capital programs. The province of Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, recently announced a cut-back of 
10 per cent in their ’83-84 capital budget. Further, our neighbours to the west, Alberta, just announced a 
12 per cent reduction in their ’83-84 transportation budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this points out to the people of Saskatchewan who is number one in  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
582 

the West, who is leading in Canada, which is the best government. It is the Government of 
Saskatchewan under the leadership of Grant Devine. Everyone else is decreasing their budgets. We are 
increasing it and still have a very respectable deficit for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the verdict is in and Saskatchewan has been cleared of the members’ opposite charge that 
we are hopelessly mired in the depths of recession. Recession, Mr. Speaker, is a word that we don’t use 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Also, just as important an indicator of conditions is the department’s maintenance budget. This year 
maintenance dollars and expenditures will be increased by 16 per cent to $79,244,100. The motoring 
public of Saskatchewan can drive the highways of this province, knowing recession has not affected the 
level of maintenance for their provincial highway system. As announced, the department will provide 
$110 million for capital construction projects. I will table a detailed summary of construction projects to 
this Assembly later this afternoon. 
 
Highlights of this department’s construction project plans starting this year will be: extension of 
four-laning of the Trans-Canada Highway for a distance of 15.75 kilometres between Indian Head and 
Qu’Appelle; the completion of paving on the four-lane section of the Trans-Canada Highway from the 
junction of No. 32 to west of Webb; work will commence this year on the approaches to the new Borden 
Bridge on No. 16 Highway between Langham and Borden . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — . . . shoulder widening on the Yellowhead Highway between Paynton and 
Maidstone. This work will complete the shoulder widening of the entire Yellowhead Route throughout 
the province of Saskatchewan. This means that we will have shoulder widening right across the province 
of Saskatchewan on the Yellowhead Route. The completion of a four-lane paving of a 13-kilometre 
section of the Yellowhead Highway, west of Battleford, will also be completed this year. The start of 
needed upgrading on the old sections of Highway No. 11 between Lumsden and Chamberlain will also 
be started this year. The initial states of four-laning Highway No. 7 between Saskatoon and Highway 
No. 60 will begin with the construction of an overpass over the CNR tracks immediately west of 
Saskatoon. Grading and paving will commence on the southern section of the Regina Lewvan 
Expressway, from the Trans-Canada Highway north to Regina Avenue — a distance of 4.27 kilometres 
— at a cost to the provincial treasury of $2.7 billion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — In addition to these highlights, I would like to mention the work to be started on 
our secondary highway system this year, Mr. Speaker. Going away from my prepared text for a while, 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the announcements coming up will point out how inaccurate the statements are 
that come from the opposition. They were stated that we were going to have a 50 per cent cut in our 
capital program — not true. They stated that all the road construction was going to be on twinning of the 
Trans-Canada and Yellowhead. Once again a statement — not true, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I believe the people of Saskatchewan can feel very confident in dealing with this new government, 
because they know they are going to get the truth, and the falsehoods are  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
583 

over. 
 
Starting with the Red Coat Trail, by construction season end, a dust-free surface will welcome tourist 
traffic from border to border with the completion of oil treatment on a 14.5-kilometre section from 
Govenlock to the Alberta border. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — As well, other projects on the Red Coat Trail this year include: grading and 
paving a 19-kilometre section from Redvers to the Manitoba border, and paving of a 20-kilometre 
section between Limerick and Meyronne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have more good news for our summer visitors. The 26.76-kilometre section of No. 21 
Highway, from Maple Creek south to Cypress Hills Provincial Park, will also be graded this year. Also 
on Highway No. 21, between Kerrobert and Unity, grading will be completed and paving will begin on 
this 61-kilometre section to assist the transportation of not only oil traffic, but tourist traffic as well, in 
the north-west area. 
 
Turning attention to the south-east corner of the province, No. 9 Highway, between the U.S. border and 
the junction of No. 18 near Oxbow, will also be graded. Mr. Speaker, this is a section of road that should 
have been built 15 or 20 years ago. It’s one of the heaviest roads used by the potash haulers in 
Saskatchewan. The reason why it wasn’t built: because the NDP government from before were playing 
politics; they weren’t concerned about the safety of this road. After viewing this road personally, there 
are ruts three to four inches in it. It’s just a matter of time before we have a loss of lives. This 
government, I think it points out, is more concerned about people and people’s needs than playing 
politics with the roads in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Focusing on the North, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of important projects I 
would like to note. The completion of 23 kilometres of grading on No. 155, south of La Loche. This will 
complete the upgrading of No. 155 Highway between Buffalo Narrows and La Loche. The grading of a 
24-kilometre section of road between Dillon and Michel; completion of the east-west connection 
between Beauval and the road to Pinehouse; the reconstruction and paving of Ile-a-la-Crosse and La 
Loche’s main streets; on Highway No. 55, west of Meadow Lake, the grading of 22.5 kilometres 
between the junction of No. 4 and the Loon Lake grid road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of these projects that I have just announced are in the North represented by an NDP 
MLA. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think once again this proves out the people of the North want roads; the 
people of the North are going to get roads, built by the Conservative Government of Saskatchewan. 
Once again it points out we are not playing politics, building the roads where the people want them. I 
know I met with the Ile-a-la-Crosse town council. They requested the upgrading of their main street. 
After viewing it, it had to be done. It should have been done five or 10 years ago, but once again, the 
members from the North didn’t even seem to have the ear of their own government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, this brings me to the final item, namely, Operation Open Roads. In 
Saskatchewan this year five communities will benefit from this program and they are: Blumenheim, 
Blumenthal, Goodwater, Saint Front, Blatz-nolin Resort. As  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
584 

you can see, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to opening up rural areas to help develop their 
potential. 
 
I congratulate the people of Saskatchewan, both for their awareness of and their interest in traffic safety. 
I am deeply appreciative of the input and co-operation the travelling public has shown. I can assure you 
that I am personally committed to providing the people of this province with a safe and efficient 
highway system. 
 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has an enviable record in traffic safety, and we plan to keep it that way. 
This has been accomplished by a combination of traffic safety awareness on the part of private citizens 
and careful planning by traffic safety personnel in urban and rural communities, safety organizations and 
government. But you’ll notice, Mr. Speaker, that I said ‘and government.’ Government doesn’t do all the 
leading; it’s up to the people. The people have proved (and later on in my text it will show up) that 
people, given the chance to work, co-operate with governments, can do a lot better if they’re on their 
own than having a heavy hand of socialists forcing them to do these things. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Now we’ll look at this year. The traffic accident information system will continue 
to provide valuable information on both rural and urban traffic mishaps, enabling people in communities 
to plan and execute safety throughout various traffic safety programs, including participation in traffic 
safety fairs. 
 
I am particularly pleased to announce that we will be seeing increased efficiency and safety in truck 
transportation. We will be taking advantage of an exciting technological development that will enhance 
truck transportation safety, in combination with recent changes to The Highways Act. Increased gross 
vehicle weights are now being allowed. As a result, some trucking companies will change to pup trailer 
hook-up systems, converting their old trailers for use under the new regulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, I think this just points out again what this government has done in 
the past 11 months, since governing this province. What we have done is removed the heavy hand of the 
socialists that were here before. We are deregulating many aspects of government; getting big 
government off the backs of the private sector and the people of Saskatchewan. Once again it points out, 
Mr. Speaker, give people a chance and they can do it on their own. And that’s why they threw the NDP 
out on April 26th, 1982, because they were tired of big government and tired of socialism. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while campaigning, some of them were even telling me, ‘They are nothing more than 
closet communists.’ Now that’s what the people, Mr. Speaker, were telling me. That’s why they are 
where they are today and we are here. We want to listen to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I regret that part of my duty as Minister of Highways and Transportation is to report the traffic accident 
statistics on Saskatchewan streets and highways. In 1982 calendar year there were 40,000 traffic 
accidents occurred, 8,516 people were injured in these accidents, and a result, a result of these accidents, 
240 lives were tragically ended, Mr.  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
585 

Speaker. I personally cannot accept these devastating figures. 
 
The ray of light that shines through these grim numbers is that both injuries and deaths were down in 
1982, as compared to 1981. And at this time I would like to congratulate the driving public of 
Saskatchewan for a job well done. It is my desire that traffic accident injuries and fatalities will continue 
to decrease, Mr. Speaker. I believe that they can with the continued help of the citizens of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to introduce for the consideration of this Assembly, new vehicles act. As I 
previously indicated, and as the former NDP administration was fully aware, this piece of legislation 
was badly in need of change. However, the previous administration did not have the courage nor the 
guts to take it off the shelf and present some ideas to the people of Saskatchewan. And because of that, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve lost additional lives in the province of Saskatchewan, and there’s only one group to 
blame — the members opposite that didn’t have the courage. They were too concerned about playing 
politics. They weren’t concerned about saving lives. Mr. Speaker, it is my hope that this new act will 
help to achieve what I consider to be two important goals. First, it will provide a badly needed 
reorganization, and second, it will provide an opportunity to breathe new life and new ideas into a tired 
old act. New ideas, Mr. Speaker, to which the people of Saskatchewan have had an opportunity to 
respond and provide their valuable insight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fairly evident that with the white paper that we released on the vehicles act, it 
was a new direction to go. Gone are the days, Mr. Speaker, of just the politicians and the bureaucrats 
drafting up the legislation for the people of Saskatchewan. We asked for input from the people of 
Saskatchewan. Nothing wrong with it. We received over 6,000 to 7,000 pieces of mail, personal letters, 
some on our survey, indicating their needs, their concerns. People want to work for the government. 
They don’t want a government that forces things upon them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the area which has received the most attention in the press, and from 
the public, relates to the problem of the impaired driver. The loss and damage of property and the loss of 
lives caused by these drivers is a situation which must and will be addressed. 
 
Under the new act, we will not simply punish impaired drivers but we will offer a program to educate 
these drivers to the effects of drinking and driving. So that, if we have a first-time offender, Mr. 
Speaker, he won’t be back as a second or third. And I’m referring now to the DWI program, that’s the 
driving without impairment. We’re not forcing it on the people of Saskatchewan. It will be an option, 
and when the new vehicles act is introduced, later this month, or early next month, the people of 
Saskatchewan will see that their views that they expressed to myself as the minister responsible have 
been heard and are going to be put into this new legislation. 
 
I would like to stress that, while much attention will be focused on the impaired driver, I’m committed 
to a much broader range of traffic safety programs and initiatives. I see a tremendous opportunity for the 
co-ordination and development of new and effective programs aimed at improvements in the safety of 
road users, of vehicles, and of the highway itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the picture and stories of needless death and suffering which cross my desk daily have 
made a deep and lasting impression on me. One out of every 100 boys who turn 16 years of age will, 
will die in a traffic-related accident before 19 years of  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
586 

age. Mr. Speaker, I cannot and will not accept this loss of life — our most precious resource — the 
youth of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have provided the opportunity for them to come home in 
Saskatchewan. We want them to stay in Saskatchewan, and we want to keep them alive in 
Saskatchewan. As the former members chased them out of Saskatchewan, we’re going to welcome them 
back home and do our very best to make sure that we keep them here safe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, I am a firm believer that the use of seat belts and child restraints is 
one of the most effective methods of reducing the death and injury rate of drivers and passengers, and I 
will continue emphasizing the importance of the use of restraint systems . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, yes, Mr. Speaker, one of the members opposite said I’ve changed my mind. Yes, I have changed 
my mind, and if the members opposite would listen and had enough depth to understand what was going 
on in this Assembly here this afternoon, it would help out a great deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It just goes to prove that we can change our mind. We can and we will listen to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and that’s why we can and will remain government of this province of Saskatchewan, 
and they will always remain in opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, truck transportation is of vital importance to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The efficient movement of goods and providing optimum service to all areas of our 
province is an area which needs to be constantly re-examined. The highway traffic board will be 
reviewing the regulations of the motor carrier industry with a view to improving the quality and levels of 
service available to all the people of Saskatchewan, while at the same time reducing the burden of 
government regulations on the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my concluding remarks I would like to touch on a few points. I think it’s fairly evident 
that the new policy by our government — open-door — that it’s listening to people, whether it’s bus 
drivers in the province of Saskatchewan that come to my office to meet with me and discuss new ideas. 
They never had the opportunity before, Mr. Speaker. We have opened the doors to everyone in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and, Mr. Speaker, with this open-door policy, open line of communication 
with people, it’s going to make a better Saskatchewan, a better place to live and raise your families in. 
 
We are not going to try and fool the people. We are not going to mislead them, as the previous 
administration had, as I’d stated in my remarks before, announcing road projects, not having the funding 
there. I wish we could have announced a billion dollars worth of road programs today, but I think in 
being responsible, the Minister of Finance has done an excellent job in this budget, and of the people 
that I talked to, Mr. Speaker, they are quite pleased with the budget because we’re talking about creating 
jobs, and when people are working, Mr. Speaker, as they are in the province of Saskatchewan, they’re 
happy. The people in Manitoba right now, I’ll bet, wish they could have a general election and rid 
themselves of the socialist fear that is running their province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe we’ve had a realistic and honest budget presented here. Well,  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
587 

one member opposite is saying, ‘Well, what do they say in B.C.?’ But that’s just another prime example, 
Mr. Speaker, of how they listened to the people of Saskatchewan. They’re more concerned about the 
people in B.C. I’m concerned about the people of Saskatchewan, that the people of Saskatchewan are 
working today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I stated earlier, the only thing we’re getting from the opposition in this Chamber is 
doom and gloom. I think it’s becoming quite evident to the people of Saskatchewan who the real 
opposition is. It is the press gallery, Mr. Speaker, and that’s not right, because the press gallery were not 
elected to be the opposition in the province of Saskatchewan. There’s more depth up there in the press 
gallery, by far, than ever there will be sitting (the Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs), in this Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the basic difference . . . We’ve had a change in philosophy, and I’m going to try 
and explain to the members opposite the difference between freedom and socialism, or you could call it 
closet communism, as some people have said. Our forefathers, our senior citizens, Mr. Speaker, came to 
this country. It was advertised in Europe: come to this great Canada of ours and take up a homestead - 
$5, improve it up, and you own the land. Now those many people, to travel down here from Europe and 
from the States to take up a homestead, lived in sod shacks, as my father had done when he came to this 
country, Mr. Speaker. If that notice would have read: come to Canada, come to Saskatchewan, and rent a 
farm from the government, do you think they’d have come, Mr. Speaker? No. No, they wouldn’t have 
come. That’s part of the difference between freedom and socialism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those senior citizens that we have today, that came over here at a very young age, they 
came over here and they opened up this country. And every one of us in this Chamber today can thank 
them for what we have today. But now, Mr. Speaker, the land bank is dead. The farm purchase program 
is here. The farm purchase program is going to enable those young farmers to once again own the land 
in the province of Saskatchewan, and remove them from state farms, and remove them from being 
nothing more than tenants of a socialist government. That’s the change in philosophy; that’s the change 
in freedom: that’s what took place on April the 26th of 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, the former premier of Saskatchewan, now the Leader of the 
Opposition, stood up in this Assembly on budget night, waved a hand full of dollar bills. You know, he 
was talking about laying these ten-dollar bills all across Canada. Well, I have two or three comments on 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Number one, I’m amazed that he didn’t use one-dollar bills, because if he would have used one-dollar 
bills we could have classified it as a typical NDP make-work project for Saskatchewan and the people of 
Canada. Wouldn’t have surprised me. But it does remind me, Mr. Speaker, holding up one package of 
bills: I wonder how many more were in the desk. Because when we took over this government, Mr. 
Speaker, the facts that were told to the people of Saskatchewan before about the great heritage fund, all 
the money that was here — we take it over, we find out the well is dry. 
 
That reminds me of a little story. It was the hon. member from Thunder Creek that told me. The man 
that came in here in a Model T and a hayrack — Mr. Fines. After being in government and being around 
the socialists for awhile, he left in a Cadillac with his saddle-bags full of money. I just wonder if there 
was another Cadillac, with the saddle- 



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
588 

bags full of money, left his province before April the 26th, Mr. Speaker. Because what it points out, and 
it just points out to all the people in Saskatchewan: they were not told the truth of the financial picture of 
Saskatchewan before April the 26th, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to repeat again: free enterprise is not just a slogan with this government; it 
is a commitment. 
 
At this time it gives me great pride to table the ’83-84 construction projects for the Department of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Garner: — Mr. Speaker, enclosed in that, roads for people. Roads that are going to be 
constructed this year. The dollars are in place for building those roads. There’s no more smoke and 
mirrors. There’s no more falsehood. There’s no more leading the people down the garden path. The real 
dollars for real roads for the motoring public of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s pointed, I pointed it out fairly clearly that I will be supporting the main motion 
of the Minister of Finance and opposing the amendment because the amendment is just something that 
some back room political hack has dreamed up for the NDP opposition. There’s no depth in it 
whatsoever. I believe our Minister of Finance has presented an excellent budget for the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Saskatchewan are the ones that are going to reap the benefits of that. 
With that, I will be supporting the motion. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to rise in the House this afternoon to enter the budget 
debate on behalf of the people of Last Mountain-Touchwood who on April 26th of ’82 placed their 
confidence in me and the Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan and elected a Progressive 
Conservative government of which I am a part. 
 
Now Last Mountain-Touchwood, Mr. Speaker, is essentially a rural community. It is bordered on the 
south by the beautiful Qu’Appelle Valley and on the west by the beautiful Last Mountain Lake. Most 
people in my constituency earn their living either directly or indirectly from agriculture. 
 
I have one town which is located directly in the Qu’Appelle Valley and that’s the town of Craven, 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to invite all members of the 
House here this afternoon and all the people of Saskatchewan to come to Craven, Saskatchewan, this 
summer. I realize that it’s only April now. But in August, Mr. Speaker, on August the 18th, 19th, 20th 
and 21st, there will be the largest rodeo and chuckwagon races anywhere in Saskatchewan next to the 
Calgary Stampede. And I would like to invite all people in Saskatchewan to come to Saskatchewan to 
Craven this summer. The Minister of Highways has just committed to make certain the roads are good. 
And all roads lead to Craven, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take this opportunity to congratulate my  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
589 

colleagues for the fine performances they have displayed in their budget speeches. All my colleagues, 
Mr. Speaker, are marked by their fine oratorical skills. Indeed, Mr. Speaker, all their presentations are 
punctuated, punctuated by flashes of intellectual brilliance. Now, Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to be a 
part of this caucus, and as I mentioned a moment ago, I’m one of the new members in this House, being 
here not quite a year. And I must frankly say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m appalled at what I have learned and 
what I see from the members opposite since I’ve been elected. Ever since April 26 we have heard 
nothing in this House, Mr. Speaker, but doom, gloom and pessimism. It is most unfortunate that we are 
unable to bring all the people of Saskatchewan into the legislature day after day so that they could get a 
true picture of the type of people who governed this province prior to April of ’82. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to know now, I would like now to go to the budget itself, and it’s a very 
important budget because it’s the first time in history . . . This is the first budget in the history of 
Saskatchewan that is totally a Progressive Conservative budget, Mr. Speaker — totally Progressive 
Conservative. And it’s also a budget that our government had to bring in at a time, Mr. Speaker, when 
the economy of this nation is not what you would call rising swiftly. We had to, we had to tackle a tough 
situation but I believe that the Minister of Finance — and I would like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate the Minister of Finance — has tackled this head-on and has, no question, brought in a 
budget for the times. 
 
I have spoken to many people in my riding, and the people recognize the options the minister had. He 
was able to either raise taxes dramatically, Mr. Speaker, cut programs dramatically, and because our 
government is a compassionate government, we would rule that out, not even give it any consideration 
whatsoever. And the only other option was to bring in a good budget with a deficit. That is what the 
minister has opted to do, and the people of Saskatchewan appreciate his wise decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this budget comes on the heels of the fulfillment of many of our 
election promises. Let me just briefly review some of our election promises which we have already 
fulfilled in less than a year. Indeed I believe it’s safe to say, Mr. Speaker, that never in the history of 
Saskatchewan has a government who was newly elected moved so quickly to fulfill so many of its 
promises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — Well, let me just highlight two or three of those essential promises which we have 
fulfilled. First of all, we promised the people that we would give them interest relief on their homes, and 
the first sitting of this House after our election we did exactly that, and since then we have helped 
thousands of people in Saskatchewan to make the payments on their homes. 
 
The second thing, Mr. Speaker, that we promised which was a corner-stone of our election campaign 
was the removal of the road tax, and we fulfilled that commitment minutes after we formally took over 
the reins of government. That, Mr. Speaker, saved the people of Saskatchewan approximately 30 cents a 
gallon on gasoline, and approximately 40 cents a gallon on diesel fuel. And I would like to remind the 
people of Saskatchewan that had the NDP returned to power, they would have been piggy-backing 
provincial tax on increases in federal tax, and by now the people of Saskatchewan would be paying 
approximately 35 cents a gallon gasoline tax, and it  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
590 

would be rising, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third, the third essential promise that we made, Mr. Speaker, and we have just fulfilled this summer, 
or recently, is the farm purchase program. The farm purchase program, Mr. Speaker, I say without any 
shadow of a doubt is a jewel of our agricultural policy, and will be the jewel of our agricultural policy 
for years to come. It, Mr. Speaker, will be the shining example of Progressive Conservative philosophy 
in agriculture versus socialist oppressive philosophies in agriculture. 
 
Now what has our, what has our farm purchase program already done? What are the indications? Very 
briefly, we have solid evidence that within two years we will have helped 2,800 young farmers in 
Saskatchewan to begin farming and to own their land. That, Mr. Speaker, that, Mr. Speaker . . . A 
colleague of mine from Weyburn asked me, ‘What about the land bank? How many did the land bank 
help?’ he says. In 10 years, Mr. Speaker, in 10 years the land bank helped 151 young farmers purchase 
their land in Saskatchewan. Our government will help 2,800 in two years, or to put it another way, in 
two years we will help 16 times as many young farmers to own their own land as the NDP helped in 10 
years. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, those were the three essential features, three essential key promises that we made to 
the people of Saskatchewan. Three essential commitments among others, and we have fulfilled those 
commitments. 
 
Let me go on now, Mr. Speaker, to some programs that this budget introduces, and some of the 
problems it addresses here in this province, and how it addresses them. Now I’ve heard a great deal from 
the opposition demanding that this government create jobs. And that’s a good demand. I do not fault 
them for it. And we’re quite aware that the people of Saskatchewan needs jobs; that the young people of 
Saskatchewan need jobs, and that apparently the Premier of the province prior to the budget coming 
down, being interviewed by the Star-Phoenix, said he hopes that there will be jobs. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
our government responds to the needs of Saskatchewan’s people, and therefore we have brought in a 
nine-point program, a nine-point program to create jobs in this province, and by the end of the first year 
that program will have created 19,000 new jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, we realize that our society is changing quickly. New skills are required and, 
therefore, there is provision in the budget to expand our skill-training facilities which I will talk about a 
little later. 
 
We have looked at the heritage fund, and we will give a new direction to the heritage fund. One of the 
emphasis, one of the emphasis that will be placed by the heritage fund will be on agriculture, which I 
will mention later. And the heritage fund . . . And also, Mr. Speaker, an emphasis which we will 
emphasize, which we promised the people that we would do, is in the area of health care, which I will 
talk about a little later. 
 
Let me, let me, first of all, highlight a few of our job creating programs that come under the nine-point 
program. Let me talk, first of all, about the Build-A-Home program. The Build-A-Home program, Mr. 
Speaker, I like to compare, in a way, to the farm purchase program. Just as Progressive Conservatives 
believe that the people have the fundamental and inalienable right to own land, Progressive 
Conservatives believe that the people have the fundamental inalienable right to own a home. 
 
With that in mind, we have introduced the Build-A-Home program, which has been  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
591 

operating for a few months. The response to our Build-A-Home program has been phenomenal. Indeed, 
1,500 people have made application to build homes between the inception of the program, a couple of 
months ago, and today. We have extended that program to August the 1st, 1983, and we expect an 
additional 1,500 homes to be constructed under that program, for a total of 3,000 new home owners in 
Saskatchewan. Those 3,000 homes, Mr. Speaker . . . The construction of those 3,000 homes, will create 
4,500 new jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
An Hon. Member: — At a minimum. 
 
Mr. Tusa: — At a minimum, my colleague tells me. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that the youth of this problem requires assistance. There are youth 
coming out of high school who require assistance; there are youth coming out of university who require 
jobs for the summer. Indeed, over the weekend some of these youth phoned me and asked me if we have 
a program for them, and I told them yes, we did. And they thanked me and they thanked my 
government, Mr. Speaker, for having the foresight and the compassion to bring in a program which will 
permit them to work during the summer and go back to university next fall. It’s the Opportunities for ’83 
program. 
 
The funding for that program will be doubled from before to $2.7 million. It will create 30,000 weeks of 
work. It will apply to small business and farmers, as well. Youth hired under this program will be 
subsidized by our government up to $350 a month for three months, for a total of $1,050. And there is 
no question, Mr. Speaker, that hundreds and hundreds of youth will receive assistance from our 
government under that program, which will permit them to continue their education this fall. 
 
Another highlight in our nine-point package, Mr. Speaker, was the $20 million tax reduction for small 
business. Recognizing, Mr. Speaker, recognizing that we don’t want just make-work projects, our 
government has stipulated that in order for small business to qualify for the $5,000 rebate they will 
receive for each new job, each new employee, the job must be a permanent job. In other words, the 
employees must have worked for 12 months with our government’s determination to truly create 
meaningful jobs in the province, and not just make-work temporary projects. 
 
Another essential part of our nine-point package is the Saskatchewan JOBS program. In the 
Saskatchewan JOBS program we are funding up to $8 million, and that’s a continuation of a program we 
introduced some months ago. That program, Mr. Speaker, we will create 3,500 jobs. 
 
And I must address the package we have for our treaty Indians. Last Mountain-Touchwood 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, has five Indian reserves. We have not forgotten about the native people in 
Saskatchewan, and our nine-point job creation program includes a $2 million program to be used 
exclusively on Indian reserves, and it’s aimed at local economic self-sufficiency. I am certain that the 
natives will be happy to hear of this program, for many of them for many years have said over and over 
that this is what they ask of government, to help them become economically self-sufficient so that they 
become full participants in our society, earning their way, living with pride and dignity. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would also, I would like to go on from there to mention very briefly the cultural 
and recreational facilities program which our government has introduced  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
592 

in the budget. This is a program which is extended over five years. The program will inject $32 million 
into Saskatchewan, into urban and rural Saskatchewan, for the purpose of constructing or renovating 
recreational facilities. The first year of the program will see $5 million devoted to this, to these projects. 
There will be a base grant of $5,000, plus a $25 per capita grant. If two or more urban municipalities 
combine, there is an incentive of an additional $5 per capita. 
 
We expect, Mr. Speaker, that this program will assist 2,000 projects throughout the province. I know 
that there is a great need for this program, since many communities in my constituency have contacted 
me over the past several months with inquiries, and I am pleased to announce to them today that we 
have this program in place and they will shortly be able to make their applications. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly mention one of two things about the heritage fund. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What heritage fund? 
 
Mr. Tusa: — My colleague from Saskatoon says, ‘What heritage fund?’ And that’s a good question. 
That’s a good question, because that’s what we asked when we got elected. Because, as the people of 
Saskatchewan recall, prior to April 26th, for some years it was difficult to turn on the news on any 
particular day without the previous government telling the people of Saskatchewan about the huge 
accumulated wealth we have in the heritage fund. And we looked forward, on being elected, to using 
parts of that heritage fund for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Unfortunately, we were absolutely shocked and dismayed to find out that the people of Saskatchewan 
were being deceived by the previous government. They were being deceived, Mr. Speaker, for when we 
opened the doors on the heritage fund, the cupboards were bare. There was nothing there. On further 
investigation, Mr. Speaker, we found that indeed there had been money in the heritage fund but, as the 
Minister of Finance said on budget night, the heritage fund had become a cash cow for the crown 
corporations, and it had gone dry, it had gone dry. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, our government does not intend to do that. Our government will use the heritage 
fund in a balanced way. We will use it to stimulate the economy, to assist the private sector, to create 
jobs in Saskatchewan, to help our province grow, and we will use it in the crowns when necessary, but it 
will not be the exclusive preserve of the crown corporations or the private sector of this province. It will 
be the exclusive preserve of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to mention just one or two more things before I conclude. And I would like to 
mention a little bit about the health services, Mr. Speaker, which we find in this budget. But before I do 
that, I would like to once more go back in the history of this province to the tactics used by the members 
opposite prior to April 26th, ’82, and for many years prior to that. 
 
And I recall back in 1978 when there was a fellow on the television screens during that election 
consistently screaming, ‘Don’t let them take it away.’ I don’t recall his name anymore, because he’s 
history as far as politics is concerned. Well, at that time that’s what he said consistently. And, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that’s isn’t so bad, that isn’t so bad. But what is bad, what is bad is what the hon. 
members, what the hon. members and  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
593 

their canvassers did, did to the senior citizens of the province. For they were the ones, Mr. Speaker, who 
knocked on their doors and said, ‘Don’t vote for those Conservatives because you’re going to lose your 
medicare,’ they said. Not only that, not only that, they even said, ‘You’re going to lose your pension.’ 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, is outright deception. The federal government controls, controls pensions — not 
the provincial. But it was not beneath them to go out and convince the elderly people of Saskatchewan 
that the provincial government controlled the pension, the pension cheques they get each month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to put it another way, the previous government went out pretending to help the senior 
citizens of Saskatchewan. But unfortunately, they helped . . . They pretended to help by deceiving them. 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, the people who pretended to help the senior citizens of this province 
actually had nothing but contempt for the senior citizens of this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you finished? 
 
Mr. Tusa: — I’m just getting started. But that is the point, Mr. Speaker, that I’d like to make, because I 
want to assure the senior citizens of this province, and I want to assure the senior citizens of this 
province . . . 
 
And I want to mention two more things about health care before I move on. Number one, number one, 
the party who first, who first had the medicare platform in their . . . medicare issue in their platform in, 
in an election in this province was a Progressive Conservative Party, Mr. Speaker, back in the 1930s 
when the Hon. great John Diefenbaker was its leader. It was not an idea f the NDP, believe me. 
 
And number two, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to very briefly mention a gentleman who lived in my 
constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood (and I’m sure the members opposite are aware of that), who 
lived in my constituency in the Bulyea area. He, Mr. Speaker, was, was the man, not the NDP who have 
consistently taken credit. He was the man, Mr. Matt Anderson, who pioneered medicare in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. I say this this afternoon so that the people in my riding, Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, and the people of Saskatchewan are made aware that medicare was not 
pioneered by the NDP; it was pioneered by an individual from my constituency, Mr. Matt Anderson. 
And I hope at some future time to talk more about that in this House. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, health care in the budget; let me talk about that for a minute or two. We 
have made . . . That’s a very, very firm commitment to make health care in Saskatchewan number one, 
as we said we would. In keeping with that, we have dramatically increased the health cart budget up to 
the point where health care now accounts for $978 million of our budget, about 30 per cent of our total 
budget or about $1,000 for every man, woman and child in Saskatchewan. That, Mr. Speaker, is a 
sterling example of our commitment to health, and to the people of Saskatchewan. And the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will appreciate it, and they will show this appreciation at the next 
provincial election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Tusa: — I could say a great deal more about health care, but I’m going to lave that to some of my 
colleagues who haven’t yet spoken. 
 
In conclusion, in conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to quote a few figures. I  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
594 

would like to show how Saskatchewan leads the nation in the fight against inflation. The national 
inflation rate, Mr. Speaker, is 8.5 per cent. The provincial inflation rate — the rate for in Saskatchewan 
— is only 7 per cent. The annual growth rate, Mr. Speaker: Saskatchewan was the only province which 
showed a increase in its annual growth rate last year. This is opposed to approximately a 5 per cent 
decline in the national growth rate. 
 
The unemployment rate, Mr. Speaker, which we hear the hon. members opposite complaining so much 
about . . . Well, let me see if I can find some quick figures on unemployment. There it is, Mr. Speaker. I 
found it. Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate — in Saskatchewan. As of February, as of 
February, the month that I have the latest figures for, our seasonally adjusted unemployment rate was 
7.6 per cent. Let me, Mr. . . . This is the lowest in Canada, and I’m sure everybody knows that by now, 
but I repeat it again. But I want to compare that to the two socialist governments in Canada. And there 
are two. Manitoba, Manitoba has a seasonally adjusted unemployment rate of 10.1 per cent under the 
wonderful leadership of Howard Pawley and the NDP. And Quebec, Quebec, which also dabbles in 
socialistic experiments, their unemployment rate, seasonally adjusted, is 14.6 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, now, Mr. Speaker, there are many other things I could mention. However, I think I 
will conclude my remarks, and I would just like to conclude by saying that the budget introduced by our 
government is a budget which recognizes the reality of the situation here in Saskatchewan. It is an 
excellent budget to lead us into the mid-1980s. And, Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing the amendment and 
supporting the main motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say that I am pleased to take this opportunity to 
participate in the budget speech. A budget is an important document, because unlike the throne speech it 
tells you clearly what the government has done, is doing, and intends to do. This budget speech does 
exactly that. It tells us what this government has done; it tells us what this government is doing; and it 
tells us what this government intends to do. And I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it frightens me. 
 
This is a government that is out of control; a government that is the captive of an economic philosophy 
that was discredited under Ross Thatcher; a government that believes that slogans create jobs; a 
government that believes that rhetoric brings economic growth; a government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
reminds me of the captain of the Titanic, who when asked, who was asked, ‘What lies ahead?’ and he 
said confidently, ‘Oh, just some ice.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s economic policies are a delight for few and a disaster for many. But, Mr. 
Speaker, it does, it does break some new ground. Conservatives elsewhere will be watching with interest 
this new economic philosophy designed by Premier Devine, augmented by the Finance Minister, Mr. 
Andrew. 
 
In the past, we have had a variety of economic philosophies. And I’m not going into the details, but I’ll 
keep it very simple so that the members opposite will be able to understand. There are basically two, two 
economic courses that you can run an economy. Sometimes referred to as the Robin Hood model where 
you expect the rich to provide some assistance to the less fortunate, a society where there is a 
distribution of wealth and an increase of opportunity afforded to the citizens of that society. This  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
595 

system is sometimes called democratic socialism. Needless to say, the members opposite do not 
subscribe to this philosophy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to say, the second school of thought is called the trickle-down theory of economic organization. 
This is the philosophy most Conservatives believe in. This philosophy believes that an economy grows, 
grows, benefits will accrue to many by means of the activities of a few. But Saskatchewan Tories reject, 
reject both of these philosophies. They have had a divine guidance. They have created a startling new 
theory of economic growth. It’s so new they haven’t even given it a name. Well, Mr. Speaker, it may be 
nameless, but it is very evident in this budget, and I for one would like to see such an economic 
innovation go by unnoticed. 
 
I have a name for this economic philosophy that it . . . that describes . . . Mr. Andrew and his 
Conservative cohorts believe they will create economic growth in Saskatchewan. The theory, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . I call it the trickle-up theory of economic growth. The trickle-up theory to the, to 
their friends, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this trickle-up theory of economic growth 
is how the Devine Conservatives will create opportunities for people in Saskatchewan. Or if I might 
paraphrase a Devine slogan — There’s so much more if you are poor. 
 
More businesses, more business bankruptcies — 100 per cent more in the last year. More unemployment 
— 62 per cent more in the last year; more unemployed employables, 49 per cent more forced onto 
welfare; more personal bankruptcies, 90 per cent more in a single year. 
 
But that’s not all, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s so much more to this trickle-up philosophy. Those are 
the people who have already been weighted in the balance and found wanting. Those are the people who 
have been cast aside and told that they have nothing to offer to the people of Saskatchewan. I say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what dreams, what hopes, what aspirations — all shattered now — told now in these 
statistics. And who cares, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Not this government. These people have nothing to 
contribute; these people have nothing to say; these people have nothing to do. When you have a grand 
master plan for an economic growth, there is no room for the individual, no time for people, and besides, 
most important of all, these people have nothing to contribute to this trickle-up theory of economic 
growth. 
 
But others do, Mr. Speaker. Others can contribute to getting Saskatchewan on the move again. 
Saskatchewan students will pay increased tuition fees as their contribution to the trickle-up philosophy. 
Saskatchewan working people will have wages frozen for two years as a contribution to the trickle-up 
economic philosophy. Every Saskatchewan resident who owns a car will pay more for their insurance as 
their contribution to the trickle-up philosophy — 28.7 per cent for the same coverage; that will be the 
increase. Every Saskatchewan resident who heats their home or farm will pay more for power as their 
contribution to the trickle-up economic philosophy. Every Saskatchewan resident who uses a phone will 
pay more as a contribution to this economic philosophy — 19 per cent more. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government has carried the trickle-up theory to its logical extent. It is not enough 
that nearly every resident of Saskatchewan will pay more, that is bad enough, but, Mr. Speaker, our 
children will pay more. Our children’s children will pay more, millions more to finance the deficit; that 
will be their contribution to this deficit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As the chief cheer-leader opposite has said 
many times,  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
596 

commitment and involvement are necessary components of the Conservative economic strategy. And 
they have involved everyone, Mr. Speaker, Deputy Speaker; everyone is paying more. And they have 
committed everyone, Mr. Deputy Speaker; everyone is committed to paying more, and committed more 
to paying more in the future. 
 
But surely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, somebody benefits. Surely someone benefits from this trickle-up 
philosophy. We realize that the 50,000 people looking for work in our province don’t benefit. The 
14,000 unemployed employables forced onto welfare don’t benefit. Twenty thousand university students 
don’ benefit. Sixty thousand workers on minimum wage don’t benefit Thirty thousand public sector 
workers who have had their wages frozen and controlled don’t benefit. Saskatchewan senior citizens 
don’t benefit. Saskatchewan native people don’t benefit. These are the people who contribute to the 
trickle-up philosophy. 
 
Well, then perhaps under the trickle-up philosophy, he will see an increase in programs and services 
provided by this government. Let’s look, let’s look then at how this so-called trickle-up philosophy 
works with regards to creating economic and social growth. Capital spending on education in northern 
Saskatchewan, down 4.8 per cent. Department of Consumer Affairs budget, cut; staff eliminated. 
Department of Environment budget, cut. Legal aid budget, cut. Special education budget, cut. John 
Howard Society program, axed. Department of Labour budget, slashed. Women’s division, destroyed. 
International aid budget slashed to more than one-half. Psychiatric health budget, cut. Dental care for 
four-year-olds, abolished. Capital grants to schools, slashed by 21.8 per cent. Day care budget reduced 
by 35 per cent. Senior citizens’ services cut by 19 per cent. Saskatchewan income plan reduced by 6 per 
cent. Public assistance for the aged slashed by 20 per cent. Grants for community services reduced by 30 
per cent. Agricultural spending is down by 12.6 per cent. Irrigation grants reduced by 75 per cent. 
Highway budget, capital budget, reduced. Traffic safety services, slashed, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
here we see the trickle-up philosophy as it operates in programs and services. There is so much more 
that people pay. There is so much less that people receive. But then I must ask again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who benefits from this trickle-up philosophy? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance said in his opening remarks, and I quote: 
 

The current level of unemployment is unacceptably high. 
 
Surely then, the trickle-up philosophy he espouses would address this problem. 
 
Well, let’s look at the Tory record of job creation: 21 jobs abolished in Consumer Affairs, 8 jobs lost in 
the Department of Co-ops, 32 positions slashed in the Department of Environment, 55 positions axed in 
the Department of Labour, 79 positions hacked away in Social Services, 87 positions removed in the 
Department of Health. 
 
In respect to the Department of Health, let me give you a breakdown: 22 staff were cut in the dental 
plan, 11 in the drug plan, six in the SHSP (Saskatchewan Hospital Services Plan), seven in medicare, 
two in the Saskatchewan assistance to independent living, four in vital statistics, 12 in psychiatric 
services, three from the hearing aid plan. And what does the minister think of these cuts? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, again I quote the Minister of Finance. He says: 



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
597 

Health and social services are of fundamental importance to any society. In Saskatchewan this 
government takes special pride in the improvements that we are implementing in this budget. 

 
But look, Mr. Speaker, 150 jobs lost. Programs have been slashed. Programs have been abolished. To 
the believers of trickle-up philosophy, this is a cause of special pride. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, it is obvious that people who work for this government are not the beneficiaries of this 
trickle-up philosophy. 
 
And again I am forced to ask: who or what are the beneficiaries of this malignant economic philosophy? 
Since the public sector is not a beneficiary of the job creation policies based on the trickle-up 
philosophy, surely then there has been job creations in the private sector. Surely now there, since we 
have, are open for business, business is booming. 
 
Well, let’s look at the record, Mr. Speaker: 1,157 steel workers laid off at Ipsco, eight jobs lost in the 
SED Systems, 20 Gulf workers in Moose Jaw laid off, 27 local company employees laid off in Moose 
Jaw, nine lost their jobs when Wilkinson steel closed, 52 lost their jobs when Schwertz Bros. was 
liquidated in Weyburn, 223 laid off at Northern Telecom. And the list goes on. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, ordinary people employed in the private sector do not benefit from the trickle-up 
philosophy. And again, Mr. Speaker, I am forced to ask the question: who benefits, Mr. Speaker, who in 
fact does benefit? So I ask, is it our cities and towns and villages who benefit? And gain let us look at 
what this budget holds in store for our towns and villages and cities. 
 
Swift Current — Swift Current has an increase of 32 per cent in unemployment, so the budget reduced 
expenditures for park development at Cypress Hills. Estevan has an increase of 48 per cent in 
unemployment, and a 50 per cent decline in building permits. So the budget reduced the money to the 
Souris Valley project by 20 per cent. Weyburn has an increase of only 26 per cent in unemployment 
rates, so the government cut 5 staff at the Weyburn Psychiatric Centre to bring Weyburn up to the 
provincial average. 
 
Yorkton, where the Minister of Labour is from, has the second highest increase in unemployment of any 
community in Saskatchewan, an increase of over 59 per cent. But there’s so much more we can, can be. 
So, this budget, you know what it does to Yorkton? Cut both jobs and budget in Yorkton. Highway 
district crew’s budget was cut, and also staff. There was a cut in staff in the psychiatric centres at, at 
Yorkton, and the Minister of Labour can rest easy. His constituency will soon be number one in 
increasing unemployment. 
 
North Battleford had an increase of 21 per cent in unemployment. So this budget, what did it do? It cut 
17 people from the staff at the North Battleford hospital. Moose Jaw reported 30 per cent increase in 
unemployment in this budget. And you know what they did? They delayed and deferred capital 
expenditures for SGI. They reduced the budget for the Moose Jaw wildlife animal park, they slashed in 
half the budget for the Wakamow Valley Authority, cut 190 jobs at Valley View Centre where we 
provide help to the mentally retarded and mentally handicapped. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, Saskatoon reported an increase of 95 per cent in  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
598 

unemployment — increase of 95 per cent. But what did this budget do? First of all it cut urban transit 
assistance grants. It reduced the grant to the Meewasin Valley Authority, slashed funding for provincial 
parks in the Saskatoon area by 25 per cent. 
 
And what about Regina, Mr. Speaker? Surely it is a beneficiary of this trickle-up philosophy. Surely 
this, this budget is good news for the Regina citizens. 
 
Well, let’s look at Regina and see what they received in this budget: rail relocation assistance cut 
$400,000; Wascana Centre Authority grant reduced by 15 per cent; the grant to the Centre of the Arts 
slashed by over 50 per cent; all money for the proposed archives building is removed from the budget. 
And every day there are more provincial civil servants who lose their jobs, jobs as this trickle-up theory 
continues its perverse way to reflect the Tory commitment to creating jobs. 
 
Everywhere in Saskatchewan the story is the same: Meadow Lake, decrease in funding for provincial 
park; Maidstone, hospital reconstruction cancelled; Prince Albert, jobs lost at the North Park hospital; 
Melville, regional park budget reduced and lost five of its staff. It is obvious then that our cities and 
towns and villages are not beneficiaries of this trickle-up philosophy. 
 
So, again I am forced to ask, Mr. Speaker: who are the beneficiaries? And, Mr. Speaker, let’s see who 
are the beneficiaries under the Tory government opposite’s economic philosophy. And this is the 
answer, this is the answer, Mr. Speaker. The multinational oil companies who’ve had their taxes slashed 
by this government — they are the beneficiaries of the trickle-up boys. They say, ‘Turn on the taps; it’s 
time to drain her dry.’ And the interprovincial trucking firms, like CP, and the interprovincial bus 
companies, like Greyhound, who can buy cheap gas in Saskatchewan and who no longer contribute a 
penny toward the upkeep of our highways. ‘Fill ’em up boys,’ they say, ‘the gas is on us.’ 
 
And third, I want to say, there’s another group that benefits from this philosophy: the bankers and the 
bond dealers, who are making enormous profits off the interest of our record deficits. ‘Give ‘em snoose, 
Bruce; we’ve got the golden Bruce.’ 
 
And finally, the risk-takers, who can afford to respond quickly to this unfettered government industrial 
strategy that affords maximum business opportunities with minimum intervention in taxation and 
regulatory matters. ‘Come and get ’er,’ they say, ‘Saskatchewan for sale, cheap.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this overview I have demonstrated that the economic philosophy espoused by this 
government is not working and will not work. The only growth industries in this province are the 
caseloads of social services, the counselling facilities at our employment agencies, and the crowded cells 
of our correctional centres. And I want to say that there will soon be another, another one, Mr. Speaker 
— new industry, the moving industry, undoubtedly, as with under Ross Thatcher, will soon become the 
third growth industry in this province. People will soon be moving out, as they did under the Ross 
Thatcher, the greatest exodus that this province has ever seen — family after family seeking an honest 
living, willing to be able to work, but driven out of this province by a selfish, uncaring government to 
whom compassion is an unknown word. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the once-bright light of our economic future 
grows dim under the direction and the incompetence of this government. 



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
599 

I want to turn, Mr. Speaker, to the area of agriculture. And I want to indicate that agriculture is certainly 
a very important economic sector in the economy of Saskatchewan, but the star news for farmers 
continues to unfold. The most recent item, an announcement on the initial grain prices, made yesterday: 
wheat down 12 cents per bushel, durum down 26 cents per bushel, barley down 33 cents per bushel, 
malting down 39 cents, oats down 23 cents per bushel. This will take a further slice off of the farm 
income. 
 
In 1982 the farm cash receipts fell from 4.01 billion the previous year to 3.8 billion. I wouldn’t be 
surprised to see this drop to about 3.5 in 1983. At the same time, farm costs are going up. In 1982 those 
rose to 2.9 billion from 2.815 million the previous year, and they may hit even $3 billion this current 
year. Farm net income in 1982 was 1.316 million, compared to 1,600 million in 1981. The only reason it 
was this high was because of increase in grain inventories. With a normal crop year, farm net income of 
Saskatchewan could drop to about $540 million in 1983, the lowest figure since 1972 and barely 40 per 
cent of the 1982 figure. It is one-third of the 1981 figure. 
 
This shows just how serious the farm income picture is in Saskatchewan. In the face of this crisis, what 
has our government done? They’ve cut the agricultural budget by over $12 million from the last year 
NDP budget. They have rejected a farm fuel rebate program. They tell, tell the federal government that 
Saskatchewan is prepared to see farmers pay more to move grain. The Saskatchewan consumer . . . The 
Saskatchewan Conservative government’s agricultural program is adding to the disaster facing farmers. 
Obviously, many of the factors contributing to the cost-price squeeze are beyond the control of the 
province, but we can do much better than this. 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy and Saskatchewan fiscal resources under the NDP were built up over 11 years 
to the point where we have some clout, where we can help the farm economy. Our objective at this time 
should be to help the farmers ride out the storm, save their farms, and continue efforts to diversify 
agriculture. 
 
And what should this Conservative government be doing? They should restore agricultural budget to its 
proper level. To bring it back to the place that it had in the NDP budget would mean increasing the 79.7 
million to over $100 million. They should introduce, they should introduce a farm cost protection 
program covering all aspects of agriculture and livestock. I say that they should dig in their heels on the 
Crow rate and tell the federal government the Crow rate should remain as it is: the law, in law, 
non-negotiable. It’s time the Conservative government opposite switched from the double-talk line they 
are now using. 
 
Also what we should do, Mr. Speaker, we should review our protection, debt protection legislation, to 
make sure it is up to date, and make sure that the provincial mediation board is fully operating. 
 
I want to come back to the question of the size of the agricultural budget. The NDP budget last March, 
the NDP budget last March provided for $91,809,700 for agriculture, including money, including money 
for international aid. The total budget that we were proposing was 2,760,800,000. In 1983-84, the total 
budget is 3,041,094,940. If Agriculture were to get the same share, it should get in this budget $101 
million. Instead, it got $79,000,771, or more than 21 million short of the same share as was allocated by 
the NDP proposed budget. 
 
Apparently, this Conservative government can find millions of dollars for concessions  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
600 

for the oil companies, for their friends, but they can’t find a fair share for agriculture. 
 
In particular, there was an urgent need for a farm fuel rebate, and when we were in office the NDP 
introduced such a program when the farm income was down. Farm income is down again now, but this 
is, this is the time, the only time the Tory government . . . The only thing that they have for the farmers 
are sweet words about what a strong agricultural industry we have. One of the reasons it is strong is 
because of the, of the NDP policies of the past and the programs which assisted the agricultural 
community. This kind of program that will result in a direct reduction of farm costs is what is needed 
now. The Tory government failed when it could have helped. 
 
And then we have, as I indicated, the Crow issue. We heard numerous speeches in the legislature on this 
issue, and many more outside the Chamber. Some said we need to save the Crow. Others said what a 
bad thing the Pepin plan is for western farmers. And I want to say that there is a subtle difference 
between the two approaches, but the full meaning of the difference didn’t become clear until the 
Minister of Agriculture spoke in Melville in mid-March and he let the cat out of the bag, Mr. Speaker. 
He said, and I quote, from the Leader-Post, March 16, 1983: 
 

Saskatchewan is prepared to pay more to move its grain, but not without some protection. 
 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is: who pays more? The farmers. Who gets protection? The railways. He says 
he has told Pepin he will pay more. He hasn’t told us how much more. How much is he selling us down 
the river for? Under the Pepin plan the Saskatchewan farmers’ cost of moving grain will go up from $75 
million to over $500 million in 1992. And even the minister says that’s too much. But how much, I ask 
him, is okay, and he won’t tell us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t fix up the Pepin plan by tinkering with it. The only way to deal with it is to 
throw it out and to start over again to develop a new plan to deal with the transportation problem. Any 
plan that allows the railways and the federal government to get their foot in the door by changing the 
Crow will eventually spell disaster to the farmer. Thus, it is essential, Mr. Speaker, that the Crow remain 
as is in law — non-negotiable. And I want to say that that is the consistent policy of the New 
Democratic Party in Saskatchewan and the federal New Democratic Party in Ottawa. And I want to say 
that there is no consistency in the Tories across this country. 
 
I want to turn, Mr. Speaker, to one other areas of concern, primarily in my constituency; although it’s in 
other parts of the province. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that waterfowl crop damage is a very serious 
problem in the area that I represent, that is the area of Ponass Lake, and in addition the area surrounding 
Quill Lakes is also affected. The advent of swathing grain as a regular part of harvest procedures has 
made this problem even more serious than it was in the past. 
 
I want to say to the government that I am concerned. When you look in the budget, there are no funds in 
the budget for compensation programs, although the November budget had 900,000 for this purpose. 
And I recognize that some previous budgets have not had this item initially because a federal-provincial 
agreement had not yet been reached. I’m also aware that the negotiations with the federal government is 
a rather difficult one. But I want to express the hope that this omission in this budget, this omission of 
this item from the budget does not reflect a change in policy by this government, and that the province 
does not intend to abandon this program. The 



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
601 

federal government should not be allowed to abandoned this program, but even more, Mr. Speaker, the 
farmers who have a problem with crop damage from waterfowl should not be abandoned. Additionally, 
it is important that the Department of Parks and Renewable Resources continue its prevention program, 
and that the federal government also assume its fair share of this program. 
 
I want to . . . In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, as I have said, I have outlined in some detail the serious flaws 
in this budget. For example, this budget provides millions of dollars for benefits paid to unemployed 
employables, but cannot find moneys sufficient for meaningful job creation. As one Tory philosopher 
opposite remarked, ‘You can’t make an omelette without scrambling eggs.’ Well, I want to say that you 
can’t make an omelette after you have killed the chicken. 
 
This budget will achieve the opposite of what it claims. It is a destructive document based on a 
misguided and misdirected philosophy. The people of Saskatchewan will soon realize who really 
benefits. Unfortunately, the people of Saskatchewan will pay dearly for this economic lesson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ultimate tragedy is that were the Tories not trapped by their foolish ideology and 
wishful thinking, they could address themselves to the economic problems facing Saskatchewan. They 
could have developed a budget that, that would address and resolve the farm fuel cost problems by 
providing assistance to the farmers; that would provide adequate funding for northern programs; that 
would include expanded health care programs, such as dental care for four-year-olds, and adequate 
capital funds for hospital projects in Regina, Saskatoon, and Maidstone, and other parts of the province; 
that would include substantial increased capital project funding throughout rural Saskatchewan, 
highways and rural capital fund; that would significantly expand education and training programming 
and adequately fund education capital projects; that would not cut back at all on the social services 
agencies funding and instead would increase the funding to these agencies where caseloads are rapidly 
increasing; that would substantially increase funding for environmental protection, energy conservation, 
and alternative energy development; that would respect the integrity of rural and urban revenue sharing 
with a fully adequate funding and would extend the revenue-sharing system to northern Saskatchewan 
with adequate, with adequate initial funding base; that would substantially increase the property 
improvement grants to provide needed property tax relief; that would practise sound financial 
management and would not mortgage our future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does none of these things. It is an insult to our senior citizens who built this 
province. It is an assault on our working people who are presently building this province. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, it is a milestone around the necks of our children . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . It is 
a millstone around the necks of our children who will inherit this province. For all of these reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, for all of these reasons, I want to say that I will be supporting the amendment and voting 
against the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Muller: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great deal of pleasure to enter into this debate. I 
certainly have to congratulate the Minister of Finance for bringing in this budget and for the way it was 
done — by going out into the cities of this province and talking to the people in the three major centres 
to find out from them what should  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
602 

be in this budget and to find out what their priorities were. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this shows that this is an open government, not like the former government that told the 
people what was good for them. Our government asked the people what they would like to see in a 
budget or in legislation. The former government wanted to keep the people in the dark, keep them under 
the big government thumb. Mr. Speaker, finally the people of Saskatchewan are beginning to see the 
light. With this budget and the job creation programs in it, in times of recession it’s up to a government 
to give the economy a little boost. I believe that the Minister of Finance has done it in the proper 
manner, by not creating jobs in the public sector but giving incentives to the private sector. 
 
Thank goodness our province hasn’t been hit as hard as the rest of Canada in 1982-83. In February we 
had 3,000 more people working than were working in February of 1982. We’re not going to sit around 
and look at that, though. We want to see as many people working as possible, as possibly can be 
working. 
 
The elimination of the road tax on gasoline, the mortgage interest reduction plan and the farm purchase 
program — these programs put $150 million back into the pockets of Saskatchewan people. These 
programs will help to stimulate business in Saskatchewan. In order to keep this province moving, we 
have to stop Pepin in his tracks. I urge Ottawa to recognize the value of the family farm to this nation. I 
urge Ottawa to recognize the contribution our rural communities make to this nation. I also urge Ottawa 
to recognize how much this nation needs the six billion a year in export dollars our grain farmers earn 
for us. If it does come to its senses and recognizes these points, it’ll dismantle Mr. Pepin and keep the 
Crown. Believe me, Mr. Speaker, the Crow is a much more valuable asset to this nation than the current 
transport minister. 
 
Getting back to the job creation programs that the finance minister outlined. I certainly want to 
congratulate him on the educational aspect of this program. It’s going to put many people to work in this 
province — also, young people. There’ll be young apprentices out in the working world learning trades 
in the best trade school in the world — personal experience. They will also be earning a living and 
supporting other small businesses while they’re learning. This, to me, is the best education you can get. 
It’s the way I got mine. 
 
I don’t think I have to go into detail on the nine points the minister outlined a week ago Tuesday night, 
but n case you people across the way weren’t listening, I feel I should touch on them a bit. 
 
Extending the Build-A-Home program and the, and the 1,500 more new houses that will be built in 
Saskatchewan, the 4,500 jobs that this program will create will certainly be a big help to the 
Saskatchewan work-force. The $32 million that has been allotted to the construction and renovations of 
cultural and recreation facilities in Saskatchewan over the next five years will reach into every 
community in Saskatchewan. The $2.7 million to assist in the hiring of young people during the summer 
months, which the Minister of Education outlined last Thursday, the $20 million tax break for small 
business for hiring permanent full-time employees — this will create another 4,000 jobs. Great. The $8 
million the Saskatchewan government is putting into the Saskatchewan JOBS program, along with 
federal job creation programs, will create another 3,500 jobs. The promoting of local economic 
self-sufficiency is going to help the people living on the Indian reserves. The $30 million special 
projects fund that was raised by the direct, careful management of this government will be turned back 
to the 



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
603 

economy for productive investments. The $1.5 billion that will be spent on the geological science 
building in Saskatoon, the Nipawin power project and the extensions of the rural gas distribution system 
will support 11,000 person-years of construction employment. The growing water requirements of this 
province has to be dealt with and the minister has outlined how we’re going to do this in his budget. 
 
These nine points the minister has outlined will certainly help to keep Saskatchewan people working. 
The spin-off from this will help the small business community also. We are going to need more highly 
trained workers in our work-force in the future. The Minister of Finance is going all out in addressing 
this problem with the expansion of the technical training system. He’s also addressed the problem of 
people who can’t leave their local areas to get, to get this training by creating 400 training spaces in less 
populated areas. As times change, so do our training programs have to change. Our ministers will 
monitor this very closely and will keep up with the changes that are necessary. 
 
Two areas of agriculture that have a lot of potential for the Saskatchewan farmers is the finishing and 
processing of livestock and livestock products. There’s also a lot of Saskatchewan farmland that can be 
irrigated which will increase our agricultural production. The minister has mentioned these two areas in 
his budget speech. We certainly need some aggressive thinking in agriculture. This is still our biggest 
industry and the most potential for expansion. 
 
With business development, we will have to participate in more trade fairs in other countries and 
encourage Saskatchewan buyers to buy Saskatchewan. We have a lot of good products that are 
manufactured right here at home. We have to get out and sell these products. We even have to go to 
Bulgaria to sell cattle. 
 
One more area where this government has shown leadership is in the streamlining of government. Open 
government means less government. This is saving Saskatchewan taxpayers millions of dollars and less 
red tape for the average citizen to deal with. We have a long way to go yet but we sure have a good start. 
 
It pleases me to see the minister has recognized the need for better health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The building of new hospitals and the upgrading of cancer services in the province, plus 
the building of a cancer clinic in Saskatoon will strengthen our fight against cancer. 
 
The increase in nursing staff is going to give better service to the people of Saskatchewan and the 
Minister of Finance has decided not to increase taxes a great deal but . . . the extra load on the, on the 
people of Saskatchewan . . . and put an extra load on the people in Saskatchewan. Instead he’s going 
with a manageable deficit which will speed up the economic recovery of Saskatchewan. The minister 
has increased the tax on diesel fuel used in locomotives and also has increased the tobacco tax, including 
snuff. With the tobacco tax, it’s up to the individual whether they use tobacco products or not, so this is 
not a big tax increase. 
 
This budget, Mr. Minister, this budget the Minister of Finance has brought in is certainly a responsible 
budget. I would encourage every member of the legislature to support this budget. I will not support the 
amendment, but I am going to support the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
604 

Mr. Katzman: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start my comments today, and I almost want to title them, 
‘Truth and Fiction.’ I have listened to the members opposite refer to the agriculture budget. Well, when 
you stop playing paper games and you start to put cold cash in place, the actual numbers are: 93 million 
in this year’s budget; 78 million in last year’s budget. I don’t know where the decrease that they keep 
talking about comes from. But the real numbers are, when you stop paying, playing with paper transfers, 
is 93 million versus 78 million. 
 
Now the member for Quill Lake did hit upon one good issue during his speech. He made a comment 
about the crop damage. And he’s right on, on that one. He’s right on about the 400, $900,000. Yes, it’s 
not in the budget. It wasn’t in other year’s budgets as well because there was no agreement signed. But 
if there’s an agreement signed there will be funds available. The farmers don’t have to worry. Past 
history has shown that. 
 
Now where is another one of those paper transfers that you fellows are playing with, ‘cause that’s really 
the difference of the argument? There’s the land bank. Now under that particular vote which is now, by 
the way, in the agriculture heritage fund, the revenues indicated are over $20 million. But we’re only 
going to spend 13.3 million of that. So we have a little extra revenue in case we need it for something 
else that’s an emergency. We’ve budgeted for the unforeseen. The other thing that’s changed in this 
budget from the previous years, as we’ve said: we’re not going to participate in the recession and we’re 
not going to participate in a drought. So we don’t need the 4.5 million drought assistance because we’re 
no going to have one. It’s that simple. 
 
Now the other factor that . . . So it’s not there. If we have problems, we have the heritage fund. The 
other one you played games with is the grain care corporation which is a $9 million item in total. But it 
was just a paper transfer from one department to another — nothing for the benefit of the people of 
Saskatchewan and the farmers. So let’s take that out of the numbers of last year, and what we get with 
those two things, three things changed, $78 million real versus the real in this budget of 93 million — 
that’s a 20 per cent increase by rounding numbers. Not, not what you’ve been saying. So let’s get the 
truth out, throw all the numbers down, not compare apples and oranges, and throw a few other things in. 
Putting it straight down factually, cash, cash. Forget the intergovernment transfers ‘cause that’s all they 
were within the games and the thing. It’s 93 million. There’s 78, and I hope you’ve got it straight and I 
won’t hear those stories from the other side about using figures that nobody seems to want. And if you 
need a lesson in economics and how the budget works, I don’t mind spending some time with you in 
going that way. 
 
Now, agriculture is number one. Just for the benefit of the members across, I just happened to receive a 
poster. It’s called, ‘Agriculture. We all depend on you.’ On April 17 to April 23 it’s Agriculture 
Appreciation Week. It’s been declared, signed by the Minister of Agriculture. There’s a poster, and I 
think any member that wants to put it on his, have one, can arrange to have one sent to them. 
 
We know that agriculture is number one in Saskatchewan. We know, and we respect agriculture. It is 
shown, as I said, by the $20 million increase. 
 
The members opposite have talked about a lot of things, and I will just like to comment. I heard the 
member talk about SGI a while ago. Now let me go back in my memory and  



 
April 6, 1983 

 

 
605 

talk about a former member from Riversdale. Prior to the election about three of four months, he said, 
and I believe it was in the Star-Phoenix, that SGI was considering bringing the deductible up to $500. 
Now remember who we’re talking about: the former member of this House who was from Riversdale. In 
the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, while he was still the attorney general, indicated that the government of the 
day was thinking of bringing up the deductible to $500 from the 350. That was the same minister who 
flew the idea that they were going to bring it to 350 when it used to be 200. So don’t blame it on this 
government. You guys started working on it before we even became government. 
 
The member from Regina today during question period referred to the Minister of Labour about 
workmen’s compensation. You know, go back and remember who introduced that piece, who brought 
that idea of that piece of legislation in. Your former government. It’s identical to the one you people had 
prepared; we brought it into law. So while you criticize that member, you’re criticizing yourself because 
your government — when you were still government — did that legislation. We thought it was fair. We 
brought it in on behalf of the workers. We were listening. 
 
Yes, there is a problem with one word and it’s the interpretation. Some people say there isn’t a problem; 
some say there is. But to make sure there is no problem, the minister has told you he’s bringing in an 
amendment. He listened; he’s acting. 
 
You know, I was making notes earlier today while he spoke, and I just happened to receive today a copy 
of a project that the Department of Agriculture got involved in several months ago. I had the opportunity 
of announcing it in North Battleford, and the results are back. It was two individuals, assisted by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, to travel to Essen, West Germany, to see if there is a market for 
Saskatchewan agricultural products, and in this case, the horse industry. 
 
It’s interesting to note that the individuals got back, and have now indicated that all horses that were 
taken over by different provinces sold very, very well, brought good returns for the provinces that 
shipped animals and have now indicated that there’s buyers from Europe coming to Saskatchewan this 
summer to purchase breeding stock to take back to the countries that they represented. It was the biggest 
promotion of livestock, all kinds, in the world is at this particular fair, and I’m glad to say that this will 
bring benefits to the people of Saskatchewan, and the producers of Saskatchewan. 
 
As I said earlier, I referred to the 94 million versus the 78, which is approximately a 20 per cent 
increase. And I think that’s important that we all must remember. But the fact is that there was a 20 per 
cent increase in Agriculture, probably other than Health the biggest increase in the whole budget, and 
will show our respect for agriculture, our number one industry. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture will, I assume, in due course during estimates, be laying out exactly how it 
is all to be spent, and how we have listened to the people. The former member that spoke spoke about 
the Souris, and I went to my blue book again to find out just exactly what he was talking about, and I 
discovered that he was quoting something that didn’t quite agree with the number I have. He said there 
was a cut-back. Well, I don’t know where it was, because in Agriculture it shows in ’82-83 estimates 
there was no money, and in ’83-84 estimates, there’s $607,000. So I don’t know where he’s coming 
from, you know, and I wish he would make sure that he gets all the facts before he stands on his feet to 
deliver a speech. Then I say to him, if he wants to figure, find out how the 94 versus 78 works, I’m 
prepared to spend some time and show him. I repeat,  



 
April 6, 1983 
 

 
606 

he should get his facts straight . . . (inaudible) . . . he stands to his feet. 
 
I think I must repeat probably one of the major, one of the major successes in agriculture before I 
adjourn debate so that I can speak later on because it’s coming close to the time. 
 
I would like the members to remember, as the member behind me spoke earlier he talked about the 
family, the farm purchase plan. Seventy-five per cent of those sales that are being referred to are in the 
family helping the young farmer get started. Intergeneration — you know, from the older people to the 
younger people. Seventy-five per cent of those approved are now becoming proud owners of their own 
land — not proud farmers of state land, but proud owners of their own. What was the target? We made 
our target. We said we were going to help so many people, we’ve done it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
Seeing the member is asking me a question, I think that I will go to a public document, news release 
83-177, just so that he can find it and get the facts himself. March 31st, 1,200 farmers purchased 2,350 
quarters of land worth approximately $150 million. Now, I think the members across also know that it 
wasn’t many months ago, I believe it was less than three months, that we helped more people own their 
land than you did in your 11 years. And as the member indicated behind me, we will help more people 
own their land in two years than you helped become socialist farmers. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I see the time is coming very, very close to 5, so before I go into many of the 
other points that I’d like to make, I beg leave to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 
 


	ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS
	ANNOUNCEMENT
	QUESTIONS
	Compensation for Disabled Workers
	SGI Licensing Offices
	Date of Increase of SGI Deductible
	Sask Tel Annual Report
	SPECIAL ORDER

