
























































Hansard: November 17, 1983


3329 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
November 17, 1983 

 

MR. SPEAKER: — According to Rule 3 of the Rules and Procedures of The Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan the normal time for a meeting of this House on a Thursday is 2 p.m. Leave is therefore 
required for us to meet at the present time. Is leave granted? Agreed. 
 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 

 

PROROGATION 
 

At 10:04 a.m. His Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber and took his seat upon the 
throne. 
 

His Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 

Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly: 
 

It is my duty to relieve you of further attendance at the Legislative Assembly. In doing so, I wish to 
thank you and congratulate you on the work you have done. 
 

In this Second Session of the Twentieth Legislature you have dealt with more than 100 bills and have set 
directions in government policy which will provide for orderly growth and development of our province. 
 

In recognition of the need for a strong private sector, the Department of Economic Development and 
Trade has been established to open new export markets and promote new products and investment 
opportunities within Saskatchewan. This is just one example of a re-organization program initiated in an 
effort to achieve a more productive, responsive government. 
 
You have approved amendments to The Education Act to reflect concerns of the education community. 
 
You have provided for a consolidation and modernization of legislation respecting justice, health 
finance, municipalities, mineral resources, and the environment. 
 
You have taken innovative steps in the areas of science, communications, and technology. 
 
In order to promote and strengthen agriculture, amendments to the Heritage Fund (Saskatchewan) Act 
have created a new agricultural division to fund the farm purchase program and to form a research and 
development division. 
 
Amendments to the Trade Union Act clarify the roles and responsibilities of employees and employers, 
and were drafted after consultation with many groups and individuals. 
 
You have passed amendments to the Highway and Vehicles Acts focusing on stricter safety guidelines, 
with particular emphasis placed upon the prevention of drinking drivers. Also included in these 
amendments are increased traffic fines and suspensions. 
 
In taking leave of you, I wish to express my thanks to the Members on both sides of the House for their 
kindness as I begin my term in this Office. 
 
I thank you for the manner in which you have devoted your energies to the activities of the Session, and 
wish you the full blessing of Providence. 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: – Mr. Speaker, members of the Legislative Assembly, it is the will and 



 
November 17, 1983 

 
3330 

pleasure of His Honour the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be prorogued until later 
this day, the 17th of November, 1983, at 2 o’clock p.m., and this Legislative Assembly is accordingly 
prorogued. 
 
His Honour then retired from the Chamber at 10:08 a.m. 


	PROROGATION

