






















































Hansard: April 26, 1983


(1430) 1431 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 26, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUEST 
 

Hon. Mr. Swan: — It’s my privilege today to introduce to the House a visitor from Ottawa, the Hon. 
Erik Nielsen, Leader of the Official Opposition, member of the House of Commons for the constituency 
of the Yukon. He’s seated in the back row here and we’d ask him to stand and be recognized. I’d ask all 
hon. members to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 

Mr. Sutor: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. I have the pleasure this afternoon to introduce to you and through you 
to members of the House, two schools of students visiting us from the constituency of Regina North East 
this afternoon. The first group, seated in the Speaker’s gallery, number 58 grade 4 students from Dr. 
George Ferguson School, accompanied by their teacher chaperones, Mrs. Quinlan, Mrs. Darroch, Ms. 
Sagasz and their principal, Mr. Dale Wallenburg. And, in the west gallery, 60 in number grade 4 to 8 
students from St. Paul’s Community School in Regina, accompanied by Al Jurzyniec, Marcel Dubord, 
Bernard Beaudry and Dennis Robson. And I would ask all members to join with me this afternoon in 
welcoming them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Unemployed Employables on Welfare Rolls 
 

Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is directed to the Minister of Social Services. It 
concerns the startling welfare figures for March which were released from her office this morning, 
which indicate that the number of unemployed employables on welfare is 14,469. That’s up 
considerably from February and in fact is up from 8,704 at this time last year, which is a 66 per cent 
increase. 
 
I’d like to remind the minister that this unemployed employable group are the people who are looking 
for work, would be working if the positions were available. 
 
What I would like to ask the minister is whether or not she believes that spending this amount of money 
on people who want to work and wish to work, which is more than what is spent on job creation, makes 
a great deal of sense to her at this time. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the interesting thing when you look at the recent statistics 
that are out for last month is the fact that the total case-load has only increased 117 since the previous 
month. If you look at the trend before that, that is a very optimistic figure. The other interesting thing is 
that the total beneficiaries have gone down by 67, and you neglected to state that. The other interesting 
thing, particularly in the employable category, is that since March of ’82 to March of ’83 this 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1432 

government has put 1,000 people in further training that were on that roll. And I think that is very 
optimistic, and I would suggest if you look at those figures plus the fact that the job creation program 
through Social Services is up to approximately 2,000, that that is indeed very optimistic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can be optimistic about an increase of the unemployed 
employables from 8,700 last year to 14,400 this year, but you will have a hard time convincing the 
taxpayers of the province and those who are being forced onto welfare that this is an optimistic role for 
her to be playing. 
 
What I would like to know is whether or not you still have a study going on on the crisis in welfare 
which is occurring at this time in Saskatchewan, and if you have received a report from that group who 
was doing that study? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — The study that was going on was not on the crisis of welfare that you call it. What 
we did was implemented a study on the systems of the social assistance plan in Saskatchewan. And yes, 
that is going on, will be completed in June; and yes, I have received an interim report. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister will indicate at this time whether or not the 
request from many, many groups throughout the province for public hearings will be listened to, and 
whether or not she intends to hold public hearings throughout the province so people who have ideas on 
solving this problem – which she says is not a crisis, but when you’re paying out 14 million a month in 
welfare payments, I’m sure that many people consider it that – whether or not you consider making 
these hearings public throughout the province? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — I did not say that a particular situation was not at a crisis level. What I did say was 
that the study was not on the crisis of the welfare. It was on the systems with the social assistance 
program. That is what I said. I have not received, as you indicate, many, many requests for public 
hearings. I have received perhaps two – three at the most. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, I wasn’t asking the minister how many she had received. I would 
differ with her on that; I’ve received many more requests than that. But my question was whether or not 
you’re considering in fact making them public? That was the question, and I want an answer to it. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — That final decision will be made when the final report comes in to me from the 
person that’s doing the review. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — A final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Can the minister indicate how she intends to 
hold public hearings after the report is completed? Can you just explain the process, how that is going to 
work? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Well, I’m sorry I guess I don’t quite understand your question. Like, I think it 
would be foolish to hold it before the report comes in. For instance, suppose the report shows there is no 
changes or whatever. Would you still go and have public hearings? As I stated, I have not had any 
pressure to hold these public hearings. I guess it depends on how one identifies public hearing. Are you 
talking about a royal commission? Are you talking about a task force? I’m not sure. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1433 

I have made a commitment to be in touch with those people and those groups that have a first concern 
with the welfare system, and I still intend to do that. As to the formalization of what you are suggesting, 
that decision has not been made yet and when it is I will inform you. 
 

Staff Cuts in Psychiatric Services 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I could interrupt the reading of the Minister of Health 
for a question. It concerns, Mr. Minister, the flattering comments made by the president of the 
Saskatchewan mental health association. I would remind you that in a news release he stated that the 
budget cuts affecting mental health services were a flagrant disregard for the needs of Saskatchewan 
people which puts the problem at crisis proportions. And he was talking, of course, about the elimination 
of staff in the psychiatric services branch. Will you, Mr. Minister, consider a further review of these 
staff cuts in the psychiatric centres across the province and, this time, take a more humanitarian 
approach to the mentally ill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well, yes, I read Mr. McCorriston’s article also, and it seems that ‘crisis’ is the 
word today. If there’s a crisis out there, I would like to comment on this so-called crisis. As I’ve told 
you many times, in the field of psychiatric services the majority of the position deletions were in what I 
call the ancillary or support services. We have told you previously we’re looking at using the moneys in 
the Health budget where we can apply the best hands-on treatment for people, and I think that if you 
took a very careful look at this you will see that that’s exactly what is taking place. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — This should be a new question, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps part of his problem is that 
he’s been listening to some of your comments. And I want to repeat some of your comments to you, in 
brief form, from a departmental newsletter dated November 1982. This is Contact. The minister was 
asked, ‘What’s your view of health care?’ The minister says: 
 

Well, there are definitely some areas that have to be looked at. The whole field of mental health 
is perhaps one area that could stand some improvement with some greater services in that field. 
 

Why is it that you took the same position as Mel McCorriston in November, and yet after the budget, 
when you didn’t get your way, you all of a sudden disagree with him and describe your psychiatric 
health services as perfectly adequate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — I don’t know where the disagreeance is coming from. From my point of view . . . I 
want to explain a little more in detail to you, and perhaps, if you just bear with me, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to lay some of the facts out as towards the psychiatric services in the province of Saskatchewan, 
keeping in mind the hands-on treatment which are the nurses and the people dealing with these people. 
 
And I would just like to point out that the staff reductions in the psych service branch in this budget will 
not affect the quality of programs and services to the public. Unlike, Mr. Speaker, unlike the previous 
government, this year’s reductions occur almost entirely in ancillary service areas and not in direct 
services. For example . . . Now, I’ve said that in this House many times, but obviously you don’t believe 
me, so now we’ll go to some of the facts. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1434 

In 1976, Mr. Speaker, 43 positions deleted; 30 of which were in nursing – hands-on care. Forty-three 
deleted; 30 in nursing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who did that? Who did that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — That was the NDP government of one Allan Blakeney. In 1979, Mr. Speaker, 35 
positions deleted; 21 of which were in nursing – hands-on care. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who did that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The same group. The same group. He always like everything refortified, my 
colleague here. 
 
And in 1983, 28 positions deleted; four of them in nursing. And who did that? Premier Grant Devine’s 
government, the government that’s been in Saskatchewan for one year – and there’s a birthday party out 
there in Saskatchewan today! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, there was no ‘disagreeance’ in 
November. Indeed, there was a great deal of agreeance in November between you and Mr. McCorriston 
if you speak the same language. Mr. Minister, in November you stated that that branch needed 
strengthening. Is that your idea of the way to strengthen a branch – to cut 35 of the staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — The hon. member is a reasonable chap most of the time, and I think strengthening 
a branch is using and keeping the hands-on service. Now, if I can save some money in some other 
services, because if you remember, at one time there were 2,000 people in Saskatchewan Hospital, 
North Battleford – there were 2,000. Now there are about 210. Now it would seem logical to me that I 
don’t need the same number of painters and plumbers and so on to maintain that building when I have 
less people in there. So, if I can save moneys there, and use them in nursing care and not have the savage 
cuts that you had of 30 or 40 positions – four positions. And at Saskatchewan Hospital base, North 
Battleford, this year, 17 positions – deleted one. Just one, Mr. Speaker, as a nurse. Now that, I think, is a 
compassionate government spending the people’s dollars where the hands-on service can be, at the 
bedside of those people who need treatment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. This is an area, Mr. Minister, in which we’d hoped this 
government would seek to be so much more. Does the minister not realize that with your empty 
rhetorics on the fashion in which the economy has not suffered, that people are, in fact, facing increasing 
stress levels and not less, and there are in fact increasing case-loads? Does the minister not agree that 
this would have been an appropriate year to increase the staff in that area and not to decrease it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Taylor: — Well I think the hon. member realizes, and I’m sure he does, that probably this 
would have been a good year, and last year, and five years hence was a good year to improve many 
things, but one has to make judgement decisions. One has to use money in certain areas . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . and that’s correct, where you can have the best care. One hundred and eighty increases 
in nursing positions in Saskatchewan indicate to me that we’re putting the dollars where the sick people 
are — 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1435 

$17 million in cancer indicates to me that we are addressing a problem out there with people that you 
people for 10 years put your head in the sand and would not address. 
 
And I want to tell you, that true, there were some deletions of staff in ancillary services and support 
services, but the record of this government with hands-on care is one that I’ll put up against you in one 
year compared to your ten-year record. 
 

Proposed Increase in SPC Rates 
 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question to the Premier, and it has to do with his 
government’s decision to allow the Saskatchewan Power Corporation to seek rate increases more than 
three times the current rate of inflation, even though he has forced a good number of people in this 
province, municipal councils, school boards, and a good number of working people, to accept 
inflation-minus-one guide-lines. My question to you, sir, is this: if the inflation-minus-one guide-lines 
are good enough for the school boards, and good enough for municipal councils, and good enough for 
the employees of municipal councils, school boards, and the Government of Saskatchewan, why aren’t 
they good enough for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the hon. member will recall when I reiterated the 
telegram from the Prime Minister asking us to participate in 6 and 5. And at that time I believe that the 
Leader of the Opposition was aware that the Prime Minister said he would like everybody to participate 
in 6 and 5 to fight inflation and lead to recovery package of 6 and 5 not be applicable to public utilities 
that would perhaps run deficits and cause people to pay larger and larger amounts of interest rates and 
interest payments in a public utility. To which the Leader of the Opposition shook his head, and he 
acknowledged the fact that public utilities should not be allowed to create larger and larger deficits. 
They should be in a break-even basis. 
 
Now to the extent that we have our own recovery program, and that there’s a recovery program across 
Canada, most jurisdictions have tried to build a recovery package and still recognize that public utilities 
like Sask Power and Sask Tel should not create larger and larger deficits which would cause people to 
pay more and more tax dollars towards interest, and we’ve agreed with that. So we have designed our 
recovery package of inflation minus one here in the province of Saskatchewan that beats every other 
province. 
 
We have inherited, Mr. Speaker, the crown corporations. After we opened the books we found out that 
they’d been robbed. There’s nothing there. We’re looking at a situation, Mr. Speaker, where the 
debt-equity ratio in the public utilities in the province of Saskatchewan has been crippled from the 
former administration. It is now our responsibility to say yes, we’ll protect the public utilities in this 
province, and we will not let them see themselves get into a very, very large deficit position so we have 
to pay more and more of our tax dollars on interest. And we will subject all our increases to a public 
utilities review commission so the public can justify the rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, new question to the Premier. As I understood the Premier’s reply 
to the last question, he indicated that he felt that it would not be  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1436 

appropriate to allow crown corporations to run up larger deficits and that for that reason he proposed to 
permit enormous increases in rates. I want to quote what you said in an interview, Mr. Premier, to the 
Leader-Post, in which you are quoted as saying: 
 

The province is bearing the brunt of the difficult international times rather than imposing it on 
people by raising taxes to protect a crown corporation or a government department. 
 

So if you are in fact saying that the province is bearing this, how do you justify 20 and higher per cent 
increases in power rates and natural gas rates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m very glad that the member asked that question, Mr. Speaker. There is a 
significant difference between this administration’s view of crown corporations and the former 
administration’s view on crown corporations – a significant difference. 
 
We were asked by the public of Saskatchewan, when we were elected, to open the books and look at the 
public utilities and look at the resource crowns and look at the other crowns. The people asked us to run 
the public utilities, like Sask Power and Sask Tel and SGI, at a break-even basis. That’s what they asked 
for. The other crowns- the resource crowns – they said, ‘Don’t tax the people to buy more oil 
companies, to buy more uranium mines, to buy more farms, to buy more anything like that.’ We have 
refused to raise taxes to expand the role of government in the resource crowns. And will continue to 
refuse to raise taxes to protect the crown corporations in the resource sector because it’s the view on this 
side that those corporations should be paying dividends to the people of Saskatchewan, not used as a 
vehicle to tax them. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary question to the Premier. I’m wondering, in light of 
the fact that the Minister of Social Services has frozen the Saskatchewan Income Plan for seniors and 
cut back by about $1 million in the public assistance to the aged, whether or not you would consider 
freezing the power rates and gas rates for t he senior citizens and exclude them from the 23 and 25 per 
cent increase which you have announced you are applying to PURC (public utilities review commission) 
for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite – I want to make this very, very clear to the 
public in Saskatchewan. Indeed, the Leader of the Opposition can take it back to Ottawa and extend it 
right across the country. The members opposite – the NDP members opposite – have always fought 
against the public utilities review commission. They fought against it year after year when we asked for 
it. We have it in power now, and that’s the very role of the public utilities review commission, is to 
decide if the rates are justified to the public of Saskatchewan. I commend the public utilities review 
commission for doing that in all the rate applications, and I’m sure they’ll make the same common-sense 
decisions when it comes to power rates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, if I could indulge the Premier in answering the question, I asked 
whether or not you would consider freezing power rates and gas rates for senior citizens who have in 
effect had their Saskatchewan Income Plan and assistance to the aged reduced? Will you not look at 
freezing the power rates and gas rates for those individuals? 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1437 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the members opposite that Mrs. Evelyn 
Sherman . . . Marion Sherman, pardon me, from the city of Prince Albert is a member of the public 
utilities review commission and she does qualify as a senior citizen. The views of the seniors, the views 
of the entire consuming public in the province of Saskatchewan are represented for the first time in 
Saskatchewan’s history, on the public utilities review commission, to justify the rates, and that’s the 
guarantee that the public appreciate now in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might direct a short question to the Premier. If he has 
such confidence in the public utilities review commission to make appropriate judgements about the 
charges that should be levied by the utilities on the public of Saskatchewan, would he please ask the 
minister of industry and commerce to stop his war on the public utilities review commission, and stop 
the litigation at public expense on whether or not the public utilities review commission should be 
permitted to make the judgements, which the Premier is expressing are so valuable, but the minister of 
industry and commerce says are so dastardly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there wouldn’t be a public utilities review commission in the 
country or in the United States that wouldn’t have some argument over the product that is being 
provided, and the service, and the price of the service. So you could ask yourself the question, and we 
have a t several times, ‘Is the deductible part of the product or is it part of the price?’ And it’s a very 
reasonable question to ask. The public utilities review commission has to have time to review that, and 
we provided them time to review that. Most people in the province understand that. 
 
I would point that you mentioned the Minister of Economic Development and Trade. I would point out, 
in the Leader-Post today, that there is close to 10,000 more people employed in the province of 
Saskatchewan over the last couple of months because of economic development and activities. That is 
something that is leading all other provinces, so I’m quite happy with the kinds of economic activity that 
the minister and his colleagues are bringing to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a short question to the premier. Since he insists on talking about 
everything but the questions I ask, I’ll try one more. This has to do with the public utilities review 
commission, and I ask the Premier: why is it necessary to have one set of lawyers employed by the 
public utilities review commission, another set of lawyers employed by your colleague, the minister in 
charge of SGI, and yet a third set of lawyers employed by your colleague, the Minister of Justice, to sort 
out just what your desires are with respect to the public utilities review commission? Is it not possible 
for the three of you to get together and decide that, without having three sets of lawyers, all no doubt 
firm supporters of the Progressive Conservative Party, sorting that out at great public expense? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that the hon. member may be disappointed that he is not 
involved as a lawyer in these discussions. There may have been many colleagues that he could have 
recommended. I’ll give the hon. member this promise: that if he wants to recommend some good legal 
advice, I’m sure we’d take it under advisement and be prepared to look at the whole problem with some 
of his advice. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1438 

Amendments to Labour Legislation 
 

Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Minister of Labour, and I 
would remind the minister, by way of background, the legislation which we passed in January or 
February was flawed in that not all of the recipients got all of the benefits which we though they were 
going to get. When is the minister going to come forward with the appropriate amendment to cure that 
flaw? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, that legislation is in getting drafted right now and we’re expecting 
it momentarily. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, that’s a different way of phrasing it. I want to remind the minister of what 
you said on April 6th, Mr. Minister, exactly 20 days ago. I asked you what has prevented you from 
bringing these amendments before this Assembly, and why the delay, and you said, ‘The amendment is 
on my desk right now. It’s going through the session as soon as we get back.’ I assume, Mr. Minister, 
you haven’t been back to your desk since April 6th. That’s the only conceivable explanation. 
 
My question to the Minister of Labour is: when are you going back to your desk? 
 
Hon. Mr. McLaren: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll remind the member opposite that I’m at my desk every day. It 
is getting drafted right now. It’s retroactive. No one will lose any dollars whatsoever in the delay, but 
we’ll be bringing it forward very, very shortly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Hon. Mrs. Smith: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on a point of order to deal with what is, in my opinion, a 
misleading impression left by the hon. member from Shaunavon, to do with what this government is 
doing to senior citizens, as he had indicated in his preamble to the Premier on a question that this 
government had made drastic cuts to senior citizens, particularly in the area of the supplement income 
plan. And that is totally not true. There have been no cuts in that area. Those people that qualify, the 
policy stays the same. And I maintain that it is deliberately misleading, particularly to those senior 
citizens that are out there in the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker: — I think that it would be very difficult to rule from the Chair that one member or the 
other has all the facts. And as I listen to the statements going from one side to the other, the facts seem 
to differ on all occasions. And I don’t believe that your point of order is well taken in this . . . (inaudible) 
. . . 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
Custom Combiners and U.S. Immigration 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise under ministerial statements, and I wish to inform this 
House of a major development of particular significance to the many Saskatchewan residents who 
participate in custom combining in the United States. 
 
As this House is aware from questions raised here last week, United States authorities have moved to 
prohibit the continued entry into that country of Canadian custom  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1439 

combiners. The action was taken, among other things, as a result of pressure from U.S. custom 
combiners who believe that as a result of their government’s decision to take grain land out of 
production the continued entry of Canadian custom combiners would result in the loss of work and jobs 
to U.S. combiners. 
 
I revealed to this House last week that upon learning of the U.S. government decision, the Saskatchewan 
government both directly and indirectly and at the official and unofficial level has been making 
overtures to the U.S. government to rescind that prohibition. I am now pleased to inform this House that 
this morning Mr. Gerald Coyl, district director of the United States immigration service in St. Paul, 
Minnesota, was in contact with my office to inform that Washington has approved an 80-day parole or 
grace period under which the newly imposed restriction on the entry of Canadian custom combiners into 
the Unites States will be lifted. 
 
During this 80-day period in which Canadian custom combiners will be able to continue to fulfil work or 
contract obligations they have in the United States, the United States Department of Labour will 
determine both the need for Canadian custom combiners in that country and the impact on U.S. custom 
combiners that the Canadian combiners will have with regard to the new situation. 
 
The one restriction on the entry of Canadian custom combiners into the Unites States during this 80-day 
period will be that they will have to demonstrate to the U.S. authorities that they do indeed have U.S. 
customers requiring their service. Throughout this 80-day period the United States Department of Labor 
and Immigration will be prepared to receive petitions from Canada on behalf of Canadian custom 
combiners. Our government is already making representations to Ottawa on behalf of the Canadian 
custom combiners. 
 
We would anticipate that throughout the 80-day period both the Saskatchewan government and the 
federal government would be able to convince United States authorities of the continued need for 
Canadian custom combiners in the United States. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to respond to the Minister of Agriculture’s statement, and I 
congratulate him on bringing this message to the House today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Also I would like to congratulate him on sticking to the facts, because as the question 
that I asked the other day in the House and the Premier responded by saying it was because of some 
flag-burning incident and the United States which has actually nothing to do with the case. I would 
further like to say, Mr. Speaker, that farmers anticipating on going down to the border, I’ve been told 
this morning, will need to indicate that they do have a job or a contract. Those that haven’t got it in 
writing and are prepared to spend money on a phone call, can inform the customs officer of a contract or 
job they have, and if the customs officer assures himself of that, they will have that. 
 
As far as the 80 days are concerned, there’s still some discussion going on and possibly that will be 
extended. 
 
The other thing is this. As far as the following year is concerned, U.S. farmers who want  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1440 

Canadians back will have to file a petition for work permits with the U.S. Department of Labor, and get 
approval for combining in 1984. And I think this 80-day permit will not apply next year, as far as my 
information is concerned. 
 
So to the farmers that have some questions about going combining, two things apply: one, they were not 
denied access tot he United States because of some alleged incident in Manitoba. I think that was a very 
regrettable story that the Premier fabricated and made up. And I’ve had phone calls . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order please. The member is allowed to reply to the ministerial statement and there 
was nothing about this subject raised in the ministerial statement. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I am referring to the many farmers that have phoned our office, and we 
have contacted the U.S. Department of Immigration in Washington, and they were assuring us as to 
what state it is and it’s still in a state of flux, as far as will that 80-day thing be reviewed, because some 
farmers expect to go down there longer than for 80-days. And I’m hoping that in the future the Premier 
will not resort to those kind of scare and McCarthy-type tactics to scare the farmers of Saskatchewan 
about going combining in the United States. That has nothing to do with the situation that’s before us. 
 
There are about 80 different issues that affect farmers and affect immigration and I think these should be 
dealt with according to what is at stake, not according to some prefabricated rumour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 22 – An Act to amend The Highways Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour, the 
Lieutenant-Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the bill, recommends it to the 
consideration of the Assembly and I move that a bill to amend The Highways Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 – An Act to amend The Human Tissue Gift Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Human Tissue Gift 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 – An Act to amend The Teachers’ Life Insurance (Government Contributory) Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Teachers’ Life 
Insurance (Government Contributory) Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1441 

Bill No. 25 – An Act to amend The Teachers’ Superannuation Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Teachers’ 
Superannuation Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 – An Act to amend The Change of Name Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of the bill to amend The Change of Name 
Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 – An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 – An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Wascana Centre Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 – An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Meewasin Valley 
Authority Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 30 – An Act to amend An Act to provide a Superannuation Allowance to a Certain 
Former Member of the Legislative Assembly 

 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I beg to inform the Assembly that His Honour the 
Lieutenant-Governor, having been informed of the subject matter of the bill, recommends it to the 
consideration of the Assembly. I move that a bill to amend An Act to provide a Superannuation 
Allowance to a Certain Former Member of the Legislative Assembly now be introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Resolution No. 7 – Research Staff: Federal Department of Agriculture 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1442 

Mr. Hepworth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure today to introduce this resolution to the 
Assembly for their consideration. It’s a pleasure to introduce the motion to this legislature, but I’m 
dismayed at what is behind the motion. I’m dismayed that we do find ourselves in a position where, as 
the motion points out, we are having to urge the federal government to keep the Department of 
Agriculture’s complement of research staff at full or increased strength in western Canada. And I will 
introduce that motion more formally at the end of my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s no surprise to anyone in this legislature that agriculture is the backbone of the Saskatchewan 
economy, and in fact is the backbone of the Canadian economy. And I think that’s been amply 
demonstrated over the past years, and specifically over the past weeks as the Premier, the Minister of 
Agriculture, many other ministers and MLA’s have been throughout Saskatchewan, and in fact across 
Canada, pointing out to all of Canada and especially central Canada how important agriculture is. And I 
think only of the debates that have been going on in this House as it relates to the Pepin plan, wherein, I 
think, central Canada has realized that in western Canada, where grain output by itself accounts for some 
$6 billion in the Canadian economy as it relates to trade dollars, that it can only be assumed by all that 
agriculture is very important to all. And hence agricultural research would be important to all. 
 
And so once again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we’re being selfish in suggesting that the federal 
government should, in fact, be increasing research in western Canada as well as in all of Canada, 
because it’s for the good of all Canada. And as our advertising campaign has pointed out as it related to 
the Pepin plan, the ads running in the leading newspapers across Canada, the headline pointed out: 
‘We’re all in this together.’ As Canadians we always thought we were in this together. And this is 
another issue where I think we are in this together. 
 
And as well, Mr. Speaker, one must realize that with research one is looking at some fairly substantive 
lead times. That is to say, moneys expended on research today and the technology that may result 
therefrom can have some significant time-lag between that project’s undertaking and in fact, that 
technology being put forth in usable form to the farmers, or industry itself. So I think you can see, Mr. 
Speaker, that I do rise today to speaker on an issue, to raise an issue in this Assembly, that is of great 
importance to western Canada, and to all of Canada, and especially of course to its farmers. 
 
And not only is it an issue that we recognize as important, but it’s been particularly encouraging to 
myself, Mr. Speaker, to have this issue raised with me personally by so many segments of society. 
Many, many farmers at the various and many farm meeting I’ve attended in the last month or two, 
across this province and in fact across Canada, have come up to me pointing out the fact that we do need 
to see more research dollars being spent on some of the very timely problems facing them. And I think 
of things like soil conservation, salinity, and disease control, whether it relates to plants or animals. 
 
And so I’ve been particularly encouraged by the number of farmers, first of all, who have made a point 
of telling me, as part of a government caucus that, ‘Yes, we would very much support our tax dollars 
going into research as it relates to agriculture.’ I’ve been particularly encouraged as well by agribusiness 
who supports very much the need for more and more research work and funding in that area. People 
from research centres, the farm groups themselves, not just the individual farmers within the farm 
groups, but the farm groups on many occasions, have presented resolutions and petitions to the 
government, briefs to the government, pointing out the necessity for continued and in fact expanded 
research funds or facilities. The professionals working at these research 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1443 

institutions have made a point of bringing to our attention the great importance that research must 
continue to play in agricultural enterprise in Saskatchewan, and in fact all of Canada. 
 
So it’s not just from one area, Mr. Speaker, that we’re receiving the inquiries as it relates to research. 
But we’re receiving the encouragement right across the spectrum. It was an issue that was raised at the 
Agricultural Opportunities Conference held earlier this year in Saskatoon, and I can only once again 
congratulate the Minister of Agriculture and his department for putting on an excellent conference. The 
theme of the conference was, ‘Agriculture – A Growth Industry. Can You Make It Happen?’ And one of 
the common themes that emerged from that conference where 600 of Saskatchewan’s brightest farmers 
as appointed by their farm groups, the cream of the crop you might say, in agriculture . . . One of the 
themes that seemed to emerge from their discussions and their comments in the papers presented there 
was that we must have in place a program of expanded research and development coupled with 
extension. 
 
They recognized very much the role that research has played in reducing some of their input costs and 
they appreciate just what the economic benefit can be for them, and I think, Mr. Speaker, that is why 
they whole-heartedly support government spending the taxpayers’ dollars in research endeavours. And 
the bottom line at that meeting, at least one of the bottom lines seemed to me, was that government 
should be involved in funding more and more research, not less and less, and that his was not a time for 
cutbacks but rather a time for increases. 
 
And it was not a time for headlines, Mr. Speaker, which in fact announced what has become the basis 
for the motion that I am proposing today. It is not a time for headlines such as those, and I’ll review a 
few of them with you, Mr. Speaker, and I think of ones dated back to the 12th month of 1982, 22nd of 
December in the Star-Phoenix, and the headline read, ‘Agriculture Research in the West to Lose Staff as 
Jobs Move East.’ This is not the kind of headline we want announcing cut-backs in agricultural research, 
cut-backs in staff, Mr. Speaker. And the article went on to point out that federal agricultural research 
stations in western Canada have been told to substantially cut staff levels while jobs are transferred to 
Quebec, a federal official said Tuesday. 
 
That is not the kind of thing our farmers in Saskatchewan wanted to hear, Mr. Speaker. The article 
further went on to say that the western region would lose 26 positions, Quebec would gain 33, and went 
on to say that the job transfers reflect a shift in priorities as more research is concentrated in food 
processing and retailing in Quebec. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, we had a case of what appears to be the federal government speaking out 
of both sides of their mouths. As I understand it, it was the same federal government that’s making this 
cut-back and making the shift who was out here telling us that yes, you in western Canada, you farmers 
in western Canada, as a province in western Canada interested in economic development you should be 
prepared to look at changes to the Crow because it will, in fact, promote increases in processing of some 
of our basic commodities. And yet on the other hand what are they doing? They’re cutting back staff and 
shipping them to Quebec and to central Canada, because they say that is where the emphasis and 
concentration on food processing is going to be. Another case of double-talk from the mouths of our 
federal Liberal government. 
 
It was headlines like this one here in December once again, I think Star-Phoenix as well,  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1444 

where the federal government was attempting to justify the shift in positions to Quebec, and that 
headline went on to say, ‘Agricultural Spokesman Justifies Shift to Quebec.’ And then a further article: 
‘Whelan Defends Cuts to Research Staff.’ These are all very scary news for our farmers who looks to 
research to decrease their input costs, rather than a government down there who seems bent on 
increasing farmers’ input costs. 
 
An editorial, Mr. Speaker, also referred to the same kind of thing. ‘Agricultural Research Threatened’ 
was the headline on the editorial. I think it bears repeating, a few of the comments made in that editorial, 
and I quote, ‘A potential shortage of agricultural research represents a serious long-term threat to the 
health of Saskatchewan’s economy.’ 
 
By making this cut-back, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that the federal government seems to be 
pursuing an economic policy of trying to come up with some dollars, cutting back on budgets, and yet 
we all know for their short-term gain, they will inflict some very long-term pain on the Canadian 
economy. This same editorial went on to say that the detrimental effect of the ability of Canadian 
farmers to improve productivity and remain competitive hinges on research, and as well pointed out the 
extensive lead time required for the benefits of the costs that research accrues to show themselves at the 
farm gate. 
 
And another headline that’s scared . . . I think the number of headlines on this particular topic, Mr. 
Speaker, only go to show how important an issue this was out here – how very much this issue was on 
the minds, obviously, of the farmers, and as well, that was noted by the press in the fact that there were 
many, many stories carried in the various newspapers and news media and in the farm papers as it 
related to this vicious attack on agricultural research positions in western Canada. And this headline 
went, and it was one in the Leader-Post, ‘Whelan Defends Transfer of Jobs.’ And it went on to say that, 
and this is particularly interesting, Mr. Speaker, ‘Whelan wants Canadian farm production to expand by 
two-thirds by the end of the century.’ And yet it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, if you’re going to have that 
kind of expansion in agricultural output, that one of the things that must come before it is research and 
development, and technology development. 
 
Once again, he seems to be going in two directions at the same time. How can you be expecting us to 
increase our output by two-thirds and yet take away all the tools so vital to increasing that output? 
 
As well, he went onto say that his blueprint for the next two decades included a soil and water research 
centre to study the increasingly serious problem of soil salinity, which now reduces production on about 
10 per cent of prairie farmland, but the federal government hasn’t announced details for such a facility 
yet. That seems to be so often the case; we’re always waiting for details of facilities. And I say, Mr. 
Speaker, enough of delay, enough of vacillation, enough of cuts, enough of waiting for details of 
important capital construction projects like a soil and water research centre. I say the federal government 
should be getting on with it. The budgets may be tight but I think everyone would agree that research, 
and especially as it relates to soil and water, should receive increasing attention. 
 
And just one final one. This is a very recent one, Mr. Speaker, in the Leader-Post, April 16th, ’83 
headlined: ‘Money Drying Up For Grain Research.’ And this one here referred particularly to the 
Brandon research station, and the Brandon research station is one that has been very much in the 
forefront as it relates to plant breeding and strains in  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1445 

barley crops. And I think one of the doctors there went on to say that it was in fact a danger that the 
demand of the industry will exceed the knowledge of barley breeders. 
 
So I think you can see, Mr. Speaker, the basis for my motion is the fact that we do have a very serious 
situation here. It is one that has not gone unnoticed by Saskatchewan farmers, and in fact Saskatchewan 
farmers are very, very much behind spending taxpayers’ dollars for research because they know the 
whole country benefits from increased agricultural production. 
 
To point out the benefits as it relates to the cost and benefit that the whole country accrues from 
agricultural research, I think it’s worthy to note a few statistics that have been generated by some of the 
various agencies across this country and in fact throughout the world. And in fact a Canadian 
agricultural science council recent report, I think a 1980 report, suggested that for every $1 spent on 
research there’s a $225 return on that investment – fairly impressive figures. And why research funds 
and the expropriation of funds to research is important, because in agriculture, Mr. Speaker, as everyone 
in this House knows, we have the most productive group of people in the world, I think, and at least in 
Canada here we have a situation where 4 per cent of the people in fact feed 96 per cent of the other folks 
in this country, and a good many in the world, I might add. So it’s in the best interests of the whole 
country to spend that $1 when it’s returning $225 in terms of economic benefit. And when you think of 
the fact that very few, very few people are shouldering the total responsibility for feeding the whole 
country, and in fact a good part of the world, especially as it relates to our livestock production and our 
grain production, so vital in the milling of high-quality red wheats. 
 
One research project alone – the development of a wheat strain resistant to stem rust, which is 
particularly important in the eastern side of Saskatchewan and in fact in Manitoba – that project alone, 
Mr. Speaker, has been estimated that for every dollar expended on the development of that rust-resistant 
strain, for every dollar spent on research developing it, it has returned $482 to the pockets of Canadian 
farmers and in fact Canadian consumers. Between 1973 and ’77 losses would have been in the order of 
217 millions of dollars per year, and when you put that in light of the current debate as it relates to the 
Pepin plan, when these big figures have been bandied around, $217 million is a very significant figure. 
What a salvation to prairie farmers the development of that strain has been, and what good return the 
government has had on dollars invested in research. 
 
Another example, Mr. Speaker, in the broiler chicken business. The nutrition research as it relates to 
broiler chicken raising where, as many of you are aware I’m sure, in the broiler industry they have very 
much fine-tuned that breed, and along with genetics and nutrition are producing a pound of protein for 
very, very minimal input in terms of grains, which is very important because we are competing with the 
foodstuff that will in fact feed people, as well. And in the nutrition research behind the development of 
those very efficient broiler operations, it’s been estimated that the returns per dollar of money expended 
on research there, the industry got a return of $260. 
 
And so I think you can see, Mr. Speaker, that if we are to expand our farm production by two-thirds by 
the year 2000, we need to put these kinds of technologies on the front burner because they decrease 
costs and increase production. And if you look at Saskatchewan specifically, and the potential that this 
province has within its borders over the next two decades, we’re in fact . . . With a little bit of help, we 
could see grain  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1446 

production increasing by 50 per cent, not even in fact in the next two decades, but probably even in the 
next decade. As well, we could see hog production increase by 50 per cent, and the potential for cattle 
will raise 20 per cent or more. 
 
We do not want to be counter-productive such as we’ve seen in this federal government move that in 
fact stifles technology. We want to enhance production. And I would suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that 
research is one of the keys, in fact it’s one of the basic building blocks to improve technology behind the 
farm gate. And so I would suggest that rather than making cut-backs, the federal government should be 
looking at increasing expenditures in this area. They should be looking at building bridges to production, 
not putting up walls. 
 
I spoke rather vaguely, and perhaps in rather general terms, Mr. Speaker, about some of the federal 
government’s shortfalls in this area, in that they are cutting back staff, and in fact cutting back funding at 
those positions. But I will be very specific. I am prepared to be very specific because I don’t believe in 
just general and vague criticisms. So I would offer, and I would hope that the federal government would 
take note, I would offer some areas that I think need attention. 
 
I would suggest to the federal government that much of their equipment and the buildings housing that 
equipment are deteriorated or deteriorating. I would suggest to them that at places like the Saskatoon 
Research Station, which in fact has had to shut down its greenhouses and other plant growth facilities 
simply because of a lack of funds as it relates to just maintaining the mechanical services there – that is 
an area in straight black and white that’s suffered strictly from a lack of funds. 
 
The travel of many professional people and technical people to scientific meetings where the valuable 
interchange of information takes place to see what others are doing, and to in fact, gain, in some cases, 
hands-on experience of field trips to examine their work – travel expenditures to these scientific 
meetings have been in many areas suffering from severe cut-backs as well. Although travel seems 
sometimes frivolous, I would suggest, where we’re trying to get the biggest bang out of our dollars in 
these recessionary times, it’s very important to the left hand to know what the right hand is doing. So I 
think it’s very important to not only now what farmers want in terms of research, but what universities 
are doing here and across Canada, what research stations are doing here and across Canada in other 
provinces, and as well, internationally, Mr. Speaker. So I think the need for communication is as 
important as it ever was. Undoubtedly, travel costs are escalating as well, but I think we cannot cut off 
our head to treat a case of dandruff in this matter. 
 
Another area that I would suggest to the federal government that they are lacking in (and it’s basically 
the heart of the matter in the recent announcement of staffing cut-backs) is that professional and support 
staff levels have been dropped or cut back, and in some cases shifted to Quebec. And in addition to the 
cut-back in staff we see as well an underusage of professional staff in that, because there is not the 
support staff and the technical staff there to aid the researcher, professional themselves are having to do 
some of the technical work. So we have two areas here of concern: it’s not just the cut-back, but in fact, 
the underusage of the professional staff. 
 
So the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, and this is what I would urge the federal government to pay heed to, is 
that currently they’re spending about 0.9 per cent of Canada’s gross national product on agricultural 
research. And I would suggest, as the Canadian Agricultural Research Council, that they move that 
figure closer to 1.5 per cent. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1447 

Especially as it relates to the arguments that we’ve heard over the last few weeks about expanded 
livestock development, food processing, commodity processing in western Canada, now is the time to 
definitely put that kind of research on the front burner, and to move that spending from a dismal figure 
of 0.9 per cent, Canada’s GNP, up in the neighbourhood of 1.5 per cent. And I’m not so naïve, Mr. 
Speaker, as to expect that they’re going to do this overnight. I accept the fact that they are in rough fiscal 
shape down in Ottawa, and maybe they’re in rough physical shape as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I’m 
not so naïve as to suspect that they can do that overnight. But I think they’ve got to start and put a 
framework in place so that perhaps over the next five years we can see them move to that kind of figure, 
and in fact see that the research development at least lead in some of the R&D so necessary to precede 
western economic development. 
 
The provincial government, Mr. Speaker . . . It’s not a case of the kettle calling the pot black here. I’m 
very proud of the role that the provincial government plays in agricultural research. It can never be too 
much, but I think they’re to be commended for the various roles they do play in agricultural research, 
and I would just like to go over a few of them because for sure in this province where agriculture is the 
backbone of our economy obviously we do want to give research its full due. 
 
I think of products like plant-breeding research, insect-control research, food-processing research, 
which, as I said before, positions were being moved to Quebec because the thrust on food processing 
was going to take place in that province. And yet, it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that we have an excellent 
facility in Saskatchewan here that was put in place in 1977, and that’s the POS Pilot Plant Corporation. 
 
POS stands for protein, oil and starch, and was set up at that time to carry out research in food 
processing, technology, especially processing as it relates to proteins, oil and starches – hence the name 
POS – into ingredients for food, feed and industrial applications. And, of course, I think everybody here 
knows that food-processing research is especially relevant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the context of the 
recent debate that’s been raging across this country over the last few months as it relates to the Pepin 
plan, and in fact seeing that western economic development as it relates to these areas does in fact occur. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that it’s a bit of a incongruous situation to have positions – research 
positions, federal government research positions – being cut and being shifted to Quebec where they tell 
us that there’s going to be an increase in food processing, when in fact we have an excellent facility out 
here. In fact, there are figures to show that for every dollar invested in POS by 1986 will have returned 
$43 in benefits to the Canadian industry – an excellent reason for them to in fact expand funding, not cut 
it back. 
 
Just to review a little bit more, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about some of the areas that are important to 
Saskatchewan farmers, I mentioned briefly plant breeding research, new varieties of cereal and oilseed 
crops, of course, and I made mention of the stem wheat resistant varieties that have in fact saved farmers 
out there $217 million a year. 
 
Another big plus for western Canadian farmers and especially Saskatchewan farmers was the 
development of the oilseed varieties safe for vegetable oils. This made the canola industry the miracle 
crop of the ‘70s, virtually, and I think you can see that in fact  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1448 

if you look back in history. During the mid-50s we had about 58,000-odd acres in crop to canola, and by 
1978 we had gone from 58,000-odd hectares, rather, to something like 2.8 million hectares, simply 
because the industry researchers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, developed an oilseed variety safe for vegetable 
oil. 
 
So that’s the kind of impact that research can have, and led to headlines, Mr. Deputy Speaker – not 
headlines talking about agriculture research threatened or agriculture spokesmen justifying shifts to 
Quebec, but headlines that said, Mr. Speaker – and this was in a recent paper and I don’t have it with me 
here to give you the exact date – but a headline that said: ‘Research Makes Canola a Miracle Industry.’ 
Simply because of one research project . . . I shouldn’t say one; that’s probably oversimplifying it. By 
the application of research to a particular problem, we took production and went from 58,000-odd 
hectares to something in the order of 20 or 30 times that kind of acreage and obviously the production 
was there to match it, and obviously the dollars, as a result of that crop, were important to Saskatchewan 
and Saskatchewan’s economy and the Canadian economy as well. 
 
In fact, even in this last few months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve heard calls from the federal 
government for increased acreages to canola. There are markets out there waiting for our high-quality 
canola and it’s the challenge of Saskatchewan agriculture to fill those markets, and the farmers have 
never let the world down yet when it comes to feeding the hungry. We’ve had distribution problems, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I would acknowledge that, but I can only congratulate Saskatchewan farmers for their 
role in feeding a hungry world. 
 
Other research, Mr. Speaker, that’s particularly important to Saskatchewan farmers includes, of course, 
developing environmentally safe pesticides and chemicals and fertilizers – those sorts of things, and not 
just the chemical agents that one can use for insect control or disease control, but as well have been 
instrumental in pursuing biological control using one insect to feed on another and that sort of an 
approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’ve already referred to the fact hat we do have a facility here in Saskatchewan that can do processing, 
research on food processing. And so I have a great deal of difficulty with positions being cut – federal 
research positions being cut here and shifted to Quebec, when in fact we have a facility right here. 
 
I also know that farmers out there, and having had conversations with them, are very interested, very 
interested in seeing research go on and continue and be expanded in developing technologies that relate 
to seeding and harvesting, and especially as it relates to seeding and harvesting in the dryland areas. And 
of course I’m particularly encouraged to see some of the PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 
Institute) facilities keying on dryland farming technology, such as is the case in Humboldt. Over and 
above all the other areas that they have expertise in, they do have some specific expertise in that area. 
 
I, of course, would be remiss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I did not mention some of the very vital research 
that has gone on as it relates to livestock production and disease control. I think of, once again, the 
university, the agricultural college, the veterinary college there, and as well, the Veterinary Infectious 
Diseases Organization, all working together, all polling their knowledge and facilities and the 
professional minds there, and of course, as members may or may not know – at least those in the 
livestock industry, the beef cattle industry will know, and as well the swine industry will know –  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1449 

some research that went on there that is a forerunner internationally. This was in the development of a 
vaccine for the prevention of neo-natal diarrhoea in baby pigs and in calves, which every year in 
Saskatchewan because of our harsh winters and our very often wet, cold, and snowy springs, has caused 
losses ranging in some instances to 50 per cent in beef cattle operations. Fifty per cent of their calves die 
before a week or two weeks of age. And at a hundred-cow herd, and you figure a calf in the fall is worth, 
hopefully, $500, you can see how quickly those dollar losses can add up in farmers pockets. There’s 
been several estimates on the numbers of, hundreds of millions of dollars that have been lost across 
western Canada as a result of that one disease, never mind the same sort of condition in swine industry. 
 
Of course, members will know that because of this research that took place at the Veterinary Infectious 
Diseases Organization, a vaccine was developed that, in fact, became very popular, not only in 
Saskatchewan and in Alberta and in Manitoba, but across Canada, and eventually as licensed and 
distributed in North America, and now I understand, as well, is in the process of clearing hurdles and in 
some cases, has cleared hurdles, for distribution to other countries in the world. 
 
So another example of Saskatchewan Agriculture funding research that benefits not only Saskatchewan, 
but Canada, and in fact all of the world. And I would tip my hat to the people at that organization, along 
with every other organization in Saskatchewan research who do such an excellent job given the 
constraints they do work under. 
 
And as well I would have to say that so many of these organizations, such as VIDO (Veterinary 
Infectious Diseases Organization) do contemporary research. They look at the problems facing 
Saskatchewan farmers today, and one of the reasons that they’re very close to what’s on farmers’ minds 
and acknowledging research that farmers want done is because of the make-up of their boards. It’s not 
made up of bureaucrats, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you like, but in fact of farmers and ranchers and swine 
breeders and swine producers and feedlot operators and those kind of people who know what kinds of 
problems they’re dealing with and where some research might come up with some solutions for them. 
 
The soil research that has gone on at Saskatoon as well and work at the crop development centre has 
made those institutions, as well, world-renown. And I think it was the president of the university who 
coined the phrase that they have understood that we must farm the soil, rather than mine it. And that is 
this kind of thrust that the research is taking up there as they look at new strains, the salinity problem, 
and so many other of those areas involved in conserving our soil. 
 
It’s a matter of investing in our future, Mr. Speaker, with research funds because of the long lead-term 
time, and it may not necessarily benefit you or myself, as farmers today, but it’s for our children and 
maybe even, in some cases, their children. 
 
Just to specifically point out where in fact we have the federal government going backward with 
research funding, I’ve mentioned some of the facilities that we in fact within the Saskatchewan 
government do support. I would like to just expand on them a little bit and, as I point out, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, where the federal government appears to be pulling back on research, we are in fact doing our 
best to increase the emphasis on agricultural research and research funding. And I would just briefly go 
over a few of the areas, as I’ve already touched on a couple. But I think it worthy to note many of the 
fine institutions and facilities that we do support in Saskatchewan. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1450 

I think of things like the soil testing laboratory. I don’t think there is a farmer in this legislature who 
doesn’t appreciate the work done by that lab in Saskatoon. And in fact I was very happy to see them 
receive an additional $400,000 to expand their facilities, to provide the kind of service that 
Saskatchewan farmers want out there in getting soil analysis – only getting soil analysis and getting 
quality results, they’re getting them quick so they can increase their turn-around times. So when the 
samples are taken and the farmer’s waiting and looking at putting on nitrogen or phosphorous or sulfur, 
they’re giving him reliable results and they’re giving it to him quickly. And I know every farmer – every 
farmer who tills the soil out there – is very, very appreciative of that $400,000 that the Saskatchewan 
government is spending. 
 
I think, as well, of the commitment to FarmLab. The total sums advanced there – at least budgeted there 
– for the ‘82-83 year were in the neighbourhood of $3.72 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think 
many of the projects – the research projects – that FarmLab undertakes are once again projects initiated 
at the grass roots level with the FarmStart committees. And now as part of the regional agricultural 
extension boards at their meetings, the meetings of farmers, what’s on their minds, what’s the specific 
problems that we are dealing with in our area, whether it be in the grasslands area or in the 
grain-producing area, or in the areas closer to the parkland. 
 
Every region has more specific problems. Obviously some of them are quite general. But it gives them a 
change to have that kind of direct contact with research formulation, research that deals with problems 
that the farmer today considers current and road-blocks to increased production or in fact one that’s 
adding to increased cost. And so we get this kind of direct input, just like we had at the Agriculture 
Opportunities Conference, direct input on how his taxpayer’s and all the taxpayers’ dollars of this 
province should be spent on research. And in addition to the local demonstration projects of course, a 
good part of FarmLab’s funds are spent through the University of Saskatchewan as well where more 
sophisticated facilities in some cases are required. 
 
But I’m particularly encouraged in places like VIDO (Veterinary Infectious Diseases Organization), and 
as well in the FarmLab project, and as well, with the Saskatchewan agricultural research fund board. But 
those boards are made up of farmers, farmers who know and understand livestock and the soil, and 
know what kinds of research can benefit them most. It’s a matter of listening to the people and 
responding to their needs. 
 
As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I made reference earlier to the Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute, of 
course with the three stations in western Canada – one at Humboldt, Portage la Prairie, and as well at 
Lethbridge. We contribute about 45 per cent to their operating costs here from Saskatchewan 
Agriculture. And last year that amounted to $1.181 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think once again, out there, every farmer highly respects the machinery institute. They have a very 
healthy respect for what they’ve put out for their publications. They’ve almost become the Bible as it 
relates to purchasing equipment, to see what PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) has 
reported on them. I know as well that PAMI is continuing to have a thrust as it relates to R&D, but as 
well, looking at more extension and specific applications of technology and developing specific areas of 
expertise at their various stations. 
 
And as I mentioned earlier, Humboldt, in addition to its broad-based expertise, is keying somewhat on 
dry-land farming equipment and as well, sprayers, very much a scene  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1451 

today on grain farms – sprayers – very important to have accuracy and safety, because a lot of the 
chemicals that farmers are using today are very expensive. The kind of sophistication that a farmer 
needs in applying these chemicals has to be preceded by some good R&D work because, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if you can save 10 per cent of a farmer’s costs, as it relates to getting that chemicals on evenly 
and safely, safe not only to himself but to his crops and to the environment, that puts big dollars in his 
pockets when you look at the cost of some of those five-gallon or 20-litre cans (whatever they are now) 
on the farm. 
 
And as well, I know, areas like the Lethbridge Station once again has brought expertise in research, but 
keying somewhat on irrigation. One of the areas that Saskatchewan Agriculture is particularly proud of, 
as it relates to its funding initiatives, is in the development of the toxicology centre, and this was a new 
initiative announced last fall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the Open for Business Conference. It’s a new 
initiative. It’s one that recognizes the times we live in, as it relates to chemicals, their potential 
usefulness and their potential harm. 
 
And I’m particularly proud that Saskatchewan Agriculture is involved in funding the toxicology centre, 
along with other departments of government – a real benefit for all of Canada and, once again, all of the 
world. Because I know some of the researchers that have been involved in toxicology up at the 
university, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and in fact in some areas we have some of the leading researchers in 
toxicology in this province. We have world-class people. 
 
Not to dwell at any great length, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but just to briefly go over a few more areas that 
we provide funding to in Saskatchewan: special crop demonstration programs; research on black fly 
control, which is very important along the North Saskatchewan River and one that’s a pesty problem, so 
to speak, every summer. And, of course, there’s a couple of biggies – a couple of funds that put out a 
good deal of money for various projects. I think of the market development fund and in fact the 
Saskatchewan agricultural research fund and, as I mentioned just a few moments ago, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the agricultural research fund board, made up once again primarily of farmers and very much 
in touch with what’s going on, what’s needed, and very happy to see that kind of grass-roots input. 
 
One has only to look at some of the programs that the funds have supported to see that they do have a 
feel for all areas of agriculture, all areas of processing of agricultural commodities, and they don’t just 
strictly limit themselves to some of the ones that are very much in the news these days, such as soil 
conservation, soil fertility, salinity, water management, soil inventory and mapping, acid soils, but as 
well get into bio-insecticides, lentils, varietal strains, triazine research on triazine-resistant rapeseed. 
 
As well, research on reproduction as it relates to beef cattle. I think specifically of studies on 
spermatozoa, a study of the effect of beta-carotene on reproduction in cattle. There’s projects involving 
sheep, embryo transfers, selenium status. 
 
And so I think you can see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that while the federal government is making cut-backs 
in agriculture, we are increasing these thrusts and the emphasis on research in Saskatchewan. I know for 
a fact that it can never be enough, but there have been increases, and in some cases very healthy 
increases, considering the recessionary times we live in. It’s not just enough to have the provincial and 
the federal governments involved in research and to have increases in research capability. As well, it’s 
important for governments to co-operate and work with other sectors in society that  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1452 

in fact are important in research, as well. I think here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of governments working 
with agribusiness and industry, and in fact international governments when it comes to research. 
 
And I can only congratulate this government and the Minister of Agriculture in fact for the leafy spurge 
control conference held here in Saskatchewan, here in Regina, last February of this year . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Leafy spurge – an important disease problem, an important plant weed problem in 
Saskatchewan. In fact for the member of Quill Lakes and the member from Shaunavon, where in fact it 
is a fairly significant problem, for their information, there’s about 10,000 acres severely infested with 
leafy spurge and it does occur mostly in pastures. And of course, one of the reasons for international 
liaison on some of these problems that affect not just Canada and not just Saskatchewan, but for 
international liaison, is because this is a problem of the central U.S. and the north-west states. 
 
In part, with the communication theme, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where it’s important for everyone to know 
what everyone else is doing, I was particularly heartened by the fact that the Minister of Agriculture 
would take the initiative, and in fact invite people from . . . And just to read you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a 
few of the people that were at this leafy spurge control conference: we had people from Saskatchewan 
Agriculture, of course; Alberta Environmental Centre; Alberta Agriculture. The commissioner of the 
North Dakota Agriculture Department was here. People from the North Dakota Agricultural 
Experimental Station, and Mr. Orlin Hanson, in fact who I introduced to this legislature the day he was 
in town for this conference, a North Dakota state legislator was here. As well, people from Agriculture 
Canada. And as well, the North Dakota Stockmens’ Association. 
 
And of course, in North Dakota and Montana it infests not ten thousands of acres, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but in fact hundreds of thousands of acres. And so here we had a gathering of some of the best minds in 
dealing with this problem, and rather than one province or one research institution go off unilaterally in 
a tangent and do work perhaps that had already been done by another research institution, we go the best 
minds together and in fact worked at an international level on a common problem. And that’s very 
important when you want to get the biggest bang that you can out of your research buck today, because 
the important thing is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to research, is you don’t want errors, and you 
don’t want omissions, and we certainly cannot afford costly duplications. And so I commend the 
Minister of Agriculture and the Government of Saskatchewan and the Premier for the kinds of good 
relations they have with these U.S. neighbours to the south, so that we can initiate joint conferences like 
this on problems which we have which are of mutual concern. So this kind of initiative and the 
Agricultural Opportunities Conference, and having boards comprised of farmers and ranchers and 
people in agribusiness, we are getting the kind of research emphasis, or emphasis on research in the 
areas we do need and do expect, and the farmers do expect it to. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to reiterate once again that it’s not a time for cut-backs in 
agricultural research. It’s a time for increasing research positions and research funding for equipment 
and for facilities all across Canada. It just is another example of a divisive policy to take positions from 
Saskatchewan and from western Canada and ship them to Quebec. We’ve already got one proposal 
presumably about to come before the House of parliament in Ottawa that is divisive, as well as the fact it 
will be devastating and do violence to Saskatchewan’s agricultural economy. We don’t need another one 
like this. It’s just throwing salt into the wound, and I would urge the  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1453 

federal government to get on with the job of augmenting farm production out there. We have 
world-class researchers working in conjunction with world-class farmers. Just give them some 
resources. 
 
And with that, then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move: 
 

That this Assembly urges the federal government to keep the Department of Agriculture’s 
complement of research staff at full or increased strength in western Canada. 
 

It is not a time for another assault on western Canada. We cannot tolerate these repeated attacks by the 
federal government on western Canada. I would so move that motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, seconded by 
the hon. member for Humboldt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Domotor: — Mr. Speaker, I would certainly commend the member from Weyburn on the 
resolution calling for the federal government to keep the Department of Agriculture’s complement of 
research staff at full or increased strength in western Canada, and am happy to second that motion. 
 
Let us take a look at what the provinces have done, as the member from Weyburn has mentioned that 
there have been soil testing laboratory areas where we’ve spent money, the FarmLab area, the Prairie 
Agricultural Machinery Institute. And I’d like to dwell on that for a moment since it’s in my town of 
Humboldt. 
 
The Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute is funded by three provinces, and that is Saskatchewan, 
Alberta and Manitoba. The majority of the funding comes from the province of Saskatchewan. And the 
breakdown for the 1982 grants totalled somewhere in the neighbourhood of $1,073,473 in 1982. In 
Alberta it was . . . their contribution was 834,924 and in Manitoba approximately $477,099. The 
locations in Alberta were at Lethbridge and in Manitoba was at Portage la Prairie. The centre is located 
in Humboldt. The testing areas between Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba gives the farmers a 
chance to take a look at the different kind of equipment that they do test. When they go out to make a 
purchase, they don’t have to go out there blind. They can take a reading. They send out the PAMI 
(Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute) reports, and I think everyone probably in the farming area, 
anyway, is familiar with the PAMI reports, and are able to look at these and assess the different 
productivity of the machine, the strength, the durability, and how well it performs on field tests. 
 
It’s important that we have this kind of research available for the farmers of Saskatchewan, because this 
gives them an opportunity to have something close by where they can run down or phone up the 
institute, and say, ‘Well, I’m thinking of buying this particular machine. How does it test out? What is 
its efficiency?’ And they have it all broken down. In the PAMI report, 1981-82 report, it shows all the 
different kind of machinery that they do the testing on, and it’s quite explicit. 
 
Not only do they test the farm agricultural machinery, but they also do some testing for the 
manufacturers. It gives an opportunity for them to do it on a cost basis. The small manufacturing plants 
that are located in the Prairies haven’t got the facilities or the money to do all the extra research and 
testing their equipment. They can contract it out to PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery Institute). The 
research staff there are willing to  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1454 

take these on, and are able to go ahead and bring them to their site. They do take them out on field tests. 
They have the trucks and the capable staff to monitor the machine, and they drive alongside it, whether 
it’s combining or swathing or whether it’s with respect to tillage, or whether it’s with respect to 
how-drills, or whatever they are able to go ahead and make a good test on it. 
 
The other testing that they have done is, of course, with respect to sprayers, as the member from 
Weyburn mentioned, and he knows that on certain areas they’ve done testing in England, with respect to 
not only fan-shaped nozzles but the circular type. And it’s good to see that we have a certain amount of 
money that’s been spent in that area. Not only has the PAMI reports done some testing, but I notice that 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has some testing and evaluation of the spinning-disc and low-pressure 
nozzles. 
 
Other areas that we’ve done testing or research, and money’s been applied to it, is in soil conservation, 
as soil fertility and salinity is mentioned previously. Water management, soil management – a lot of 
money has been put into this area, and it’s indeed good since we have our basic commodity in 
Saskatchewan. A lot of our income is from the farming community. 
 
The advantages of maintaining research staff in western Canada, and increasing the staff, can only 
benefit not just western Canada, but also all of Canada. The importance that the federal government can 
gain from this research is a better agricultural base. For example, research branch programs are designed 
to determine optimum conditions of soil and climate for production of specific crops and animals, 
develop new and improved varieties of plants and animals, reduce losses caused by disease, insects and 
weeds, improve management techniques for crop and animal husbandry through biological and 
engineering studies, and develop new and improved technology for processing, preservation, and 
utilization of food. 
 
The funding of research to industries and universities is vital, in that out of this research the agriculture 
community can utilize new ideas, improve their productive capacity and generate increased income. And 
you know generating increased income means more taxes or more income tax. This is all generated back 
to the federal treasury, and back into the communities, and the communities can then spend it in their 
respective areas. 
 
For example, an Agriculture Canada report in research areas such as Swift Current: the use of 
60-centimetre and 90-centimetre spacing between rows in seeding forage crops resulted in yields that 
were greater by 35 per cent and 144 per cent respectively than those obtained with rows 30 centimetres 
apart. Now that is a significant contribution. And if the research funding is taken away by the federal 
government it means we’ll have a reduction in this kind of research and a reduction in efficiency that the 
farmer or the rancher can utilize. 
 
Research extends to a large area, Mr. Speaker. Let’s take an example in Alberta, for instance. Irrigation, 
salinity studies in southern Alberta were continued and have been extended to solonetzic soils. Field and 
laboratory research programs on solonetzic soils has proven the feasibility of reclamation o f these soils, 
and appropriate recommendations have been made jointly with the Alberta government. Now estimated 
benefits in reclaiming some of these salt areas or salt soils have been in the order of $50 per hectare. I 
suggest that is a considerable amount, but research in this area has to continue. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1455 

Research has provided many areas such as crop production, commodity analysis, food-market analysis 
in food quality and processing technology. Increased research staff could give us, for example, 
alternative sources of energy, thus insulating us from the uncertainty of oil supply from the Arab 
countries, and from the inevitable decline of fossil fuels. This type of research takes money, and the 
federal government should be willing to place money in the area, for the eventual benefit would go to all 
Canadians, not just a few. 
 
Any research in this area will benefit not only western Canada but the East also. If we take for example 
where research has been done in Nova Scotia with respect to windmills. They have developed a certain 
kind that is quite efficient. We can utilize some of these perhaps out in the Prairies. We can reduce the 
amount of dependence in fuel, of the fossil fuels. Maybe we can go more to natural gas at the present 
time. But then there’s also alcohol production that we could be looking at. We look, for example, during 
the world war, Germany or Sweden ran a lot of their engines on alcohol. We can utilize a little more 
research in this area. We can use the grains we produce. For example, research done in that, you still 
have the food value that people can still eat from the by-products, and we can use the other part for 
running engines. These are all cost benefits that can not only save us in the long term but also in the 
short term. When benefits can accrue to all society, we cannot emphasize enough to the federal 
government to increase research funding. 
 
Not only are the benefits to crop production or new varieties or better processing, but the benefits can go 
on to market development. If there’s any increased markets, the benefits will translate into more income 
to the provinces and to the federal government who, in turn, can continue funding research development. 
Market development, for example, with respect to agricultural research: when you develop new varieties 
in canola and greater production in canola, we’re able to sell a certain amount to Japan or to China or to 
the Asiatic countries – this means that it returns income to the farmer. Not only that, it adds to the 
balance of payments that the federal government gets through this type of activity, and this all reflects 
back into research. 
 
Market development is important. Without market development we have no place to export our 
products, and therefore we need that research in that area. We can process a lot of the final end products 
of the crops that we produce here and maybe sell the end product, and the final analysis is that it will 
create more jobs back at home and give us more return per dollar in our economic return. Without 
research we would not today be growing crops in the Peace River area either. By dedication and hard 
work of researchers new varieties were developed that would be more tolerant to drought and new 
varieties were developed with shorter growing seasons. These are a few examples, Mr. Speaker, that 
have helped over the years. 
 
If the federal government reduces staff in western Canada, it is only again showing that central Canada 
feels that the West is not significant. Again, we see them pulling out of western Canada and putting the 
jobs or the research into eastern Canada and forgetting about the West. The resources that the West has 
are important and are well worth the expense by the federal government. This is a large country, Mr. 
Speaker, and if we are to deep our country as one united entity then the federal government must 
recognize that money spent in the West is to their advantage. 
 
Let’s take a look at Agriculture Canada, the research stations in western Canada, and I just happen to 
have a list here from Agriculture Canada. Research stations are located  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1456 

in Brandon, Manitoba – I’ll just read a few of them out – Portage la Prairie, Winnipeg. In Saskatchewan 
we have them located in Melfort, Regina, Indian Head – and everyone knows the tree nursery there; we 
have Saskatoon university, and Swift Current, Saskatchewan. In Alberta we have some at Fort 
Vermilion, Vegreville, and Lethbridge. 
 
These are research stations that are in the West, and I maintain they should be kept there because of the 
benefits that accrue to the area. You can’t go ahead and start conducting a bunch of research with 
respect to crop varieties or tillage – how it’s going to work – in soils that are in Ontario. You have to 
adapt them to the conditions and the climatic conditions where you’re going to be growing them, and 
that’s the only way. And the only way you can do that is by decentralization and having research in 
various parts of the country, various parts of the provinces. And therefore it’s very significant and 
important that this is done. 
 
The other part – the objectives and goals of research. What are the objectives? Well, some of the 
objectives they outlined in the brochure, ‘Agriculture Canada Research,’ and it says, ‘Land, for example, 
soil management and conservation: some of the objectives there – they were going to try and go ahead 
and solve some soil problems. Soil problems – it can vary from improvement with respect to how you 
utilize it, soil drifting, utilization with respect to soil moisture conditions, how you can get the best 
return out of your dollar for it. This is research, Mr. Speaker, and these are some of the objectives that 
the research development was supposed to look at. 
 
What about water and irrigation? These are part . . . Irrigation in Saskatchewan or Alberta or Manitoba 
is not just related advantage to them, but it can spread throughout the country. It can be advantages to 
Ontario, or B.C., so, therefore, we have to have them related to the specific areas that they are being 
utilized. 
 
What about some of the other research stations? We saw what happened to the weather station in 
Regina. We need the meteorological and climatic indices as to determine what the climatic conditions 
are going to be. When we’re seeding a crop, we want to know more or less what are the possibilities of 
moisture for that year. Or when you’re going out there and combining, you want to know what’s the 
weather going to be like for the next week or two. And if you have more research into the 
meteorological areas so they can determine a couple of days in advance whether you’re going to get rain 
or not, you can put the pressure on a little more and get your crop off in dry conditions. 
 
So these are some of the areas that we have to have more research in, and by reducing the staff, or taking 
them out, we lose. Not only do we lose, Mr. Speaker, but the whole country loses because it means 
there’s a reduction in the production capacity in the West – in the agricultural area. 
 
What about energy? I mentioned before about energy. I mentioned that with energy we can have 
independence from relying on foreign oil supplies. We see what happened to the oil supplies. They went 
zooming up; caused us great inflation. Then they got up to a high point, then all of a sudden because of 
conflict between Iraq and Iran, and because of need for moneys, Saudi Arabia not agreeing with the 
West, we see oil cartel falling apart and we see the oil prices dropping. When we see this happen, we 
don’t know whether they’re going to keep going down, or whether they’re going to keep a certain price 
per barrel. A few years later, all of a sudden it can turn around and the price may go sky-rocketing again. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1457 

And we should be looking at the possibility of having alternative sources of energy, and the only way 
you’re going to get this, Mr. Speaker, is by having research staff, developing new areas where we may 
be looking at, and that is as I mentioned before: alcohol plants, or whatever. Or solar energy, or biomass 
energy. All of these need research, Mr. Speaker, and the only way we’re going to do that is to have the 
staff to do it. And if we pull those staff out and take that money out of here, we won’t be able to 
continue in that area. 
 
Further, they have in their brochure, in the structure of the research branch, areas on production and 
development of animals. For example, beef cattle. What are some of the goals there? The goals they had 
was in selection and cross-breeding: how they improve the stock, cow-calf systems, how to improve a 
better cow-calf crop, and how to utilize they type of range land, or forage crops. And this had to do with 
research. Feedlot systems – how feedlot systems can be improved. How insect pests can retard the 
growth of the animal and therefore cost you more days in the production of the beef that you’re going to 
go ahead and sell. And in order to help the farmer, these are certain areas that they can zero in on and do 
research. And therefore it’s important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the research area is kept here. 
 
Dairy cattle raising or having a dairy system or feeding animals in Saskatchewan or northern 
Saskatchewan compared to southern Saskatchewan is different. And when you compare that and you 
take feeding or have a dairy in Saskatchewan or Alberta or Manitoba, each province has different 
various climates and different kind of facilities. And this is totally different than having a dairy say in 
the coastline of B.C. where the temperatures are different. Or having a difference in Ontario where again 
we have different fluctuations of temperature. Or difference in the possibility of selling the feed to the 
open markets. We’re more land-locked here. Where is our traditional selling area? 
 
So you have not only development of how you can produce the beef better but also how you can market 
that beef and where you’re going to market. And we have to be careful in that area also. You need the 
researchers to develop or to determine where the animals, where we’re importing livestock in from. 
 
These is the whole gambit of areas that research staff are needed and one individual can’t do it. You 
need a battery of individuals. Two heads are better than one. And when the federal government comes 
along and wants to go ahead and take some of these out and reduce the amount of money there, we 
automatically lose. And as the member from Weyburn pointed out, every dollar spent in there has a 
certain extra number of dollars in return. 
 
Poultry and sheep – we have these areas that can be developed. Honey-bees – we have honey farms or 
honey production in Saskatchewan. It’s different possibly doing it here than doing it in different 
locations. And these are important. 
 
What about cereal crop production? Cereal crop production is very important. We have wheat 
production, barley, oats, etc., rapeseed, mustard, flax – all of these crops are produced in the Prairies. 
Now where are you going to go ahead and do the research? Down in Ontario or down in B.C.? We have 
to do it here and the more we can generate research into developing hardier crops, shorter growing 
seasons and more drought-resistant, the better off we are going to be. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1458 

And these are the areas, Mr. Speaker, that the research staff have been working on and I suggest that we 
must keep them in that area. 
 
It’s a priority of spending. It’s the priority of spending that is important. And if you spend your dollars 
in the right place, you got a lot more return than just spending it all over the place. 
 
Processing is another area in technology that we need to spend some time on and if the research 
development is utilizing that area, the better off we will be. 
 
I think that generates pretty well the whole research area. I’d like to commend the Minister of 
Agriculture and the member for Weyburn for bringing this up. The amount of money that’s been spent 
in our programs. We have for example soils and water: there’s total funding for ‘82-83 is about 
1,103,500; crop production 1,460,000, just to give some examples. Into animal agriculture you have 
738,500; economics and production, 20,000; toxicology, another 48,000. When you add up the numbers, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a considerable amount 3,500,000 in total grants and total amount. Then you have 
each net evaluation – for example, market production – that Saskatchewan Agriculture has contributed: 
26,100 commitment there; flax growers, 3,000 commitment there. I can go on and on, but I’d just like to 
illustrate a few examples of what Saskatchewan Agriculture is doing for research in this province. 
 
And I would suggest that if the federal government is sincere in being a federal government that reflects 
not only just Ontario and Quebec, that it go ahead and spend money in the West as well, and not only 
that – beef it up. And perhaps they’ll get more unity in this country than they ever had before. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure in supporting the motion as presented by the member 
for Weyburn. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have just a few comments I’d like to make on this 
motion, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think there are too many members here that would disagree with the fact 
that we need increased expenditure and research for agriculture. Agriculture is one of the, I think, most 
important industries that we have in Saskatchewan, and maybe the most important to Canada. 
 
I think in the past we have seen a commitment by the former administration to research in agriculture, 
and I would only hope that the present government would continue that commitment, and they would 
provide more research, and more assistance for agriculture. However, I don’t think that that has been the 
case in the past year, and the Minister of Agriculture is smiling there, and I’m sure he’s going to 
improve that situation for next year. 
 
I think it’s sometime difficult for leaders in eastern Canada – political leaders in eastern Canada – to 
understand the industry of agriculture and what it does for Canada, because there’s always been a 
problem trying to get different programs and different funding for agriculture. And it didn’t matter what 
party it was, whether it was the Conservatives or the Liberals. They tended to make . . . If there were any 
cuts that could be made, they would make it in areas of agriculture. A good indication of that is what’s 
happening with the Pepin plan and the Crow rate at present, where, if they’re going to try to save any 
money, they’re going to be doing it in an area that’s going to affect  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1459 

farmers. And that, Mr. Speaker, is something that I think we should be trying to address ourselves to, 
and trying to make Ottawa aware of. 
 
One of the other things that I found kind of interesting is the kind off support that should be given for 
agriculture and really isn’t. It isn’t done on the federal level, nor is it really done on a provincial level. 
We have seen provincial governments all across Canada tend to be a little soft and want to . . . 
(inaudible) . . . assistance to the farmers and to agriculture. And that is happening in a lot of provinces, 
and it’s happening in Saskatchewan to some degree. I can think of one area, if you want to look at using 
an example, would be the recent cut in the program the family farm improvements branch, and that was 
an area that assisted farmers – the department, or a branch, that assisted many farmers. 
 
A lot of farmers over the years used that program to obtain a supply of water on their farm, to get 
waterworks installed in their homes, and it allowed them to do this with some technical assistance 
provided by FFIB, and also supplies that were given to them at a very reasonable rate, at a very 
reasonable price, Mr. Speaker. And that was something that the farmers appreciated. But what has 
happened to that program? It is no longer there. As of July 1 there will no longer be a family farm 
improvement branch. And I think it’s somewhat ironical that this government can stand up and criticize 
the federal government for the cuts that they are making in agricultural research and in other areas, and 
at the same time, they go and they get rid of programs right here in Saskatchewan – programs that were 
beneficial to farmers. And there are going to be a lot of farmers there, Mr. Speaker, that are going to be 
critical of this government doing away with FFIB. So I think before we go and be too critical of the 
federal government we should look at what’s happening provincially also, although I agree that there are 
a lot of criticisms of the federal government regarding agriculture. And I would hope that this 
government continues to look at them and to address what is happening in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, the critic for agriculture, I know has a good 
number of comments that he’d like to make on this motion. And since he is away at a meeting today, I 
would, therefore, beg leave to adjourn this debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Resolution No. 17 – Testing of Cruise Missile 
 

Mr. Yew: — Mr. Chairman, I’m real pleased today to begin this debate regarding the resolution, on the 
resolution regarding the widespread opposition throughout Saskatchewan, throughout Canada, 
throughout the United States, to the opposition of the cruise missile testing and also the nuclear arms 
build-up. 
 
In a social democratic society, people ought to have the opportunity to be heard, Mr. Speaker, and to 
have their issues represented in this legislature. As every member of this Assembly knows, Mr. Speaker, 
all across Saskatchewan, thousands of men and women are becoming increasingly concerned about the 
nuclear arms race, about the cruise missile testing proposed for northern Saskatchewan, and about this 
Conservative government’s refusal to raise its voice on the issue. I therefore urge every member of the 
Assembly to join with me in supporting this resolution. 
 
I would like to share with you my views on the cruise missile and why its testing must be stopped, as 
well as share with you some thoughts about the Devine government’s  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1460 

general approach to these questions – not divinely inspired. First though, Mr. Speaker, I should like to 
tell you something about myself and about why the issue of the cruise missile testing in northern 
Saskatchewan is so important to me. 
 
I spent my early years in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, on the west side, not far from the 
Primrose bombing range. This land has been inhabited by my people for generations. It is their land, it is 
their community and it is their home which are at immediate risk. For many, many years now, the 
people of northern Saskatchewan have been ignored, neglected and poorly treated by the exploitive 
economic forces beyond their control. This government and its administration, its policies, are just one 
more example. It is therefore because of my deep personal roots in that part of our province that I 
initially developed such an intense feeling of this issue. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the CCF and the NDP have taken a firm and consistent stand on peace from 
their earliest days. This was made clear in the Regina Manifesto in 1933. Some 50 years ago at a time 
when memories of the First World War were still fresh and when aggressive patriotism was emerging 
from all over Europe. It was made powerfully clear again in 1956, Mr. Speaker, in the Winnipeg 
declaration of the CCF. Its opening sentence was as follows: 
 

The aim of the CCF is the establishment in Canada by democratic means of a co-operative 
commonwealth in which the supplying of human needs and enrichment of human life shall be 
the primary purpose of our society. 
 

Further on, in a section entitled ‘Basis for Peace,’ the declaration said: 
 

The solution of the problems facing Canada depends in large part on removing the international 
dangers which threaten the future of all mankind. Therefore no task is more urgent than that of 
building peace and of foregoing international policies which will banish from the earth the 
oppressive fear of nuclear destruction. Only if there is a determined will to peace and if every 
part of the world is free from the fear of aggression and domination can progress be made 
towards a lasting settlement of outstanding differences. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote to the members some facts and figures which I picked up in a paper 
called the New Internationalist paper, dated April, 1983. And at this time, let us just take a look at the 
size of the world’s war machine: ‘Global military spending is now running at more than $1 million per 
minute.’ Also, Mr. Speaker: ‘And there are some 50 million people world-wide working in the war 
machine of potentially aggressive nations.’ 
 
Mr. Speaker, these figures stand in stark contrast to the totally inadequate measures by the United States 
and some other countries for the basic services to the poor. There are inadequate health care services, 
Mr. Speaker, inadequate social services, even inadequate education services. Mr. Speaker, it is with this 
goal and this determination in mind that we must therefore all join in the struggle to stop the testing of 
the cruise missile. 
 
Let there be no mistake. The cruise is not a defensive weapon. It is for one purpose only; it is an attack 
weapon for offensive purposes alone. It is becoming increasingly clear that the circumstances 
surrounding the signing of the Canada-U.S. agreement are highly suspicious. The federal government 
has been less than candid with Canadians,  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1461 

and it now seems obvious that the Trudeau government has for many months been committed to 
allowing the U.S. to test this weapon in our country and in our communities. 
 
There is evidence of a growing ground swell of opposition to the cruise missile from all over 
Saskatchewan and all over Canada. Just the other day, over the weekend, we had well over 80,000 
people demonstrating in opposition to the cruise missile testing in northern Saskatchewan and also in 
northern Canada. There were people in Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and Regina, Vancouver, and various 
other communities throughout Canada that protested, that raised strong opposition to the testing of the 
cruise missile. 
 
In Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, and in northern Saskatchewan, in Meadow Lake, ordinary people of our 
province are coming together to discuss the issues and to join the common struggle against the cruise 
missile testing in Canada. That this is merely because of the immediate danger that it poses to my people 
in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; that danger is not an insignificant one, though. Within recent 
months, for example, there have been three crashes involving military planes in that one part of our 
province. Within three months, there has been three jets with malfunctions that ended in destruction, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
No, the real reason for that opposition is much deeper and much broader. It is because all of us as 
morally responsible citizens know that nuclear arms pose the gravest threat to mankind ever known. We 
know that the cause of international peace is not furthered by nuclear proliferation. And we know that as 
responsible Canadians, we must struggle to reduce nuclear threats in the world and not to increase them. 
 
Not only must we continue to inform our neighbours, not only must we continue to object to the cruise 
missile testing at every opportunity, Mr. Speaker, we must also persuade this Conservative government 
to oppose it, to state its position and to represent the views of the people that demonstrated so 
strenuously against the testing of the cruise missile. 
 
As you know, so far the Devine government has not issued a single protest on this matter. It has not 
issued or raised one single objection. It has not spoken out for peace. Instead it has consistently tried to 
hide behind the shallow excuse that this is a federal matter, not a provincial one. This is not true, Mr. 
Speaker. You know and I know that peace and a noble and secure future for all of us are indeed matters 
on which our provincial government can and should speak out. To the extent that the Devine 
government quietly supports the cruise testing by its silence on the issue, to that extent it shows its moral 
bankruptcy. 
 
To me it seems clear that the Devine government’s morally bankrupt approach on the cruise testing 
issue, Mr. Speaker, is similar to its approach on some vital issues which affect us all. Let me just 
mention some of these. 
 
First, there is the whole policy approach to the people of northern Saskatchewan. As you know, the 
Tories have done two things: destroyed the programs and services that had finally been established in 
northern Saskatchewan, and secondly, it has ignored the economic and social development needs of 
northern people. 
 
Secondly, they have made drastic budgetary cuts in the wide range of environmental protection 
measures programs in this budget for the current year. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1462 

Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. The question material in the motion that you are discussing is very 
narrow. It doesn’t include the items that you are now raising, and I would ask the member to stay on the 
subject of the motion. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me point out, Mr. Speaker, that to me, at least, the deliberate 
budget cuts demonstrate a general approach by the Tories, the same general approach, general policy 
approach as the quiet Tory support for cruise missile testing in Saskatchewan – a negative attack on 
programs for people, a negative attack on programs for our future, a negative attack on policies which 
show some responsible, moral leadership. 
 
In conclusion then, Mr. Speaker, I wish to summarize a few main points about this issue. Nuclear arms 
are a concern to us all in this Assembly, and throughout Saskatchewan, and throughout Canada, and for 
many others, . . . (inaudible) . . . communities in the United States. To sit by silently, passively, as this 
Conservative government has been doing, is simply to abdicate moral responsibility. This is why, Mr. 
Speaker, I wish to conclude my remarks today by, once again, urging all members of this Assembly, on 
both sides of the House, to join with me in supporting this resolution. With that, I thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to address a few brief remarks on this 
resolution. I had the opportunity Saturday to participate in a rally, and I want to repeat some of the 
comments I made there and add some. 
 
I just want to deal initially, Mr. Speaker, with the Primrose air range and deal with some of the nonsense 
that has passed from the Attorney-General as the truth. Primrose air range treaty was signed in 1954. 
The treaty has no term on it. It is a treaty signed in perpetuity so long as the federal government wants to 
use that air range, and it was not renewed by the then attorney-general in 1980. And the suggestion 
coming from the Minister of Justice is false, and I can only assume he is very poorly informed. 
 
What occurred in 1980 was in fact a renegotiation of the compensation due to the province; that must 
take place periodically. But there was no renewal of the terms, the term of that lease is in perpetuity. All 
the then attorney-general was doing was haggling, if you like, about the price. But he had no opportunity 
to haggle about the term of the lease itself. 
 
I think it is largely irrelevant to drag into this debate the merits of signing the treaty in the first place. 
That treaty was signed in 1954 during the era of the Cold War. A different mood, a different culture 
prevailed at the time. To judge the government of that day by the standards and the prevailing mores of 
this day is unfair and illogical. And I am surprised that the Attorney-General should stoop to that sort of 
an argument. It has nothing to do, I suggest to members opposite, with the events of this day some 30 
years later. 
 
An Hon. Member: — When did the Cold War end? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — The member from Prince Albert asked me when the Cold War ended. In the minds 
of some members opposite, I suppose the Cold War never will end. I suppose some members opposite 
will always need someone to dislike and someone to mistrust. And they’re as far away and as 
misunderstood as anyone. I suppose the Soviet Union will do the member from Prince Albert as well as 
anyone. So if you want to continue the Cold War in your riding, hop to it. But I suggest to members 
opposite, and  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1463 

the members on this side of the House, because not all the government members are opposite. I suggest 
to members in the government caucus that the continuation of the Cold War does very little to bring 
about peace. 
 
I was present on Saturday and I felt a bit of nostalgia, Mr. Speaker, I felt a bit of nostalgia on Saturday, 
because I had not seen that kind of a movement, and that kind of a rally for many, many years. My first 
initiation into the . . . My first involvement with any peace movement was back in the early ‘60s when 
the unilateral disarmament movement began in the very early ‘60s, in ’59,’60, 61. I was at that point in 
time just a teenager. That movement was as short-lived as it was illogical. It created a good deal of 
controversy. I think, because of its illogical nature, but it was very short-lived. 
 
It was followed some three or four years later by the anti-Vietnam war movement. And I am sure 
members opposite are still fighting that one as well. You’re probably still wishing that we had gone in 
and nuked the poor groups in Vietnam. That movement, however, Mr. Speaker, was successful. It began 
in the early ‘60s. It was a very long struggle, but that movement was successful, because the U.S. 
eventually withdrew unilaterally from Vietnam and left them to solve their own problems . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . In spite of the considerable temptation from the member from Prince Albert, I’m not 
going to rehash with him the Vietnam war. Suffice it to say, I think, if the member from Prince Albert is 
proud of the U.S. role . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. I believe that the motion here deals only with the cruise missile and the 
testing range at Primrose Lake and in Canada. We cannot get into Vietnam or other wars. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I will admit that I did succumb to the temptation to respond to the member 
from Prince Albert. He’s always best ignored, and I should have kept that in mind, Mr. Speaker, and I 
will do so. Suffice it to say there’s a mood out there today that I haven’t seen for many, many years. I’m 
not sure what is causing it, whether it is just a cyclical thing, or whether people simply don’t trust 
President Reagan; whether they find him less stable than they did Lyndon Johnson or John F. Kennedy. 
But there is clearly a different mood out there. 
 
At the rally on Saturday which dealt with this issue, someone close tome said to me, ‘You know I 
haven’t seen this sort of a rally since the 60s.’ Frankly, that was exactly what was going through my 
mind when that was said . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I say to members opposite who are braying in 
the midst of my comments, I say to members opposite that the opposition to the testing of the cruise 
missile, and the support of the peace movement is very, very broad. 
 
As I suggested to the government members opposite, I was preceded on the podium by the deputy mayor 
of the city of Regina; the Catholic archbishop, the Most Reverend Charles Halpin; the Anglican 
archbishop, the Most Reverend Michael Peers – and following me should have been someone from the 
government, but of course, you people chose not to. It’s obvious from your comments shy you weren’t 
there, because basically you don’t share the goals of that peace rally. 
 
The testing of U.S. armaments in Canada is scarcely new. That began long before I was born. What is 
different about the cruise missile is that heretofore the U.S. military involvement on Canadian soil has 
basically been for defensive purposes. NORAD (North American Air Defence) is a defensive treaty. It is 
not an offensive treaty. And the  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1464 

U.S. military manoeuvres on Canadian soil have been defensive. 
 
As my friend from Cumberland pointed out, this is different. This is different because the cruise missile 
is offensive in both terms of that word. It is offensive in the sense that it is meant for aggression; it is 
offensive in the sense that it is obnoxious to the vast majority of Canadian people. So the member, when 
he asks if it’s offensive, uses it at least partially in the right term. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Are you actually qualified to make that statement, Ned? 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I can say to the member from Regina North I’ve got one qualification for 
making that statement: I got elected to the Assembly of Saskatchewan. I was asked by the people of 
Regina Centre to provide some leadership and that’s what I’m trying to do. I suggest to the members 
opposite that you might try to exercise some leadership on behalf of your constituents as well. 
 
That is the only qualification I have, Mr. Speaker, to take a position on this, is that I feel I have a 
responsibility to the people of Saskatchewan to show some leadership. I only ask that members opposite 
show some of that same sense of responsibility. 
 
There is little, Mr. Speaker, that Canada or Saskatchewan can do to contribute to the world’s military 
arsenal. There is very little this country can do to add to the armaments. I am left in the dark as to what 
purpose all those armaments serve, bristling and pointing at everyone, but even if they did serve a 
purpose there’s very little this country can do to make any meaningful contribution to it. Our population 
base and our resources are simply too small. 
 
There is something, Mr. Speaker, that this country can do to bring about peace, peace in the world. 
Canada enjoys an international reputation far beyond its people or its resources, and it is that 
international reputation, that rapport with third-world nations, which we can use to bring pressure to 
bear equally on all of the superpowers. And I single out not one or the other. I suggest that we have a 
responsibility to bring pressure to bear on all super powers, because unless we do, unless we show this 
kind of leadership, we face imminent danger of nuclear war. We have never been closer to it than we are 
in this decade. And all peoples everywhere, whether they live in Germany, or Regina, or Prince Albert, 
have a responsibility to do what we can to bring about peace in the world. 
 
The member from Cumberland has given his view of how that can best be done. His suggestion is that 
by refusing to allow this offensive weapon – offensive and offensive – by refusing to allow this weapon 
to be tested on Canadian soil, we can say to both superpowers that we believe that disarmament is a 
route you should be following, and we’re going to do what we can to ensure that that happens. That is 
the one positive contribution we can make. We can bring pressure to bear on the superpowers – both 
equally, both equally . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I don’t know what they’re saying in Moscow 
about me. I’d be delighted to think that any comments I had were of such great import that they were the 
subject of discussion on the streets of Moscow, but I frankly don’t think that I’m going to make it. I 
frankly don’t think I’m going to make it. 
 
Before I get called out of order, though, because I’m not sure I’m on the topic that I’m discussing, I 
want to close by saying that there is something positive we can do. The member from Cumberland has 
suggested what it is: to say to the superpowers, ‘You cannot test or use offensive weapons on Canadian 
soil,’ would be a message equally to  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1465 

both superpowers. It would be positive. I urge the members opposite to show some leadership and at 
least allow the resolution to come to a vote. If you must oppose it, do so. But I urge members opposite to 
at least allow this resolution to come to a vote. You know what they were saying at the rally on 
Saturday. They were saying that you people don’t share the goals of the peace movement but that you 
haven’t got the guts to say so, and that’s why you weren’t there. That’s why it was a no-show for 
members opposite. I would be delighted to think they were wrong. I’d be delighted to think you people 
will take a stand. So I urge members opposite to allow this to come to a vote. Vote as you will, but show 
some leadership on what must be the most important issue of our time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to speak to an issue that I think many people across this 
country, and around the world, no doubt, are very concerned with. And to the Premier, and to the 
government side of the House, and I think they’ll share, and the members opposite will also share my 
feelings generally about peaceful coexistence. I believe that every one of us in our society collectively 
abhor war. We collectively abhor war. 
 
I would just like to extend to the opposition they’re welcome to join us in this abhorrence of holocaust 
that has been historically shared by all nations of this world for thousands and thousands of years, 
virtually. 
 
In the past 40 years, since the war – approximately 40 years – since the war to end all wars, I think 
there’s probably more progress toward world peace than there was in the thousands of years preceding 
the great war to end all wars. The position that the opposition has taken today indicating that the 
government side of the House has no interest in peace . . . I might just express one experience I had 
recently, in fact it was shortly after Christmas when there was a candle lit for peace in Victoria Park in 
downtown Regina on an evening. I don’t know exactly the temperature that evening, but it was nearing 
30 below zero, and most of the members of that group were required to go to the Hotel Saskatchewan in 
shifts in order to warm their feet and hands so they could participate in a group meeting for peace. The 
one thing I noticed – and I wouldn’t have brought it up today, except our colleague in the House from 
Regina Centre mentioned we are not interested – the only member from the legislature that was there 
that was invited, other than the opposition, was myself. I shared . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
He was present. I stand corrected – I was saying from the government side of the House. The member 
from Lakeview was present. It was so cold that evening, so cold that evening, that I never noticed the 
member from Lakeview just because of the breath – the breath for peace, Mr. Speaker, that we all share. 
The obvious absence was members of the opposition were not there to share in the march for peace in 
Victoria Park when it was 30 below zero. They chose to be there, and the member from Regina chose to 
be there, Mr. Speaker. He chose to be there when the temperature was near 20 degrees Celsius – the only 
time he’s probably been for a walk, a walk of any kind, in 1983, let alone a walk for peace. He does not 
choose to walk for peace. He took his family out for a stroll on Sunday afternoon and happened upon a 
podium. 
 
The Attorney-General apologized to this House yesterday in question period; he had other commitments. 
He was unable to be there, but he showed the respect we all have in this House for world peace, and I 
can appreciate the Premier and the Attorney-General when they suggest that the federal position and 
their position is for mutual  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1466 

disarmament – mutual disarmament. The members opposite and their philosophical equals around the 
world would choose to have unilateral disarmament - unilateral disarmament, of course, giving their 
philosophy the advantage of the hammer and the advantage of the sickle, if you want to go that far. We 
in fact on this side of the House do not agree with unilateral disarmament, to arm one member or one 
nation against another, without the opportunity to defend itself. We also support mutual disarmament. 
We all support, on this side of the House, the mutual disarmament of all nations to strive toward world 
peace. And this side of the House will in fact endeavour to increase the level of activity in that area. 
 
The opposition this evening also suggested that . . . The member from Cumberland suggested earlier that 
we have not addressed the issue. He said he has not heard a position expressed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. The member from Cumberland may not have been in question period yesterday when the 
Premier of the province and the Attorney-General so articulately expressed our position. They outlined 
the fact that the agreement signed, that was negotiated in 1953, that was renegotiated in 1981 by 
members of the party opposite who were then in government, it was signed and it was in fact 
re-established in 1981 by Roy Romanow, who at that time was in a position where possibly he could 
have renegotiated the terms of this agreement. It wasn’t done. It was renewed and extended. It’s 
extended into perpetuity, Mr. Speaker, an agreement that was signed by a former government with a 
philosophy similar to those on the opposite of the floor at a time – and I can appreciate their concern at 
that time – a time nine years after the Great War. The concern, I think, was shared by all in Canada who 
had suffered and been touched by that war either through the death of friends, neighbours, relatives, or 
whoever. But I think the objective probably, at the time when that agreement was signed, was common 
to the objective we all have today: to assure world peace, to assure peace in this world that all nations 
can share and all people can share. 
 
This peace will not come easy. It hasn’t come easy historically, and it will not come easy into the future. 
It will only come through the negotiated efforts of nations throughout this world in aligning themselves 
in a manner that is not threatening to their neighbour. And I’m sure the government . . . We support hat 
position. The Premier and the Attorney-General outlined yesterday in question period that mutual – 
mutual – disarmament in the goal that is shared by the federal government who has the auspices over 
this area. National defence does not come into the political theatre of provincial governments. National 
defence is the responsibility of the federal Government of Canada. 
 
We are brought into this debate today by an opposition who is hell-bent for an issue. Unfortunately, 
since we’ve been elected, unfortunately for the opposition, we have governed this province in a manner, 
Mr. Speaker, that has probably been more responsible than any government we’ve had in the past 40 
years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — And the opposition has raised an issue today that is shared by all but is not within our 
auspices and they are well aware, they are well aware of the government’s position on this issue. But 
because of the fact we’ve governed well in the last 11 months and the fact that they have run out of gas 
on other issues . . . The gas is cheaper; they’ve run out, but they can buy it for less money than they 
could on April 25th last year. And I find that raising the issue as it is outlined in the motion which  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1467 

suggests that the Government of Canada . . . the Assembly express to the Government of Canada its 
opposition to the testing of cruise missile systems on the Primrose Lake Air Weapons Range in northern 
Saskatchewan . . . I can appreciate expressing that concern and it has been expressed by all governments 
provincially in this country to the federal government. They have set their policies based on those, that 
input. 
 
Today being the anniversary of the victory of our party, April 26th, 1982, they chose to raise an issue 
that deflects from the people of Saskatchewan the importance of the victory of the Progressive 
Conservative Party on April 26th, 1982. The importance of this victory . . . And, Mr. Speaker, I realize 
that you feel I may be getting off the topic . . . (inaudible interjections) . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Order. The member is off the subject of the debate and I would ask him 
to come back to the debate. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My point generally was that our concern for Saskatchewan 
people has been addressed in the last 11 months. And our concern for this issue, I can promise the 
people of Saskatchewan, will be taken very seriously, very seriously. And within the jurisdiction that we 
can act, we will act upon this particular issue very, very seriously, Mr. Speaker. And the people of 
Saskatchewan, I think, in the last 11 months have found that they can trust us as a government. We 
offered them several packages during our election campaign in April last year, and I’d just like to 
suggest to the opposition that most of those promises, most of those promises – promise is a tough word 
for them to accept – most of the promises have been delivered. And it’s the promise of this government 
that the concerns shared by the people of Saskatchewan will be aired by this government regarding this 
problem. 
 
I would like to remind members opposite also that members of your own government, prior to April 
26th, were in fact involved in this debate to some degree. And I would just like to read from Hansard, 
March 17th, 1982, when a member of their own caucus rose in the House, Mr. Prebble, and questioned 
Mr. Romanow on exactly what we’re discussing today. His question was: 
 

My question to the minister is whether the Government of Saskatchewan would be prepared to 
advocate that the federal government adopt a policy of favoring a nuclear weapons-free zone in 
this country under which the testing and manufacture of nuclear weapons systems or their 
components would not take place and under which there would be a halt to the storage of nuclear 
weapons on Canadian soil and a halt to any proposal for nuclear submarines or nuclear-equipped 
aircraft to enter Canadian waters or Canadian air space. 
 

A question by Mr. Peter Prebble, member for Saskatoon University, on March 17, 1982, and answered 
by Mr. Roy Romanow: 
 

Mr. Speaker, perhaps I can endeavor to answer the hon. member’s question in these terms. 
Obviously this is an area which is the responsibility of the federal government. 
 

We agree with Mr. Romanow on that point . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . As the member just 
mentioned, there’s not . . . We don’t have consensus with Mr. Romanow on many issues; we do on this. 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1468 

It does concern itself with nation-to-nation treaties and obligations that pertain thereto. On 
occasion, the provincial governments are asked to express opinions as they affect national and 
provincial interest in the area of, say, the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights and so 
forth. We support the objectives of the disarmament which have been articulated, I believe, by 
the United Nations in session in 1978 – to which the Canadian federal government was a 
signatory and was also a supporter. Accordingly, the degree to which the testing of the cruise 
missiles might be contrary to that foreign policy objective as signed in 1978 is open to each 
member’s individual interpretation. I would at this point make no further comment on the other 
larger aspect of the member’s question. 
 

Basically he agrees that it’s a federal jurisdiction. The problem is one that will be dealt with at a federal 
level, although the concern’s certainly shared by members of the provincial legislature. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to sum up the position the Attorney-General and the Premier 
expressed yesterday during question period, that of mutual disarmament of nations around the world, 
and that we would definitely support a position of mutual disarmament. I would like to ask the 
opposition to share with us in that appraisal of this problem, that in order to defend the freedoms and the 
rights that we share as Canadians, our interest in mutual disarmament is an extremely important factor in 
the end result of weapons manufacturing, wherever it may be in this world. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I hadn’t really intended to get too heavily involved in this 
particular debate today because the matter was being well handled by my colleague from Regina North 
West. However, there were some accusations thrown around earlier, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps the 
Government of Saskatchewan is somehow war-mongering, pro-war, and anti-peace, and I for one, on 
our side of the House, resent that implication. I would not say it’s an absolute direct statement, but 
certainly it was implied, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I share . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I see the member from Regina Centre is piping up again. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, this gentleman is rapidly becoming the John Q. Dingleheimer of Saskatchewan politics. 
And who, may you ask, is John Q. Dingleheimer? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who cares? 
 
Mr. Maxwell: — Exactly. Thank you, member from Shaunavon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t start this argument. You’re all my witnesses on both sides of the House, but if 
we’re going to get into an argument, then I’m certainly not going to be one to back away. Because, 
unlike some of the members on this side, I know where I stand on this issue, and we’re not an 
obsequious, ingratiating little party who are trying to play up on the emotions of people who got 
involved in peace marches, Mr. Speaker. When the negative, disappearing party can come out and take a 
strong stand on anything, I’ll be completely, surprised, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I know exactly where we stand on this one. This government is deeply concerned  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1469 

about cruise missile testing. We are concerned. We are also concerned about the whole area of nuclear 
arms proliferation. But the direct responsibility on negotiation on this particular subject is not ours; it 
isn’t ours. Weapons testing is a matter which is related to national defence, as these members to my right 
well know. If it is a negotiable item in any sense, it falls within the exclusive jurisdiction of the federal 
government. And the agreement in 1954, the then CCF Government of Saskatchewan signed, conceded 
control over activities within the Primrose weapons range to the federal government. That was a 
situation we inherited. 
 
Now what was the motive of the CCF Party of the day in signing that agreement? I listened with interest 
when the member from Regina Centre talked about a cold war in 1954 and a different – he used the 
word – culture. Certainly there were different circumstances in the world of that time, a scant nine years 
after the end of World War II. Well, at that time in 1954, the member from Regina Centre is quite 
correct about the extent of the Cold War. We’d also come off a war involving Korea. 
 
I agree that times have changed since then to some extent. But I do believe that the party and the 
government of that time was probably adhering to a belief, a belief that sprang up from the events 
leading to World War II, and that belief is, Mr. Speaker: the best way to prevent a war is to be ready for 
a war. I’m not saying I particularly adhere to that today in 1983, but it certainly must have been the 
motive of the CCF Party in 1954 when they signed the agreement, an agreement we didn’t sign, but one 
which has bound us since that time. 
 
Obviously Canada and its allies would prefer not to deploy missiles or nuclear weapons of any kind. 
Any probably at that time the government of the day was convinced that negotiations on disarmament 
would not succeed if western allies showed any signs of weakness. I submit, Mr. Speaker, we’re facing a 
similar situation in 1983. 
 
Canada’s security policy for the past 35 years has had three main objectives. The first one is preserving 
peace – not promoting war, but preserving peace through collective security. And collective security 
arrangements revolve around NATO and NORAD also, promoting verifiable arms control and 
disarmament agreements. Third, working for the peaceful settlement of disputes and the removal of 
underlying political and economic and social causes of international tension. I agree once more with the 
member from Regina Centre, that Canada has had a role to play in that particular area of negotiation, 
and I think Canada has done extremely well. I don’t mind agreeing once in a while with the member 
form Regina Centre. He doesn’t always speak poppycock, Mr. Speaker – mostly, but not always. 
 
Now those objectives are closely related to one another – those three particular objectives. In particular, 
participation in collective security arrangements – a support of some type of western deterrent are 
complementary with Canada’s commitment to vigorous arms control and to disarmament policy, which I 
happen to believe in, if it is multilateral disarmament and not unilateral disarmament, and I don’t recall 
hearing that particular distinction being made earlier by the members of the opposition. 
 
Security is the key – security. The Canadian government does not consider that unilateral restraint or 
reductions by one side will lead to successful arms control agreement. Nations can be expected to accept 
reductions or limitations on their weapons only if they can be sure that their security will not be put in 
danger. And given events in Afghanistan and other points around the globe, I have serious questions 



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1470 

about our security, Mr. Speaker, should we be involved in unilateral disarmament. Again, I favour 
multilateral disarmament. I’m not sure that as a province we have the negotiating rights to conclude any 
type of multilateral disarmament agreement with any power. 
 
I heard it said earlier by one or two members that we’re talking about an offensive weapon in the cruise 
missile. It’s rather hard to count the cruise missile an offensive weapon when it has a top flying speed of 
500 miles per hour. One old farmer told me not so long ago – because we had a snowfall recently in the 
town of Spiritwood – he said, ‘Given the speed of the cruise missile, my snowmobile could get to Russia 
faster than they could.’ So I hardly count it as being an offensive weapon. 
 
It is certainly not a first-strike weapon, in the sense of the word first-strike to initiate nuclear war. 
 
As a provincial government, we don’t have a say in the testing of the cruise missile at the Primrose Air 
Weapons Range, because of an agreement signed by the previous CCF government. We didn’t bring that 
agreement in, and it wasn’t there by our choice. The fact of the matter that it is there, and we are bound 
by it, does not mean that we are pro-war in any sense of the word. And once again, Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to say I take serious offence at being told that we are opposed to peace on this side of the House. 
 
And with those few remarks, I know we have another speaker who’d like to address the issue. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weiman: — Generally, Mr. Speaker, when I stand in the House, I usually preface any remarks I’m 
going to be making by saying that it’s a privilege and a pleasure to be able to enter into debate. I 
generally look forward with a great deal of relish to enter into debate with the members opposite. This is 
one of those times I would like to say it is a privilege, but not so much a pleasure. 
 
I would like to offer a couple of comments and a couple of thoughts to this House, Mr. Speaker. I may 
go back just a point when I said it was not necessarily a pleasure. I think we do, as a government or as 
an opposition, a great injustice to the people of this province when we raise their expectations as to the 
power of a provincial government vis-à-vis any agreements that the federal government has with any 
other nation of the world. As I mentioned, I believe it is a great injustice to raise those expectations of 
the people of our province. No one in this House in the debate that I’ve heard thus far could speak in 
favour of nuclear proliferation. No one in this House wants to even consider the devastation that a 
nuclear attack, or a surprise attack, could bring to this great country of ours. 
 
This isn’t a time to be discussing unilateral versus multilateral disarmament. What we are discussing 
here in this House today for the people of Saskatchewan is whether we as a sovereign province have the 
power to change or to control the jurisdiction of the federal government. 
 
It reminds me, when I think of the holocaust that is possible with a nuclear strike, reminds me of a 
quotation that is said to be Winston Churchill’s. After the Second World War, Winston Churchill was 
asked to comment on the great second world war to end all wars, as the members have mentioned, and 
to foretell what the third world war  



 
April 26, 1983 

 
1471 

might be. Winston Churchill thought about the matter for a moment and replied: ‘I cannot tell you what 
the third world war will be fought with, but I can assure you that the fourth world war will be fought 
with sticks and stones.’ 
 
All of us here in this House would never want to see the day that our children had to fight that fourth 
world war. So it goes without saying, that to continue on and talk about the devastation of war and the 
cruelty of war is not the time at this particular moment. 
 
The two thoughts I would like to bring up, Mr. Speaker, is one that was broached yesterday by the 
Attorney-General. Fact number one is, that we would not be in this situation today, discussing the 
deployment of the cruise for testing purposes over soil over Canada, under Canada, had it not been for 
an agreement that was made with the CCF government in 1954 and the Liberal Government of Canada. 
 
Now one of the members opposite had mentioned that it was an unfair comment to make. My colleague 
from Turtleford suggested that it was not an unfair comment to make and I concur with that. If ever the 
mentality of the world was ripe to work towards peace, it must have been after the conclusion of the 
Second World War and the Korean conflict. The tragedy, the suffering of those years were still fresh in 
the memories of the Canadians, as well as the many new immigrants that came to this country and many 
of which came to the province of Saskatchewan. So I suggest it was a fair comment. 
 
If that government in 1954 has seriously considered the moral implications of the agreement that it was 
signing, it would never have sat down at the table with the Liberal Government of Canada in 1954. 
 
Fact number two, that the people of Saskatchewan should be aware of, and I alluded to it earlier when I 
talked about the opposition raising unfair and high expectations of the power of the provincial 
government via-a-vis the federal government. The fact is, it is in federal jurisdiction. Mr. Romanow, the 
attorney-general at the time, wanted to be clear on this issue and had asked on March the 16th, received 
a memo on March the 16th from a Mr. John D. White, the director of constitutional law, to give him 
some input into this matter. The reply to the attorney-general at the time was, and I quote on page one: 
 

The federal government enjoys exclusive jurisdiction over defence. 
 

And this agreement (the agreement of 1954) and the implementation of it are clearly exercises of a 
defence power. 
 
In light of that fact, Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 4:58 p.m. 


