






















































Hansard: May 10, 1983


(2026) 2027 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 May 10, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 

 
JUSTICE 

 
Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 3 

 
Item 1 (continued) 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, I was on, I think, a document which to me indicates some of the concerns 
in respect to the direction that you may in fact be proceeding in regards to the legal aid clinics. And I 
want to just indicate a number of concerns that the former dean of the law college, Mr. Roger Carter, has 
indicated. And as I stated in part, he indicates another further concern and that is this; he says: 
 

Turning to the MacPherson report, the fundamental objections which I have to its recommendation is 
that each of the 13 local community boards, which are now in charge of management of their 
respective clinics, should be transferred into mere advisory groups. These boards constitute an 
essential part of what is completely unique legal scheme. In every other art of Canada legal aid is 
controlled either by the provincial government or by the law society of the province involved. 

 
I think that is a concern, and I think I have demonstrated here this afternoon that there are a large 
number of groups and citizens who are indeed concerned that the local control will in fact be eroded and 
that it will either be under the control of the government or under the control of the law society. And 
certainly, as he indicates, Saskatchewan had a unique legal aid system of allowing the establishment of 
the boards, and this was done with the recommendations of a committee. I want to ask the minister 
whether or not he feels that there is the potential for the erosion of the legal aid system by either 
diverting the control to the government or over to the law society of the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — One, first of all I do not see the diversion of control to either the government or the 
law society. I think a careful reading of Mr. MacPherson’s report will indicate that the government is to 
play a minority role in the operation of the legal aid plan. I personally subscribe to that position. With 
regard to the law society, that was never contemplated in the MacPherson report nor was it referred to 
the MacPherson report. 
 
I will be the first to admit that I will be unable to devise a perfect system. I would hope that the hon. 
member opposite is not arguing that the existing system is perfect, because it’s not. I see no difficulty 
with the changes. If one keeps in mind the objective of maintaining the highest quality of legal services 
to those that cannot afford to use the private lawyers, I suggest that if we keep that objective in mind, if 
we can supply the highest quality — really the form of supplying that is not that important. Ensuring 
that the highest quality services are supplied must be the fundamental objective. That will  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2028 

be the fundamental objective under the changes being considered. I suggest with that in mind that if we 
are in fact supplying the highest quality legal services, the system will be well accepted by the users and 
the public. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to continue the record of this topic. Mr. Carter goes on to say that a 
number of considerations led that earlier committee to recommend this kind of structure. Briefly some of 
them were: 
 

1. That the legal aid scheme should be responsive in areas where public legal education (a vital 
concern of the system) to local needs . . . 

 
So he says that the legal aid scheme should be responsive in areas of public legal education to the local 
needs. That was a consideration. 
 

2. That a legal aid scheme should in appearance, and in fact, be divorced as far as possible from 
government intervention and control. 

 
3. That on-going and meaningful involvement by local people would ensure that the system would 

remain a vital part f our social structure. 
 
Those were the essential considerations. 
 
I want to say that those considerations were developed, not by one individual. I want to correct the 
Attorney-General. I want to put the record straight — that what I have in fact been putting forward here 
is not any allegations against the report on behalf of myself. I am putting forward concerns in respect to 
the report by the former dean of the College of Law and the various groups which were here. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Attorney-General or Mr. Minister of Justice, that you can’t turn it around by alleging 
that I am in fact personally, in any way, denigrating against the work in which Mr. Justice MacPherson 
endeavoured to perform. And I want to say it was in respect to your limited time limits and also the 
terms of reference that you set forth that he had to work within. So I want to ask the minister: how in 
fact does he see a more efficient and a more available service of legal services under the proposal as set 
forth by Mr. MacPherson? Can you outline how in fact you see an improvement in respect to the many 
groups that are concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I see an improvement, first in the uniformity of standards. I see an improvement in 
uniformity of training. I see an improvement in uniformity of services being supplied. For example, 
under your scheme, tax advising was one role, and where the local board happened to have a surplus of 
funds, it would increase the number of services supplied; others that had a shortage of funds or different 
work-load cut back in the services. So I see a better ability to be able to move the council, the lawyers, 
around the province to where the demands are. So certainly on those areas I see a significant potential 
for improvement of the quality of legal services. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, you indicate the uniformity of service. And I would think that is a major concern 
of many of the groups, where you’re going to have a central body determining that it’s going to be a 
uniform service. 
 
I want to tell you, and I raised it with you, Mr. Minister of Justice, the concerns of the community board 
that they expressed — which are located at La Ronge — indicating  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2029 

that in fact they live in a different environment of vast areas and a different culture. And here you stand 
up and say that the very thing which they are frightened of — you stand up and say it’s going to be the 
mark of improvement, uniformity of service. How do you reconcile that with the concern of the 
Northerners? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I’m reluctant to give a legal lecture, but my understanding of the law in the 
province of Saskatchewan is that it applies throughout the whole province. My knowledge of the 
Criminal Code of Canada is that it applies throughout the Dominion of Canada. 
 
Surely the people that are arguing for the people in the North that are utilizing legal aid should be as 
well skilled and as knowledgeable in the law . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, that is precisely what I 
am saying and I suggest to the hon. member that he is not listening. I suggest to you that the more 
skilled counsel that we have in northern Saskatchewan . . . When you talk about uniformity of services, 
you tell me the advantages of a system that — here we have services to the poor — is supplying tax 
advice. I question whether that really should be an objective. Certainly the need for quality legal advice 
to people undergoing or going through a divorce is vital. Quality legal advice for people going through 
matrimonial property settlements is vital. 
 
Properly trained legal counsel to defend an accused is vital. And I suggest that we have a far more 
greater likelihood of improving the quality of service under the proposals in the MacPherson report than 
under the existing system and that is really the nuts and bolts of the MacPherson report. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Carter goes on: 
 

There is one other aspect of the MacPherson report on which I would like to comment. It contains 
criticisms of the ability of the lawyers presently practising in the schemes. Unfortunately there is no 
hard evidence in the report on which to base these conclusions. None the less, I have no doubt that 
here and there young lawyers first stepping into practical work encounter some difficulties. That 
being so, he goes on to say) I am somewhat surprised that Mr. MacPherson did not consider whether 
the general counsel’s office established under the system might not be expanded and reinforced so as 
to provide the kind of overall professional direction and advice which would solve any such 
problem. 

 
I wonder, first of all, if the minister is prepared to accept the statements made by Mr. Justice 
MacPherson about the ability of some of the lawyers under the community clinic, community legal aid 
system — whether you are prepared to accept without any hard evidence the statements which were 
made by Mr. MacPherson. And secondly, I want to ask you whether or not you are prepared to take a 
look at the recommendations that Mr. Carter makes of the use of the general counsel’s office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I could, except that Professor Carter’s criticism there is a rather contradictory 
one. Because here, on the one hand, he argues for a chief counsel, which is in existence, to deal with the 
whole province and oversee the whole province. At the same time he’s arguing for autonomous local 
boards — obviously a contradictory position. 
 
I suggest to you, I suggest to the hon. member that the recommendations of the MacPherson report, that 
in fact there be two legal directors in each of the cities of  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2030 

Regina and Saskatoon -–one responsible for criminal matters and one for civil matters — is a far more 
practical way to deal with the problems in those two areas. Should the problems in other areas be similar 
to Saskatoon, I would be supportive of the same type of operation of the two. What it means is that we 
have, on a day-to-day basis, contact with people responsible for the improvement, the legal services — 
criminal and civil. Right now we have assigned one person with that overall responsibility, a highly 
onerous position — very competent individual. But I suggest that the Carter position is highly 
contradictory and that in fact the MacPherson report is a far more responsive position to dealing with the 
problem. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Carter raises yet another concern in respect to the direction. A final comment: 
 

The earlier committee managed in a meaningful way to reach out to and to hear from people who 
might eventually be clients of the system. It held meetings throughout the province with a host of 
different organizations including the anti-poverty groups. Many of those hearings were informal. 
They gave the committee a real feeling for the needs of the disadvantaged people in this province, 
and an understanding of their attitudes towards law and the possible legal aid system. Again, here it 
was in my view, most unfortunate that Mr. MacPherson, by reason no doubt of the severe time 
limitations placed upon him, was unable to meet with the most important group, the very people who 
use the system, or their representatives, in order to have the benefit of their assessment of the 
operation of the scheme. 

 
I ask the Attorney-General: why will you not, in fact, hold public hearings to answer the concerns of this 
great number of people — public hearings which, in fact, we held in the past? And I want a specific 
answer of why, in fact, you’re not prepared to have public hearings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I answered the very question several times this afternoon, and I would like to 
raise with the hon. member a couple of facts that I did raise this afternoon. One, the writer of the letter 
that you referred to, Professor Carter, was one of the architects of the original proposal. I would expect 
him to say nothing different from what he has in fact said. Those are expected criticisms when the father 
of a system sees the system change. 
 
Secondly, in turn, in the matter of public hearings, go back to the matter you raised this afternoon, 
wherein you referred to the McClelland report and the public hearings that were held. And I ask you to 
take a look at the McClelland report, and remember that that earlier study done by your government 
made it quite clear that there was a serious problem in the relationship between the autonomous local 
boards, the lawyers delivering the services, and the commission. 
 
The McClelland report basically threw up its hands and said that we hope that good faith prevails and 
the problem’s solved. In fact, the MacPherson report (and I’ve never heard anyone deny it), states that it 
still has not been solved. So here is an effort, making significantly . . . I think that’s the only criticism 
that people are concerned about, is whether the boards be autonomous or advisory. Here we address the 
very problem that’s been a carry-over since the day the legal aid plan was developed; here we attempt to 
address it. The McClelland report notes the problem, MacPherson report refers to the problem; the 
McClelland report refuses to deal with it, the MacPherson report does deal with it. 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2031 

All of the other matters, all of the other matters really haven’t been changed with the MacPherson 
report. So I suggest to you that one, the people concerned have been corresponding with my office; that 
in fact, there will be a meeting between myself and representatives of the boards. I know that the 
objection will come that they want the boards to be autonomous, but I suggest to you, at that narrow 
issue, that it’s really a policy decision that has to be made. I suggest to you as well, you may not like it, 
but I believe that the quality of legal services will in fact improve with the new scheme. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to indicate, Mr. Attorney-General, if you are so confident that the direction in 
which you are going is going to be a major improvement, which you are alluding to, then what have you 
to fear to go and to listen to the public? What have you got to fear? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Nothing to fear. I’m just so anxious to get on what I think to be a big improvement 
that’ll better the quality of legal services that I want to get on with the job. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — All right. You’re so anxious to get on. Will you indicate to me the specifics of how you 
see the legal services being improved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I gave you that answer 10 minutes ago. I’m prepared to stand here for days, 
for weeks if necessary, and keep repeating the same answers. I gave you that specific answers in terms 
of improvement of the training of the lawyers involved in the legal aid system. I believe that there will 
be significant improvements in the ability to ensure quality of work, that there will be a better 
opportunity for the lawyers to in fact develop some expertise in areas as we get a central control — that 
will help the poor. I believe as well, that the ability to start developing uniformity of services will in fact 
improve the advice to the poor. I believe that in the two cities of Saskatoon and Regina, if the two 
directors as proposed by the MacPherson report are implemented, that in fact we’ll develop a high 
degree of specialization amongst legal aid lawyers to better serve the impoverished and those using the 
system. I believe that if we can, in particularly those two cities — and as I’ve indicated, I’m prepared to 
extend it throughout the province if the need is there — that in fact if we can develop an expertise in 
divorce, and matrimonial properties, and matters of child custody, and areas such as that, that in fact the 
people using the legal aid plan will be far, far better off. 
 
I hope the hon. member would reconsider his position and realize that there’s a great chance for 
significant improvement. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, if you are so in favour of improving the legal aid system for the poor and 
those which find themselves in circumstances requiring this assistance, then I ask you: why have you, 
before making modifications, at least why have you then cut the total budget for legal aid services in this 
year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I believe the cut was in the range of 1 per cent, was it — approximately 
$150,000 out of a total of 5 million, previously 877,000; that’s less than 1 per cent. I believe in 
anticipation of the operation of the plan and the changes and the efficiencies, that that will be more than 
made up. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, you keep talking about efficiencies, and as soon as the report came out 
you indicated a million-dollar saving. What I would like you to do is to provide me with a breakdown of 
how you intend — because you had to have made a  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2032 

calculation — how you intend to save a million dollars under the new scheme. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I indicated at the time, and perhaps the member was not listening . . . I 
indicated at the time that the advice I had was that there was a potential for savings up to a million 
dollars. No way did I say that that would in fact be the saving. The people involved in the operation of 
the plan feel that in fact there can be significant savings with the proposals followed by the MacPherson 
report. I suggest that they will be significant. If not, then of course we will be back for more funds. 
 
I suggest to you if the savings are not attained, then . . . Well, as I’ve said, that we’ll be back for more 
funds next year. I happen to expect that there will be significant efficiencies. I realize the figure in the 
MacPherson report, but there is a feeling that in fat with the centralized administration and better 
controls and better monitoring of lawyers and staff activities, some of the activities such as duplication 
of effort referred to in the report; the extremely worldly affidavits; the possibility of personal conflicts 
which exist which were referred to in the report — all of these things in my view can be rectified, and I 
believe there will be significant savings. 
 
So if you carefully listen to the phrases that I used, you will indicate, or you will know that that is the 
advice that I have. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think when you make a statement to the public that you’re going to make a change and 
you base it on one of the significant things is a change, and as soon as you got the report, you indicate a 
million-dollar saving. Tonight I ask you, you said there was a potential for that savings. I think, as a 
responsible minister of the Crown, you didn’t make it without a breakdown, an analysis of the potential 
in savings. And what I am asking you: can you or can you not file and provide me with the basis on 
which you made that statement rather than generalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I don’t know where the generalities were. I just listed several specific details 
and I suggest to you that all of the details that I’ve given you will result in savings. I suggest to you that 
what you should be doing, if you challenge my figures, is let’s put it into effect and if they turn out to be 
less than that amount, then you have grounds for criticism next year. I suggest that you be very careful 
and hear carefully the words that I chose and that you wait for it to operate and you will see the savings. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think again you’re being totally . . . totally misrepresenting the facts in making that 
type of statement. And now you say you won’t categorize or you won’t come forward with a calculation 
of the million dollars which you had headlines across the province. ‘New System: Save a Million 
Dollars for the Taxpayers.’ And what I’m asking you is you obviously must have had figures, not just 
categories of potential, because you put a specific figure on it, Mr. Minister. And what I am suggesting 
that if you don’t come forward with a detailed analysis of your calculations, that I think in fact what 
you’re doing is you’ve pulled a figure out of the hat for purposes of trying to defend the new direction in 
which you are going. And clearly enough, you don’t know whether there is a million dollars, nor did you 
know at the time. Because if you did, certainly if you could make that statement at that time, you should 
at least be able to break it down here tonight. Because the very groups which are opposing it would like 
also to be able to take a look at the authenticity of your calculations. And obviously what you’re doing is 
evading the issue. 
 
So I’m asking you once more: can you or can you not give an analysis of the breakdown on which you 
made your calculations of a million dollars? That is, can you be more  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2033 

specific in respect to sums that you think will be saved in the various areas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I’ve given you specific examples. I’ll give you a couple of examples which 
may cause the savings to be reduced. Any delay in putting the legislation through would delay it. We do 
not yet know the first-year costs of the efforts that will be undertaken to improve the quality of legal 
advice and services. And that may impact because that will be the first priority and we have made that 
very clear. So I suggest to you that with the variables that I have mentioned, and the possibility — if 
today is any example — of a delay by the opposition to stop the savings from going through — and I 
think that the public can only read that into the questions today — that in fact the savings will be 
reduced, but that will be on your heads. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll certainly take a lot of responsibility for stopping any program which is going to 
undermine the benefits of a system that was helping the poor, I’ll tell you that. I’ll answer to the public 
for it. So you don’t have to start warning me whether I’m setting up a delay. 
 
But I want to ask you, Mr. Minister . . . You pretend to be in such agreement with the legal aid system, 
and improving the legal aid system, and when I asked you why didn’t you increase the budget, you said, 
‘Oh, well we only cut it by $150,000.’ I would like to ask you, Mr. Minister: can you indicate to me 
whether you have done an analysis of the case-load in respect to the various community clinics in the 
province, and can you indicate whether the trend is upward as the economic condition deteriorates under 
this Tory government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, it will be on your head, as the taxpayers are already on your head for wasteful 
government and overexpenditures. I’m glad to see that you are the only member of the New Democratic 
opposition that’s prepared to take the responsibility for that and be prepared to take the responsibility for 
wasteful expenditures. I will give a very simple example, for I believe there can be significant savings 
with a tightening up . . . with a tightening . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, I’m prepared. I’ll have 
my officials prepare the case-loads, and we will get them from all of the independent, autonomous 
branches of the legal aid system, the offices around the province. We will pull all that together for you 
and we will get you the case-load in each of these autonomous boards that you want to keep autonomous 
. . . But now you want a central control to pull all the records in, so I’m having a little difficulty with 
your position. But we will supply that to you. 
 
For example, there has been a practice which has been brought to my attention, primarily by senior 
members of the bar and the judiciary, that in fact in most cases, or many cases . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well I don’t know if you want to hear the news that I’m going to give you because I 
think it would be enlightening — that, for example, in matrimonial cases the legal aid lawyers do not ask 
for costs, even though they may be the successful party. I would suggest that that will save perhaps 
several hundreds of thousands of dollars merely straightening that up, so that the successful party asks 
costs. 
 
Now I agree that if both litigants are receiving legal aid then the question is an academic one, and an 
irrelevant one. But where one party is on legal aid and the other party is not, the successful party on 
legal aid does not ask for costs, and somehow that tradition has arisen. I would suspect, without 
prejudging the commission, that that would be one of the areas that would be seriously looked at. I’ve 
had that criticism brought to my  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2034 

attention on numerous occasions. I suspect that that would be dealt with. 
 
So I suggest to the hon. member that there are ample opportunities for major savings. There’s an ample 
opportunity for better recovery of cost, and I suggest that a centralized administration is the best way to 
do that. And, as I’ve said, I will have the officials pull the case-load, and we will give it to you perhaps 
this evening. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have here in respect to the Regina community legal aid services, and this is a press 
release, and it indicates: 
 

If no changes are made to the current budget proposals emanating from the provincial government, 
poor people in Regina face the prospect of reductions in legal services available to them over the 
next year. We are now looking at budget figures indicating an increase of one-half f one per cent 
over our ’82-83 budget. 

 
That’s for Regina. And it goes on to say: 
 

The Regina legal aid office dealt with 5,100 new cases during 1982-83 compared to about 4,600 in 
the previous year. The legal aid office expects added work resulting from the government’s 
decisions to cancel funding for the mediation diversion project operated by the John Howard 
Society. 

 
They go on to indicate the seriousness of your lack of funding. 
 

Cut-backs have already hit other legal aid offices in the province. The provincial legal aid 
commission, which must approve the hiring of all lawyers employed by local boards, has frozen the 
hiring of 10 existing vacancies across the province, leaving only 46 lawyers employed. The situation 
is made worse by the threat of new legislation aimed at removing locally elected legal aid boards as 
employers of staff in the local clinics. 

 
The association said, reading just parts of it here, said MacPherson had recommended removing of the 
power of the local boards after allowing only two hours for discussion with a delegation representing all 
13 boards. 
 
What I am concerned with, and I have a fact sheet here which demonstrates in respect to the Regina 
Community Legal Services Society. And this fact sheet I have to draw to your attention, Mr. Minister. 
 
In a time when the unemployment is high, when the economic conditions are not as good as they were in 
the past — and I may say under our government — during this period of difficult times for may people 
in society, there is often more and more need for people to use the services of the legal aid clinics. I 
want to go through what the fact sheet indicates here because I think it will draw out clearly that what 
you have done is not only receive a report from Mr. MacPherson where you may well be acting upon, 
but you have in your budget, even before putting into place a new one, you have slashed the capacity of 
the legal aid clinics to the proper work for the poor of this province. 
 
I am going through this fact sheet: 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2035 

The total government funding for legal aid in Saskatchewan for 1983-84 has been set at 5.7 million 
— this a reduction of over $100,000 from the 1982. The increase for Regina legal aid clinic for 
1983-84 is about 4,000 or 0.5 per cent more than 1982-83. The immediate effect is that the Regina 
clinic will not be able to hire either summer law students or articling students during 1983-84. The 
number of files opened by the Regina clinic increased by more than 10 per cent in 1982 — 5,100 — 
compared to 1981-82. There is no reason to expect that the number of clients will not increase by a 
similar percentage in 1983-84. The provincial legal aid commission has frozen all the hiring of 
lawyers in the system leaving 10 vacancies unfilled out of a total complement of 56 lawyers 
province-wide. 
 
The Attorney-General has floated rumours of even further cuts to the legal aid budget during the 
current year and has spoken of savings to the system of as much as a million dollars. The provincial 
legal aid commission has already circulated a menu of services for discussion by the local legal aid 
boards in recognition that cuts in service will be necessary under the current budget estimates tabled 
by the provincial government. If implemented, the menu would deny a wide variety of legal services 
to the poor people. If the menu had been in effect during 1982-83, the Regina legal aid clinic would 
have had to refuse service in several hundred instances involving some criminal as well as civil 
cases. 
 
The Attorney-General has said he intends to act on the recommendations that the locally elected aid 
boards be removed as employers of staff in the local clinics. 
 

I want to say that here is the concern which many of the citizens of this province find themselves in 
viewing what is happening is that, for this year, what you have done is actually cut the budget. And I 
think it’s clear from what the Regina Community Legal Services Society has said that there is an 
increasing case-load. 
 
What I want to say is: how can you indicate that you are committed to improving the legal services and 
at the same time, before having the new system in place, cutting back on the services that can be 
provided by the existing system? Can you explain why you have indeed cut back at a time when the 
case-load has been increasing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well again, I go back to the MacPherson report. I don’t frankly know why you have 
not referred to this when you talk about case-loads, because there is an indication in the MacPherson 
report that perhaps the indicator of case-load is not a fair one the way the present system operates, in that 
a legal aid office . . . Supposing a person is charged with seven offences, a legal aid office, and this was 
I think indicated in the MacPherson report and admitted, may well open seven different files with seven 
different lawyers, whereas a private firm would probably open up one file. 
 
If we look at the civil matters where in fact, — and it’s referred to in the report — that a legal aid clinic 
may open up a separate file for a custody application, a separate file for the divorce application, a 
separate file for the matrimonial property, and may have three different lawyers, in fact, assigned. So the 
opening of files is not necessarily a proper indicator of the use of the system. And I do believe that the 
changes being proposed may go some ways to addressing that particular aspect. 
 
You also have the situation where an accused may have an offence in Saskatoon,  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2036 

another one in Regina; then two different lawyers maybe involved or he may move. The offences could 
take place in Saskatoon — two different lawyers involved. So I suggest to you that the examples that 
you give are not fair examples, and not necessarily accurate examples. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I asked you a question: if you are supporting the legal aid system, why did you cut the 
budget? Are you saying that your analysis is that they’re doing less work, or there’s less work 
anticipated this year? Is that the basis for cutting the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve given you the answer on several different occasions already, that the 
indications from the MacPherson report is that with a centralized system there will be efficiencies and 
savings that should more than offset that. I suggest that you may disagree with that, but the examples of 
where savings could take place are many. And I suggest that if the administration is more centralized, 
and better controls, that in fact the savings will more than offset the less than 1 per cent reduction. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I don’t think you’re going to convince very many people with that type of remark. 
Number one, you’re afraid to go to the public and allow them . . . and to se up public hearings. You’ve 
clearly indicated that. And I want to indicate that the list of groups that have been soliciting and asking 
that you have public hearings, or that you continue with the local control boards . . . And I have here yet 
another organization which, of course, you may scoff at, too, because they may be offending the report, 
as you indicated; you dismissed the others. But this is a resolution from the United Church of Canada, 
and they indicate, and I’ll just read the resolution: 
 

Be it resolved that the Saskatoon Presbytery of the United Church of Canada urge the 
Attorney-General for Saskatchewan not to remove the control of legal services from local 
community boards. 
 

So this is from the United Church in Saskatoon. I have gone through, Mr. Minister, that there are others 
who have asked you, at least, to allow them to have an input. The president of SANGSSA 
(Saskatchewan Association of Non-Governmental Social Service Agencies) strongly supports the 
concept of services being provided by people via community-operated organizations. 
 
I have a report on legal aid by the board of directors of the Regina Community Legal Services Society 
which analyzed the report, but expressed much the same concern. I have also a press release here by the 
North Central Community Society Incorporated, and they say: 
 

The community association representing Regina’s largest inner-city neighbourhood wants full public 
hearings held before any major changes to the Saskatchewan legal aid system are contemplated. 

 
I think what I have been able to do here this afternoon and this evening, Mr. Minister, is surely to 
indicate to you that there are a large number of organizations and representatives of various groups — 
native groups, women, labour, church groups, various organizations throughout the province — who 
have asked at least for public hearings to be able to voice their concern. And I would think that if you 
are convinced that your system is going to be an improvement, that in the end the total support that you 
would get from that would be by having public hearings, allowing people to make their representation. 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2037 

I guess what one has to come to the conclusion here is that this government, which purports to be 
so-called open government, has suddenly closed the doors. And it is really disconcerting, Mr. Minister, 
that one individual as yourself, the Minister of Justice — a very important portfolio where the rights of 
individuals are affected — that you would be the first to close the doors to the public, that they may not 
in fact make representations. And I ask you again: what have you to fear by listening to these people, by 
setting up public meetings? 
 
I want to go on with other important areas in your portfolio, but I really want to make it abundantly clear 
that I think that your actions is nothing other than contempt for the very people who use the system. I 
ask you once more: why will you not have public hearings in order to allow a large number of the 
segment of this population who are users of a service to have input? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I’ve made clear my position. I find it somewhat strange when the NDP were 
in office and decided, perhaps on a whim, to nationalize the potash industry. And I remember the efforts 
made by the public to try and get public hearings about it. And of course, there were no public hearings 
about it. And don’t tell me that it was raised in an election campaign, because it wasn’t. I can remember 
the debates in this Assembly requesting public hearings on freedom of information that the New 
Democratic Party refused. The public then received the opportunity for public hearings on freedom of 
information. 
 
I’ve suggested to you that on the matter of legal aid, that the issue of whether the boards be autonomous 
local boards or whether there be a centralized system, is really a policy decision — that the quality of 
legal services is the true issue. I suggest as well that the proof of my argument will come out in the 
operation of the legal aid system. If in fact the public is dissatisfied once the changes have had an 
operation to work, with the quality of service, one, they will certainly let me know; they will let the 
government know, and the government will respond in a positive manner. I suggest to you that for you 
to argue that you always had public hearings on every major issue is not a fair one and not an accurate 
one. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, soon you must become acquainted with the fact that you are now in 
government. You must also become cognizant of your clichés that you give to the public, that you will, 
in fact, open the doors for consultation. And I want to ask you how you can justify this position that 
you’re taking, as being consistent with open government. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Anybody can communicate, and I received copies of the letters that the hon. 
member has received, and replied to them. Secondly, I indicated again on several times this afternoon 
that I am prepared to meet with representatives of the boards and that has been scheduled, and their 
representations will be brought forth at that time. 
 
So, to suggest that there’s no opportunity to representations is, again, not accurate. So, I can repeat my 
position over and over and over and over and over again as you ask the same questions over and over 
and over and over and over again. You may not like the answers; you may disagree with the answers. 
But I suggest to you that the public of Saskatchewan like the answers, and the public of Saskatchewan 
believes that there is an ample opportunity in the legal aid program to bring about some savings to the 
taxpayers, some significant savings, and the public of Saskatchewan also realize  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2038 

that with the savings there is also an opportunity to improve the quality of legal services. That’s what 
this government stands for and that will be in direct opposition to your position when you were in 
government. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I have here, just a . . . Revert back to return no. 79, department of Attorney-General, 
return no. 79 which you provided to me this afternoon. And this has to do with the number of 
out-of-province trips made by the Attorney-General of Saskatchewan and also the number of people 
accompanying the minister. And I just want to ask you a couple of questions in respect to the trip to 
Banff, a cost of $3,901.92. That to me seems like a very substantial amount. I wonder if the minister 
could give a breakdown. I know it’s attending the joint annual meeting of the Benchers Law Society of 
Alberta and there may be a very substantial fees that you have to pay and they may have been paid out 
of this amount. But if it’s just indeed travel and accommodation, I ask you, could you give me a 
breakdown as to the items? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It was Jasper. It was the joint annual meeting of the Benchers of the Law Society of 
Alberta and Saskatchewan. Accompanying me were Dr. Gosse, the deputy attorney-general and John 
Whyte of the constitutional branch of the department of the Attorney-General. We will supply that 
detailed information. I think you fill find that the bulk of the expense was on the aircraft charges to the 
annual meeting. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The reason I ask you in respect to the breakdown, I just have another return, return no. 
89, and this is one trip. This was not by yourself, though, but by the minister of public works, supply and 
government services. No, that was the federal-provincial conference of ministers of public works and 
supply and government services, and there were indeed accompanying the minister in this instance . . . 
There was one, two, three, four, five — five individuals plus the minister. And that was to . . . Yours 
was to Jasper. This was to Banff. I note that for the six in comparison with the three, the total was about 
the same. The total for return no. 89 was $3,941 and the total cost of your trip to Jasper was $3,901, and 
there’s a fair number of extra passengers than which the air fare would have had to be paid. And so what 
I would like, and I’m sure it’s all accountable, but I just would like the breakdown. It may well be for 
the law conference and you may have picked up for al of the lawyers that attended with you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — First of all, you can rest assured that it’s all accountable. Secondly, I hate to tell you 
this, but Jasper is a little further away than Banff is, and one is outside of Edmonton, and the other is 
close to Calgary. I think that the hon. member may not understand, but I’m sure he does . . . This was in 
government aircraft, and the number of passengers at that point, other than some limited changes, 
doesn’t make a great deal of difference and that may be accountable in the figures. But again, the 
officials will pull that information in detail, and we will be more than pleased to supply it to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just in respect to the court-houses in Regina and Saskatoon — I wonder whether you’re 
proceeding with them, what is the present status, are you leasing, are you building, does one department 
know what the other is thinking? Because I can indicate that you have seem to have said one thing, the 
department of government services seem to be off on another flight, and I’d like to ask what your 
intentions are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The matters of the court-houses — they’re not being proceeded with in this budget 
and that has been made clear. The options as to what form of development, if it were to proceed, had 
several aspects. There was consideration of  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2039 

whether having it developed, project managed, and then leased back, the question of whether the 
department of government services would build it. All of these options, I believe, have been publicly 
discussed and that perhaps is where the member has a degree of uncertainty. But those options were 
discussed. Obviously, in this year’s budget, they’re not proceeding. It was simply a question that this 
government has made some very tough decisions. We are making and are prepared to make tough 
decisions. We realize that the revenues proposed by the previous government were perhaps somewhat 
inflated — and I’m being polite when I say that — that there is a downturn in our revenues and that we, 
along with the public of Saskatchewan, are tightening our belts and that’s one of the difficult decisions 
that we had to make. I hope that sometime in the foreseeable future we will be able to proceed with 
court-houses. But if we’re making the choice between court-houses or a new cancer clinic in the city of 
Saskatoon, this government chose to proceed with the new cancer clinic. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I know economic times are tough when they’re Tory times and I know that there 
has been major cuts in university construction and I know that there has been cuts in the Justice 
department and you’re not telling the public anything new. 
 
I want to ask you whether . . . The report here says: 
 

Plans for court-houses to be unveiled next week. Expansion plans for Saskatoon’s overcrowded 
court-houses are expected to be announced next week after government officials weigh seven 
proposals from private firms. 
 

And this is set forth by the deputy minister, Otto Cutts, who made that statement. Now I’m wondering 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Since Mr. Cutts, and he’s got an appropriate name . . . I was wondering 
whether in fact we can believe his statement or have you overruled the decision of the government 
services which had indicated that they were proceeding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m going to have to correct the hon. member on several areas. First of all, I know 
he will retract his statement about cuts in university construction, that in fact that was not the case. The 
government is proceeding with the new geological sciences at some twenty-some-million dollars. I 
believe, and major construction of the universities that in fact there has been no cuts, I am advised, in 
university construction. So I am sure that the hon. member will withdraw. 
 
I believe that the hon. member asked me the question about the new court-houses and I have responded 
to that question. In terms of alternate spacing for the overcrowded facilities in Saskatoon, yes, the 
department of government services is looking. I believe there is a tentative proposal to proceed with 
moving the facilities to the Sturdy-Stone building in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Has the minister any position in respect to . . . rather than having the provincial 
government build court-houses, that we go on a basis of leasing the court-house space on a permanent 
basis rather than construction? What is your position? That should we go to the private sector, have them 
build what would be a court room, and then have the government lease it back, or are you more in 
favour of the government constructing the court-houses themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Whatever is the cheapest for the taxpayers is fine with me, I’m not  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2040 

married to any system. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I would like to ask the minister which proposal — the private or building it by the 
government — is likely to be cheaper. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, depending on what factors you take into account. You can certainly take into 
account the lost opportunity cost if the government . . . For example, if the government has to put up $25 
million out of this year’s budget, and take it away from other needed services in order to build a 
building, then some services are going to be cut, and I suggest to you that the people may suffer. If the 
government is prepared to lease it and spread that cost over 25 years, in fact it may be far cheaper. I 
can’t give you the answers to that because each case would have to be decided on its merits. But in fact 
what we have to look at is: which is cheapest for the taxpayer, both over the short term, over the long 
term, and where can the government best utilize its funds to make sure that these services are being 
provided to the people of this province? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You totally didn’t address it. You know as a fact that normally government — not 
normally — but governments can in fact borrow funds at a rate preferable to that which the private 
contractors . . . and obviously, the cost therefore, should be decreased. 
 
But going on to another document here in respect to the court-houses, and I want to get it clear, because 
the government services minister, Joan Duncan, says her department will lease space for a temporary 
basis from the private company to relieve overcrowding; construction plans have been shelved for three 
to five years. I wonder if the minister can confirm that they have been shelved for three to five years as 
indicated by your colleague. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I have no cause to disagree with the statement of my colleague. Certainly in 
terms of this year’s budget, the proposals for new court-house facilities n the two cities of Saskatoon and 
Regina were shelved. Whether the increasing demands and the problems that do exist — which I freely 
admit — continue, may cause a reconsideration of that particular position. So I suggest to you that the 
matter is still up in the air, that in fact it will be reviewed. It will be reviewed on an annual basis. 
 
I had information given to me this afternoon, if we talk about government construction of some 
buildings, that in fact if we’re talking about creating employment — and the record of this government 
is second-to-none in Canada — that it is far more effective to use our $5,000 project employment 
proposal which ahs caused so far a take-up of approximately 4,000 jobs in the province at $5,000 per 
job, is far cheaper than building a building where the cost of one job may be in the range of 20 anywhere 
up to $50,000. 
 
So I suggest to you that there may be far more effective ways to stimulate employment and get 
employment for our people, than your proposal of big government buildings, which you say . . . And I’m 
sure that the public were watching with interest your statement that the government can build these 
cheaper than anybody else. I would doubt very much on the record to date that the public would accept 
that statement at face value. 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2041 

Mr. Koskie: — All I can say to the hon. member — he should have run for leadership, because his line 
of fiction is about as effective as the Premier’s. 
 
I want to turn to the area of the court of appeal, and as I discussed previously, Mr. Justice Bayda has 
indicated his considerable concern with the amount of work and the need for additional members of the 
court of appeal. I’d like to ask the Attorney-General, the minister, whether or not he has worked out with 
his Liberal friends, his brethren who he was a member of the party before, and whether you have in fact 
had communications with the Liberal Party (which you in fact were a member before) and worked out a 
method of communication insofar as your consultation in the selection of the court of appeal justices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I stand certainly convicted of having been a Liberal. I would caution the New 
Democratic members opposite however, that I saw the light and joined the Progressive Conservatives. 
You did not take my advice. You didn’t learn from my past mistakes. After I joined the Conservatives, 
you dove into bed with Pierre Elliott Trudeau and his friends, and in fact developed this infamous 
incestuous relationship which exists between the New Democratic Party and Pierre Trudeau and the 
federal Liberal Party. So I learned by my mistakes. The people of Saskatchewan may not let you forget 
your mistake. They, to date anyway, have, at least in my riding, forgiven me mine, if we can call it that. 
I do suggest to you that you do have time to reconsider your position, and on the road to Damascus you 
may see the light. I would hope that is the case. 
 
I have made it clear to the hon. members opposite . . . I have indicated previously to the members 
opposite that this government — and I have taken the position — that we believe that there should be 
consultation between the government and the provinces in its appointment of superior court judges. We 
have a difference of opinion, I was surprised to find out during the last estimates, because when you 
were the government, the then premier indicated that there should be consultation between the federal 
government and the provinces, at least in the Supreme Court positions. And my recollection was that he 
suggested it to all superior court recommendations as well. The position of this government is that there 
should in fact be consultation between the Government of Canada and the provinces as to the 
appointment of both the superior court, which in this province is the court of appeal, and the Court of 
Queen’s Bench. We maintain that position. Until such time as there is consultation, I really have 
difficulty answering the question. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Chairman, I would ask the minister whether he anticipates an increase in the 
case-load for the court of appeal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, I can’t give any indication of that. I would suspect in the normal course of the 
increase of charter cases that there would be an increase in the case-load of all courts. Assuming that to 
be the case, I would make an assumption that there would be an increase in the case-load of the court. 
But to categorically state that, I’m afraid I can’t, nor could anyone else. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, I want to draw the attention to the Minister of Justice: 
 

‘Provincial courts to acquire more power.’ Estey predicts. ‘Senior provincial courts will become de 
facto courts of last resort for all cases except those involving the charter of rights, and 
federal-provincial contests,’ Supreme Court Justice Willard Estey predicted in Saskatoon Monday. 



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2042 

What Mr. Justice Estey of the Supreme Court has indicated is that the court of appeal level in the 
provinces will, in fact, be de facto the last court of decision, other than the major cases in the 
constitutional and charter rights, because he says, speaking to a joint meeting of the Canadian Club and 
the Rotary Club, Mr. Justice Estey said: 
 

The Supreme Court will be forced to restrict the range of issues covered in the 150 cases it chooses 
to hear in the year. 

 
He goes on to indicate, as I said, that the provincial courts, senior provincial courts, will become the de 
facto courts of last resort. Obviously, what he is indicating is that there is going to be increasing pressure 
on the court of appeal. What I am asking the Minister of Justice: why doesn’t he get rid of his desire to 
wait until after the next federal election, hoping that a federal Tory government will be elected and that a 
suitable prime minister might in fact appoint him to the court of appeal, and leave the position open? 
 
I think that the justice system of this province is much more important than that you should, for personal 
reasons, if that certainly has been alluded to, want to delay the appointments of further justices to the 
court of appeal. I ask you: what specifically have you done since the last time we discussed it in 
estimates? What correspondence, what discussions have you had with the Minister of Justice in 
resolving what you indicate is an impasse? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I first of all would like to correct the fallacy of your argument, and your 
misinterpretation of the statements of Mr. Justice Estey. Just because a statement exists that the court of 
appeal of a province may, in fact, become the court of last resort, does not mean that it’s going to hear 
any more cases. All it means is that several of the cases that went from the court of appeal to the 
Supreme Court no longer will be going there, so it doesn’t mean an increase in cases . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 
 
I suggest to the hon. member that that argument is just as unwise as the previous one, because in fact it 
just simply means that there’ll be less appeals; there’ll even be a little less work for the court of appeal 
in preparing the documentation that has to go to the Supreme Court. So I suggest to you that your 
argument is not the least bit correct. 
 
I suggest to the following member, another possibility which may have the effect of reducing the 
work-load of the court, and I’m referring to efforts by this government to have changes to section 96 of 
the constitution to allow the provinces to appoint their own specialized courts. For example, in 
matrimonial matters that that jurisdiction could, with the law remaining federal — the law of divorce — 
to the provincial courts. That in fact we have an opportunity to reduce the work-load of the superior 
courts, we have advocated that most strongly. 
 
I had been hopeful that at the last constitutional conference there would have been a resolution of that 
matter. The position was uniformly held by all of the provinces but for Quebec, and Quebec’s position 
being unique, the federal government chose not, at this time, to amend section 96 to allow the provincial 
courts to take on more matters of jurisdiction. If that amendment had of been proceeded with, in my 
view that may well have had the effect of reducing the work-load of the superior courts. It certainly 
would have meant putting it on the provincial courts. But it would have made many aspects of the law 
more accessible to the public. 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2043 

Secondly, we will be proposing amendments to the small claims act of the province of Saskatchewan, 
increasing the jurisdiction, which may take some of the load off the superior courts. If we did not have 
the existing court rulings as to the jurisdiction of the small claims court and if we had of made the 
changes to the section 96, perhaps the jurisdiction of the small claims court could have been higher and 
again, reducing the work-load for the superior court. 
 
So I don’t think it fair for you to leave the impression that this problem is rapidly increasing and that 
nothing was being done. In fact I suggest that the substantive changes that we propose and discussed 
with the Government of Canada would have gone a long way to alleviating the pressures. 
 
We will be bringing in amendments as well to the Court of Queen’s Bench act, which I hope the Hon. 
members will support, which should reduce the work-load and in fact make the court operation 
smoother. So I suggest there are ways to reduce the work-load. 
 
With regard to the question that you ask about any discussions or consultations that I’ve had with the 
Minister of Justice of Canada with regard to our position, I have transmitted the position of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, and my position, that we do believe that there should be consultation to 
the Minister of Justice. And I had a rather frank and full discussion with him at the last constitutional 
conference. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I ask the minister whether cases involving the charter of rights, federal-provincial 
contests, can in fact be heard by the court of appeal. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Are you talking about a reference or are you talking about cases between 
individuals or Criminal Court appeals? Which? 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Whatever. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, tell us which because it makes a difference. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ll take the . . . (inaudible) . . . one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Certainly, the court of appeals can hear it. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — What Mr. Chief Justice Estey has indicated, that two very new important areas as a 
result of the constitutional changes have surfaced, and that is in respect to the charter of rights and 
federal-provincial contests as a result of the constitution. And what I am saying to you, while that will 
pretty well fully occupy the Supreme Court, as he indicates, I am saying that that volume could 
conceivably go through the courts of appeal and increase the number of cases. So, what you’re saying in 
reply doesn’t make any sense so far as the number and the burden on the court of appeal, because as you 
are aware, there is a case in Regina based on the charter of rights and, as a consequence, the load in the 
court of appeal will in fact increase both in the amount and in complexity. 
 
What I am urging here is that I think you should get rid of your political considerations and get on with 
appointing additional members to the court of appeal. As Mr. Justice Estey has indicated, they are likely 
to be the court of last resort, because of the inability of the federal Supreme Court. As a consequence, I 
think that with that circumstance  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2044 

being a reality, full complements of necessary justices and support staff should be enlarged. I am rather 
disappointed that over one year, the Minister of Justice, who says he has had a frank discussion and has 
not been able to get any kind of an agreement from his liberal cousins in Ottawa . . . and I ask the 
minister to report more fully as to any progress that has been made in respect to the consultation process. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, as I indicated, the matter was pretty much left at the frank discussion. We’re 
aware of each other’s position, and when I hear from the Minister of Justice for Canada, I may well 
make a report to this Assembly. I can’t respond any further to your question about the possibility of an 
increase in the cases before the court of appeal because of the charter. You indicated that Mr. Justice 
Estey said that. I said that when I first answered your question — that that’s a distinct possibility. So, I 
indicated that there may well be an increase because of the charter. There may well be a reduction in 
cases if we can get changes to section 96, changes to the small claims court jurisdiction, etc., etc. and I 
gave all those options that we, as a government, are working on, and we, as a government, have been 
urging upon the Government of Canada. That was fully debated in this Assembly during the last 
estimates. 
 
Prior to the constitutional conferences we set out our position — we set it out for the public of 
Saskatchewan. So, I suggest to you that to take Mr. Justice Estey’s argument as automatically meaning 
an increase, it just simply does not follow logically, and it doesn’t follow practically. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I tell you, if it came to a choice on making an estimation on the effect of the case-load 
for the respective courts, I would want to believe Mr. Justice Estey. I think what should be clear to the 
Attorney-General is that in respect to his own legislation — the public utilities review commission — 
where a case has been submitted by the chairman of the commission, I believe, to the court of appeal for 
an interpretation of the powers to the commission . . . Now, I would have thought that there would have 
been some indication to the Minister of Justice of the difficulty which Mr. Justice Bayda indicated. That 
is, the case-load is certainly causing an amount of delay, because the reference of this case to the court 
of appeal, as I understand it, will not be heard until November. And I would have thought that, you 
know, if you’re going to have an efficient justice system, a system dealing with the individual cases at 
the earliest opportunity would be best. 
 
But I take it that the Attorney-General, for obvious political gains, is holding out on the expansion of the 
court of appeal. And I think that I would like to ask him whether or not in his representation to the 
Minister of Justice — the Minister of Justice in Ottawa — whether you have sought support for your 
concept of consultation; whether you have sought representation from the chief justice of the court of 
appeal, the chief justice of the Queen’s Bench, in support of your submission; whether you have in fact, 
sought support from the Law Society of Saskatchewan, in support of your position, which I think you 
find it necessary to delay any further appointments because you say you want consultation. And if that is 
the case, then I ask you, have you asked other groups to join with you in getting the federal justice 
minister to change his position and indeed set up a consultative process that would be satisfactory to 
you? Have you solicited support from the other groups? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It goes without saying, I believe, that most provinces would like a formal process of 
consultation for judicial appointments. I would like the hon. member to keep in mind that the courts that 
I’m referring to are within the province of Saskatchewan. I believe that although the power of 
appointment is within the  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2045 

Government of Canada — of Saskatchewan judges — that the province of Saskatchewan, the people of 
Saskatchewan through its elected government, should have some input into that appointment. That is a 
position that this government has taken. 
 
I find it strange that when you were the government, when you took that position, it was non-political. 
When I take that position, this government takes that position, all of a sudden it’s become political. I 
have some difficulty with your position. It strikes me as somewhat inconsistent. I would hope that the 
hon. members opposite would support this government in its belief that as these judges are within the 
province of Saskatchewan, that the people of this province should in fact have some input and 
consultation into their appointment. A very simple procedure. You can call me political for having done 
that. As I say, when the former premier gets up and wants provincial consultation of the Supreme Court, 
somehow that isn’t political, but when we do it, it’s political. 
 
In terms of . . . Yes, we have discussed . . . I have discussed with the chief justice. I’ve discussed the 
matter with members of the law society. Certainly there is concern about the work-load of the court of 
appeal. I share that concern. But I also believe that there should be a consultation in the appointment of 
judges which have such a dramatic impact on the daily lives of the people of this province. I believe that 
the province should have some input. Certainly the federal government is not prepared to go with any 
formal consultation process. They have an existing legal position obviously, and they would be naturally 
reluctant to weaken that position. But whether some accommodation can be arrived at, I simply cannot 
say. 
 
I’m going to respond to an earlier question raised, when you asked about the work-load of the 
community clinics. I believe the hon. member already has a copy of the 1981-82 annual report of the 
Saskatchewan Community Legal Services Commission wherein that information is tabled. The update 
for 1982-83 we will have to obtain from the community legal services commission when we have that 
information. I will undertake to supply it to you forthwith. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to turn to another area and that is in respect to the 
unified family court. As you know, unified family court was established in Saskatoon and there certainly 
was intentions by the previous government to extend that to Regina. Now, I take it that what there has 
been was a report which reviewed the work of the unified family court in Saskatoon and really, in fact, 
gave high praise to the work of the unified family court. I am wondering if there are any reasons other 
than restraint under the new administration which defers the establishing of the family court here in 
Regina. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The situation, as I’ve made public a short time ago, is that we have received and are 
reviewing the Havemann report into the unified family court and also the report of the unified family 
court committee. Those reports are presently being reviewed to determine the effectiveness of the 
unified family court and there were some mixed results which one could debate for some considerable 
period of time. Until such time, though, as an analysis of those reports is ready, I simply am unable to 
establish a policy or determine a policy as to what position we take. 
 
I also throw into the hopper the consideration and the possibility of major changes by the Government of 
Canada in the divorce legislation. The Minister of Justice has indicated that there may be significant 
changes. If, for example, the federal government  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2046 

allows affidavit divorce, which would mean that parties that consent to a divorce simply file affidavits of 
their position and affidavits of consenting to the divorce, the work-load of the unified family court may 
as a result drop dramatically, which would have an impact on the form of that court and how it would 
best operate. So, until we have that, the changes to the divorce law which the federal government is 
hoping to introduce this spring and summer (June, I’m informed), we really would have difficulty in 
deciding what form a unified court should take and how it should operate if that’s the way to go. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I understand that there was a three-year study by the Prairie Justice Research 
Consortium and that report has been finalized — it’s the Prairie Justice Research Consortium. And that 
report is complete, from my information, and it says that the Saskatoon court has improved the judicial 
and family counselling services offered to families in crisis. 
 
The family court has been able to develop streamlining features including telephone adjournments, easy 
access to interim relief and custody maintenance order. The report shows that the court handle all 
matters more quickly than the regular courts in Regina. It took an average of 75 days to obtain a final 
divorce decree in Saskatoon compared to 103 in Regina. The average costs awarded against parties in 
Saskatoon with the unified court were $281 compared with $433 in Regina. And according to the report, 
the counselling services provided by the family court were beneficial, particularly for children. And 
New Brunswick is implementing a province-wide system of unified family courts and in Manitoba a 
court will be established in Winnipeg. 
 
I just want to say in respect to the overall highlights of the evaluation of the unified court in Saskatoon, 
it indicates a number of advantages that have been established by having the unified family court: in 
respect to costs, in respect to the time, streamlining procedures, the counselling services provided by 
family court in respect to: particularly, the benefit to children. And I am really rather concerned that 
after the major success that seems to be evident in Saskatoon, what are the major concerns for delaying 
such a feature, such a unified family court, in Regina. What further evidence does the minister require in 
order to make a decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — One of the areas that we would like some information is the question of cost. The 
report that you referred to, also known as the Havemann report, does not do a cost analysis of the unified 
family court, and I know that deciding on the cost, and trying to find the cost of programs is something 
new. It’s something new being brought in by the Conservative government that didn’t exist before, but 
it’s something that we’re somewhat cognizant of, is the question of cost. 
 
But let me refer to another item that you neglected to mention when you talk about the length of time for 
an uncontested divorce action to get to court in 1980: in Saskatoon, was 75 days; in Regina, 103 days. 
But look at the question of contested divorce actions: Saskatoon, six weeks; Regina, three weeks — half 
the time. 
 
So let’s not take the statistics as anything other than . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, the hon. 
member says a lot of counselling goes on. The chief justice has advised that many of the procedures to 
expedite proceedings have now been adopted by the Court of Queen’s Bench, to be applied 
province-wide. 
 
One of the other areas that we would like to address in terms of the unified family court 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2047 

. . . Although you’ve narrowed your discussion to Regina, we would like to know the impact of the 
unified family court and the possibility of the unified family court throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan, as opposed to just an extension to the city of Regina. So that would be a major item. As I 
say to you, when you talk about reducing costs, I’m very sympathetic to the question of reduction of 
costs for people before the courts, particularly the family matters. I suggest that perhaps the proposed 
changes of the Government of Canada in the new divorce legislation to allow divorce by affidavit may 
have a far more dramatic impact on the reduction of costs for people going through a divorce than 
perhaps anything else that could be done. 
 
So I suggest that we would all be well advised and responsible if we waited the federal report and a full 
opportunity to discuss the reports that we already have before a decision is made. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I sense what is happening, Mr. Minister, is that your department is suffering the same 
disease that has infected other portfolios, and that is major Tory restraints when it comes to assisting 
lower income people and people facing major problems. 
 
I want to turn to another topic, and that is The Matrimonial Property Act. And I want to ask the minister 
whether he has referred to the law reform commission The Matrimonial Property Act and whether he’ll 
set out any terms of reference in his reference to the law reform commission. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I’m glad you asked that question because it gives me an opportunity to correct 
the records. And I hope it’s well corrected by members of the press gallery because it was not this 
Attorney-General . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Because this will give them an opportunity to correct 
the mistaken impression left out by people like Miss Sandra Mitchell. It was the previous 
attorney-general who requested (and I ask the hon. members opposite, it was not this Attorney-General 
but the previous NDP attorney-general) who requested the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan 
to review The Matrimonial Property Act — not this Attorney-General — and ask for a full review. I will 
endeavour to get a copy of the letter of reference from the then attorney-general to the law reform 
commission asking for that review. Not only will I supply a copy to the hon. member, but I will 
undertake to supply a copy to all hon. members so that they understand the reference. I have in no way 
suggested any changes, nor have I made any suggestions whatsoever with regard to change to The 
Matrimonial Property Act. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Are you indicating that the law reform commission have before them a study of The 
Matrimonial Property Act? I am asking you whether, in view of the so-called open government 
approach, which isn’t evident when you come to the legal aid problem, will you in fact provide an 
opportunity for public hearings by the law reform commission if they continue to handle it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well it’s not for me to tell the law reform commission. If the law reform 
commission wishes to hold public hearings, I would be very supportive of that effort, but that would be 
up to the law reform commission. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Do you make any recommendations to the law reform commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can ask for areas of study of the law reform commission, as obviously stated in the 
act establishing the law reform commission. As I suggest, I  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2048 

cannot tell the law reform commission to hold public hearings. If it wishes to hold public hearings, as I 
say, I would be very supportive. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to turn a release which indicates that, Mr. Minister, that the jail population is at 
record level. And it says: 
 

The population of Saskatchewan’s correctional facilities has risen strikingly in the last year and is at 
its highest level ever, a situation which people in the field attribute partly to the economic 
conditions. 

 
And all of us can agree on the economic conditions being increasingly worse. 
 
What I would like, if the minister could provide, is in respect to the correctional facilities, Pine Grove 
Correctional Centre, first of all I’d like to ask you what is the so-called capacity of the Pine Grove 
Correctional Centre. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Normal capacity is 52. Before we proceed, I would like to read into the record in 
answer to the previous question with regard to the law reform commission and the review of the 
matrimonial act, a copy. I think the public is well aware how much faith the members opposite place in 
letters of the then attorney-general, if I can refer to the rather short cruise missile debate — and I would 
hope you would come back to that because I have some further information; but we can do that at an 
appropriate time. A letter under date of January 14, 1980, and I will send a copy over to the opposition 
critic: 
 

Professor R.C.C. Cuming 
 
Chairman, Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan 
 
Sturdy-Stone Centre, Saskatoon. 
 
Dear Professor Cuming: 
 
Reference the Matrimonial Property Act. 
 
I would ask the commission to review the operation of this statute with a view to providing me with 
a report on its shortcomings (and I’m going to repeat that — on its shortcomings) and how it might 
be improved by the time it has been in force for two years. 
 
You will, no doubt, wish to consult with the bar, interested organizations and members of the public, 
and examine as well the application of the similar, recently enacted legislation in the other three 
western provinces and Ontario. 
 
I am requesting my officials to meet with you at some time in the early future to see if the 
department can be of any assistance to the commission. I expect that you will hear from Dr. Gosse 
shortly as we discussed recently. 
 
Yours truly, 
 
Roy J. Romanow, Attorney-General 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2049 

You will note that, although there is a suggestion for consultation with the public, there is no 
suggestion that there in fact be public hearings and you’ll notice that the proposed directive from the 
then attorney-general refers to a review of The Matrimonial Property Act because of its shortcomings. 
I suggest that if you have any criticism of that review, that you could take it up with the appropriate 
ex-authorities. Now I understand that the question on Pine Grove was, capacity was 52? 52. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I want to thank the Minister of Justice for the report, not for the report, but for a copy of 
the letter of the former attorney-general. Many of the people of Saskatchewan miss him. The brilliance 
in which he fulfilled the office . . . And I know, as has been said by the press which the present Minister 
of Justice has alluded to, that he still walks in the shadow of . . . and is having a very difficult time to fill 
the shoes that were vacated. And I want to also leave no misconceptions as the Attorney-General 
attempted to allude to by reading the letter. 
 
I want to say that the Attorney-General emphasized shortcomings to providing me with a report on its 
shortcomings. I would like to say, Mr. Attorney-General, shortcomings can be either direction. Either 
the shortcomings could be in respect that legislation was introduced that went too far, or shortcomings in 
respect to legislation that didn’t go far enough. And so shortcomings is looking and evaluating at the 
legislation as was adopted. So don’t leave any diffusion in respect to misrepresenting an 
attorney-general that certainly, I think, adequately expressed what he wanted to say. And who goes on to 
say, “you will no doubt wish to consult with the bar, interested organizations, and the members of the 
public.’ 
 
And all I asked, for a simple question in respect to the present Minister of Justice, if in fact this matter 
has been referred to the law reform commission . . . Will in fact the outline of the direction, if you want 
to call it that, as set out by the former attorney-general, is that essentially acceptable to you? Or have 
you, as a new Attorney-General, indicated that you have some reservations in respect to the broad 
general outline of the content of that letter which you referred to, and tried unsuccessfully to imply other 
than what was stated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, I have some concerns because, as you say, there can be two interpretations of 
what your government meant by shortcomings in the act. Did it mean a shortcoming in that . . . I recall 
that section 20, the equality provision, was inadequate, and that equal rights for women had gone too far. 
Is that what you’re referring to in shortcomings? I don’t know. I think the use of the phrase certainly 
caused some concern amongst people affected by the legislation that I find unfortunate. But certainly the 
review is under way. I believe that the review now, given the public concern about the review, will be 
done in a most fair and effective manner, and on that basis, I have been assured by the new chairman of 
the law reform commission that he’s aware of the concerns. He has responded to many of the women’s 
groups in response to their concerns, how their review started, and I believe that those that have 
corresponded with him are satisfied, so therefore so am I. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Getting back to where we were before you interrupted. I was on to corrections, Mr. 
Minister, and Pine Grove Correctional Centre you indicated had spaces for 52 inmates. I want to ask you 
the same question in respect to the Provincial Correctional Centre at Prince Albert, that is the normal 
number of spaces there. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Do you want the normal capacity of all the correctional centres if I  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2050 

can supply that to you, rather than one at a time? I’m prepared to send that information over to you . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . It doesn’t matter, I mean it’s the taxpayers money. You can still ask the 
question one at a time, I’ll answer them one at a time. If I can give you the information all at once, it 
may be a bit much for you to absorb, if that’s the concern you have I am prepared to give it to you one at 
a time, whatever you wish. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I think talking about problems, the exhibition tonight by the Minister of Justice . . . I am 
sure that in comparison to the performance of the former attorney-general, that the people of 
Saskatchewan must be wondering — wondering how it is possible to have made such a mistake to watch 
this dismal performance this evening. 
 
What I want Mr. Minister, I would like the normal capacity for each of the correctional centres: P.A., 
Regina, the Battlefords, and Saskatoon, and also if you would provide me with the maximum number of 
inmates and/or remands held for each month at each centre during the course of last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We do have the yearly, which I will forward to you. It includes the Regina 
Correctional Centre, the Prince Albert Correctional Centre, Saskatoon Correctional Centre, Battlefords 
Community Correctional Centre, Pine Grove, St. Louis Rehabilitation Centre, the Besnard Cape Lake 
Camp, Buffalo Narrows Community Correctional Centre, the Creighton Community Correctional 
Centre, and community training residences. I’ll supply that. 
 
We will have to pull the monthly statistics and supply those to you. I doubt that we would be able to get 
them tonight, but we will supply them as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That will be fine if in fact you can provide that in the near future. 
 
I think that the minister certainly will agree that the jail population, or the correctional centre population 
of inmates has increased dramatically, some 18 per cent in the past year. And what I want to ask: have 
you any initiatives similar to increasing the number of work camps, or bush camps, or the other forms of 
— rather than have them held in incarceration in the correctional centres, those which are less risk — 
whether you have any plans in this budget to increase the number and the capacity of the work camps, 
the bush camps, or the various other community centres, in order to alleviate the pressure of the 
correctional centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There is, opening in May of this year, a new urban camp in the city of Saskatoon. 
There will be new programs announced — one, sorry, which has been announced, the restitution 
program — which should have some impact on select offenders, of reducing the number of inmates. 
And then, secondly, a community service order, and there’ll be a full announcement of that in the near 
future as to how that particular system will operate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You mentioned the new urban camp in Saskatoon is in the works. I wonder, how many 
inmates will this facilitate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Fifty. 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2051 

Mr. Koskie: — And in respect to the restitution program, what impact do you feel that that will have of 
alleviating the pressures on the correctional centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We expect a reduction of 26 of the jail population when it is fully in place. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — In view of the fact that the correctional centre population had increased dramatically, I 
want to ask the minister, prior to getting into place any substitute, why, in fact, did he eliminate the 
Greenbush challenge camp at Hudson Bay? And why, in fact . . . Well, let’s start with the Greenbush 
challenge camp. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, several factors: first of all, there was an unremarkable recidivism performance 
at that program, that in fact, for example, the Buffalo Pound camp was costing approximately $30 per 
day whereas the Greenbush camp was costing, in ’82-83, $89 per day, practically triple. So there was 
also a reduced number of suitable inmates and a significantly higher cost, compared to less-specialized 
camps. So there was several reasons for the cancellation. 
 
I would like to advise the hon. member that one area of concern to me with the cancellation of the 
Greenbush wilderness camp was, in fact, the support that the camp had in the community. And that, I 
think all members would agree, has tended to be the exception as opposed to the rule, and we are 
looking at alternative ways of utilizing the facilities to take advantage of the community support that 
exists in that area. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Also, Mr. Minister, the John Howard mediation diversion program, which had, I think, 
undoubtedly, a considerable amount of success, and we note that this program also was in fact scrapped 
under your jurisdiction. I want to read just a portion of a letter that I have from the John Howard 
Society, which I think sets out some of the work in which it was doing. It says: 
 

The John Howard Society of Saskatchewan has been providing unique, innovative mediation 
diversion services since December 1, 1976 in both Regina and Moose Jaw. Mediation diversion 
provides victims and accused persons an opportunity to discuss and resolve conflict which lead to a 
criminal complaint. Further, the participants are provided a model for handling further 
disagreements more effectively. 
 
Through the first five years of service, this successful program was referred in excess of 2,700 
criminal cases. In Regina alone, an average of 45 cases have been referred each month. Mediation 
diversion has been shown to be an effective and efficient method of resolving these criminal 
complaints. This has been demonstrated in that in spite of the voluntary nature of the program 
participation, the vast majority of referral persons, both victims and the accused, not only 
participated in the mediation meetings, but did in fact resolve the complaint to their mutual 
satisfaction; that over 70 per cent of  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2052 

the referral complaints are resolved through mediation; and that the average cost per case is $125 
(program approximation) attests to the efficiency and the effectiveness of the program. 
 
Independent research has revealed that the mediation diversion is successful at reducing criminal 
repetition of crimes. Whereas only 14 per cent of those accused persons referred to the mediation 
diversion program were subsequently charged, 69 per cent of those persons charged in similar 
circumstances but proceeding through the formal court procedure were subsequently charged during 
the same time period. 
 

I think that here was a program which certainly is illustrated had been working, had been working well, 
certainly for young and first-time offenders, rather than going through the harrowing experience before 
the courts, the expense of hiring a lawyer. Here was a program which brought together the individual 
which the complaint was levied against with the complaint with the individual that had been the victim 
of the accused action — and a high, high percentage of satisfactory disposal of that situation. 
 
I really wonder why so early in your term. It’s not only that there is no funding at all in this budget. 
They have been totally eliminated from any funding, totally. But what is worse, even in your first 
budget, before this second budget, they had great difficulty in receiving the ordinary amount of grants 
that had been provided by the previous government. I would have thought that if you had concerns in 
respect to the efficiency of it, that at least you would have discussed it with the John Howard Society. I 
know that the John Howard Society had solicited funds from the community and now in fact, now in 
fact are campaigning for funds in support of the public, in order to carry on some of the very important 
work that it was doing. 
 
And in all seriousness, Mr. Minister, and laying aside the political rhetoric, I want to say that I am 
indeed very concerned that what I think was a very innovative procedure has been so rapidly scrapped 
by your government. It seems to me that when asked to justify this cut, and certainly the amount that 
was being paid by the government was not an astronomical amount — I think it was somewhere around 
$96,000 — I ask you again, you know, on what basis did you come to the conclusion to in fact scrap a 
program which had major benefits, both to the accused and to society, in reducing the costs of rather 
than going through the formal court procedure? I ask you, can you explain what analysis you did, and 
for what reasons did you in fact decide to scrap this program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The hon. member is one of the few people I know that could make sunshine look 
like a blizzard in his description of the sky is falling, the sky is falling. And there are many, many 
inaccuracies in the statement. First of all, that it was cheaper. I ask you to refer to statements by the John 
Howard Society that in effect admit that the costs of going to court were $77, whereas mediation 
diversion was $125. The other difficulty is that there is not, and I think all objective people having dealt 
with the Elkin report, question the . . . Or there is little evidence of an effective recidivist rate, and 
there’s very little review, or effective review, as to the cost analysis of the particular program. 
 
I hope the public would keep this in perspective and listen to what the hon. member said, because it was 
originally designed as a pilot project in the two cities of Regina and Moose Jaw. It was to end, I believe, 
two or three years ago. The previous government saw fit because it, too, was unsure as to the effect of 
the program. The previous government refused to make it a permanent project, secondly, refused to 
extend it  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2053 

beyond the pilot project cities of Regina and Moose Jaw. It was an experimental project. 
 
The government on the evidence before it, and we have the Elkin report and the criticisms of the Elkin 
report . . . And with regard to the Elkin report, I might advise that the Government of Canada has 
refused to make the final payment because it is not satisfied with the report and the quality thereof. So 
the government was faced with an experimental program that there was no solid evidence as to the cost 
effectiveness. The cost indications were in fact close to double what it was costing to go to court. We 
were faced with the decision. Do we continue an experimental project? Do we make it province-wide? 
Or do we cancel it? 
 
We made the difficult decision, and I believe the proper decision, on the evidence that we have, 
including the Elkin report, that perhaps it’s time to look at other ways to deal with the problem of young 
first offenders and bringing them in touch with the people that they have affected in the crime. 
 
So I suggest to you quite simply that on the evidence, it was questionable; on the evidence of the John 
Howard Society, it was questionable. And it was experimental when you were the government; you 
maintained its experimental status; you refused to extend it beyond Regina and Moose Jaw. So a 
difficult decision was made, and it was made by this government. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Attorney-General, I want to disagree 
with the comments that you just made, in the strongest possible terms. It may well be that the former 
administration should be faulted for not having extended the program, but I don’t see the logic in 
suggesting that that’s a good reason for having terminated the program. 
 
Mr. Minister, everyone who was connected with the program, whether it be the bar, the judiciary, or the 
social service agencies, supported this program. I’m sure you can find someone somewhere who thought 
there was a better way of doing it. But this program had the overwhelming support of all connected with 
the justice system. 
 
You add up the costs, Mr. Attorney-General. I suggest you’re only adding up part of the costs. I suggest 
that if you add up all of the costs, the incalculable costs of giving an accused a record, and saddling him 
with that, the costs which can be calculated for that percentage of offenders who might have gone to jail 
and who were thus saved from jail, I suggest that the costs will weight in favour of retaining the 
program. 
 
But surely, Mr. Attorney-General, whether it was $150 on both sides of 75 on one side and 150 on the 
other, surely that’s irrelevant. Surely the real question is whether or not the program was effective. 
Because if it was effective, the costs of the program pale into utter insignificance in comparison with the 
cost of society handling and dealing with a subsequent offender. And if this program was effective in 
deterring the people from criminal activities, then the costs are just absolutely immeasurably small. 
 
My experience with this program, Mr. Attorney-General, was that it was effective, as effective as any 
we have. I wouldn’t claim, for this program or any other, 100 per cent effectiveness. I don’t know what 
you’re suggesting the effectiveness of this program is. But I remind you that the court system itself is by 
all admissions a pretty ineffective program. And it doesn’t matter. Mr. Attorney-General, whether we 
fine them, incarcerate them or put them on probation, the court system itself is not an effective  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2054 

system. If this program was effective, then the costs are irrelevant. I suggest it was effective. It brought 
the victim face to face with the consequences of what he had done. It introduced him to the practical 
reason why society passes these laws. 
 
My experience, and I’ve done some defence work, my experience has been that so many people I defend 
think it’s not all that far removed from a video game, the whole business of law and order. It’s a set of 
rules which you challenge, sometimes successfully, sometimes not successfully. But so many offenders 
just do not see why there are rules. As I say, they see it as sort of a real life video game. 
 
This program brought the offender face to face with the reasons laying behind the law an din my 
experience, it was effective in an impressive number of cases. No program is going to be 100 per cent 
effective. There are people whose wits are impossibly scrambled, people whose emotions are so badly 
warped that no program is going to be effective. But, there are among first-time offenders a lot of people 
who simply don’t understand the criminal law and its reason for being. This program, Mr. 
Attorney-General, I think was effective in dealing with that category of offender, and that’s the only 
category of offender that any program is going to meet. 
 
Mr. Attorney-General, you abolished the one truly imaginative program which was in existence. This is 
the only innovation — apart, perhaps, from the system of absolute discharge — this is the only 
innovation in the criminal law since the last century, when hanging was abolished for some 
100-and-some-odd offences. It was the one recent innovation we have, it made sense from the point of 
view of the criminologist. I suggest that you have set the whole process of corrections back many light 
years with this ill-thought out, ill-conceived abolition. And, I truly hope, Mr. Attorney-General, that 
before you go about abolishing any other programs, you take some opportunity to acquaint yourself with 
the reason for the existence of the program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, first of all, your reference to the court as a program, I take exception to, 
because it is part of our constitutional fabric, as opposed to being a social program, and I think the hon. 
member will accept that. I also take exception to the idea that we don’t look at costs, that costs are 
irrelevant. I think we do have to look at costs, and I think that the public expects us to look at costs. 
 
When you suggest that this was fully supported, I suggest to you that one of the reasons for the 
questionable success of mediation diversion is the fact that the courts did not fully support mediation 
diversion, and that there was an ongoing difficulty in having cases referred to mediation diversion. 
There was a significant resistance that the courts had of referring matters to mediation diversion. Keep 
in mind the offender that was being dealt with — the young first offender. Much of that is, in fact, being 
dealt with by the very success that you refer to, that being absolute discharge. So we cannot say that the 
system has totally failed these people, because it hasn’t. There was unfortunately in my view, a 
reluctance by the courts to refer matters to mediation diversion, which does not, in my mind, augur well 
for the argument that it was fully supported. Unfortunately it wasn’t fully supported — wasn’t supported 
by those that count. So, I suggest that when we’re dealing with the particular target group of the young 
first offenders, the absolute discharge is, as you say, a significant change in the Criminal Code. 
 
We also have conditional orders; we have community service orders, which also have an effect. And I’m 
not to suggest that the program didn’t have some merit. And I think it did have some merit. There are 
very select first-time offenders that perhaps the  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2055 

best penalty that can be supplied is to have them sit down across the table from the person that they’ve 
harmed. I suggest that that may be the case. 
 
We are in the unfortunate position, and I think any government is. I think if you had felt that committed, 
then your logical argument should have been to extend the program throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, you take that position; in fact, it wasn’t done. And 
you have to accept that. It is a difficult decision. And I stated that in my response to your earlier 
question, that it was a difficult decision. There is some, I suggest, very limited merit. The way I’ve left it 
with the John Howard Society . . . When the hon. member talks about public support, they attempted to 
raise funds publicly, and were successful in raising, I believe, about $1,200, so that they had difficulty 
getting the public support. 
 
I indicated to them that if they were able to come up with public funding, that we would be prepared to 
take another look at it. I await the results of that. But it’s certainly the type of program that the public 
must be prepared to support in order for it to be effective. It’s also the type of program that the judiciary 
itself must be prepared to support. And I say, unfortunately it did not, and that was one of the problems. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, I’m going to leave it, Mr. Minister. We will simply have to agree to disagree 
about this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, we’re not quite there yet. 
 
I just simply say, Mr. Minister, that I think that the group whom this program could work effectively 
with was much larger than you suggest. It also had one additional effect. And that is that some victims 
of offences also left the justice system with a better taste in their mouth, a feeling that someone had tried 
to do something for them. I know all about the crimes compensation board and I think that it is a 
worthwhile innovation, and not all jurisdictions have it. And it’s to the credit of the Liberal 
administration, with which you were once connected, that we have that program. But this served a useful 
purpose as well in dealing with the victim. And to often the victim is the forgotten man in the criminal 
justice system. 
 
Mr. Minister, I really got on my feet to go on to the law reform commission. I wonder if you would 
supply me, and you could do so in writing if you like, with the staff, the board members, and the 
remuneration, broken down as to salary and expenses, of both the staff and the board members. And if 
I’ve had you undertaking to supply that either now or in writing, I’d go on to a couple of other questions 
I have about the board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — You certainly have my undertaking. Whether we can supply it to you immediately, I 
can’t answer. I’ll have my officials attempt to get it for you immediately. If not, we’ll get it to you as 
soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — It doesn’t matter, Mr. Minister. None of the questions which follow are in any sense 
based upon the salaries. So that doesn’t matter. 
 
Mr. Minister, I recall the law reform commission producing a report on a guardian act, or something of 
that sort. I’m struggling with the terminology. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Guardianship. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Guardianship. I’m told by one of my colleagues . . . reporting on  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2056 

legislation having to do with guardianship. And I wonder if there is any intention to pursue that report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, we have to be careful here because there’s the question of the public trustee 
and the reorganization of the official guardian department — that will be forthcoming. In terms of . . . 
That should affect the, if I can use the phrase, the guardianship of the property. The question of the 
guardianship of the individual, I’m not sure that we do have a report from the commission as well. We 
have tentative proposals, but not the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, that’s what I’m attempting 
to say to the hon. member, make the distinction between the question of the guardianship of the property 
and the public trustee’s act — that will be in legislation. The question of the guardianship of the 
individuals, and I believe they were interim proposals . . . I have had meetings with representatives of 
the mentally handicapped with that particular area. I would hope that we would have legislation dealing 
with that aspect of it next fall. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — There is a tantalizing question rises on that, and that is what do you mean by next 
fall? But I’m not going to ask it because I wouldn’t expect the minister to answer that question. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to express that hope as well that that legislation will be ready to go next fall. It’s an 
area that is in need of reform as you recognized in commenting upon the report, and I hope . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — We’re targeting for July 15th to adjourn this place. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, well I just hope we make it; with a vastly improved co-operative spirit from 
members opposite we might. I’ll get back to the issue, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if any thought has been given to The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act. It has, quite 
frankly, got to be just an unworkable piece of legislation. I don’t think it comes within your jurisdiction. 
I think the act is actually assigned to the minister of consumer and corporate affairs. However, I don’t 
think that department can deal with it. 
 
The problem with that act — again another piece of legislation passed in the days of Ross Thatcher, and 
which served a useful purpose so long as interest rates remained relatively simple — when that act was 
passed interest rates were expressed in simply terms; they were fixed to the life of almost all loans, and 
the act was workable. It has now become almost unworkable and is thought to be a very complex 
problem. It is complex for credit unions who are directly caught by it and it’s complex for banks, who at 
large take the position ‘It doesn’t apply to us,’ but who will admit that there is a very grey area there. 
 
I’m suggesting to the Attorney-General, in a long-winded fashion, is that act, the cost of credit 
disclosure, should now be referred to the law reform commission. It is a complex problem. The need is 
as great as when Darrel Heald passed that legislation. The need for the consumers to understand the cost 
of money that they are borrowing is as every bit as great, but the problem in communicating to them 
what it is costing has got to be very complex. And my suggestion to you, Mr. Minister, is that act should 
be referred to the law reform commission for review and a report so that we may update that legislation. 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2057 

One of these days it is going to cost some credit union or some bank or trust company, but more likely a 
credit union, a very considerable amount of money. And some scallywag is going to get away with 
murder simply because we, as legislators, have not done our duty of updating legislation. I honestly 
don’t think the consumer and corporate affairs department can deal with it. I think it’s just too complex. 
My suggestion, Mr. Minister, is that might be referred to the law reform commission for review and 
report. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — If I could respond. The matter is obviously one for the department of consumer and 
corporate affairs. I would be prepared to undertake the hon. member to contact my colleague. Mr. 
Sandberg, and get an assessment from consumer and corporate affairs as to whether they are in fact 
getting complaints about The Cost of Credit Disclosure Act. 
 
I would like to refer to the hon. member with regard to the guardianship legislation. One of the technical 
difficulties that we have to wrestle with, which is a matter of concern, is the testamentary question — if 
the hon. member is at all interested — is the testamentary question. I’m referring to the guardianship 
legislation. One of the difficult aspects is the testamentary question as to whether either guardians or 
parents can make provision in the will for their mentally handicapped child. That is one of the difficult 
areas that is presently being studied. So it’s a caution I give to you; it’s one that we are very much 
concerned about addressing as soon as possible. I agree with you. And we’ve indicated to those 
organizations concerned about the problem that it is a matter that we’re attempting to address as soon as 
possible. 
 
The question of the cost of credit disclosure — I’ve given you the undertaking that I’ll check with the 
minister responsible and see if there are concerns being raised, or if he’s aware of concerns that would 
warrant it in fact becoming a priority and submitting it to the law reform commission. Subject to that 
caveat I would have no objection to the commission reviewing that type of legislation. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — You might check with that individual who has just returned to the House. You 
might check with that individual in his capacity as minister of co-operatives, rather than his capacity as 
minister of consumer and corporate affairs. It is the credit union, I think, and the Credit Union Central 
which have the most severe, and I think very justifiable, concerns about that act. 
 
Mr. Minister, there was recently appointed a new associate deputy minister, a Mr. John Siu (and I may 
be mispronouncing the name, I’m not sure). I wonder if you could give this . . . Would give us his 
experience and qualifications, give us a description of what his duties are, and salary and so on? And 
you may do so in writing if you prefer, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can respond to the first question you had asked earlier, about the law reform 
commission; I have that information available. The previous chairman was Mr. Ron Cuming, his salary 
was $70,000 per year. The board members were Miss Marjorie Gerwing, who was paid at the rate, I 
believe, of $50 a day with a $1,000 honorarium. The same with Mr. George Taylor, who was a former 
board member. The new chairman, Dr. Doug Schmeiser, is receiving one-half of the salary made to the 
former chairman; it is now a part-time. He is integrating that with his teaching position at the University 
of Saskatchewan College of Law. Board members, Miss Gerwing was reappointed and a new 
appointment, Mr. Gordon Kuski, I believe, would be familiar to the hon. member. The per diem and the 
honorariums have all remained the same. Did  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2058 

you need more information than that? 
 
I’m having my officials pull Mr. John Siu’s resume, if I may. He is currently deputy commissioner, 
policy planning and administration, the Correctional Service of Canada. That’s a federal agency with an 
annual budget of approximately $500 million; 10,000 staff; 60 institutions; 70 parole offices; 17,000 
offenders. He is directly responsible at that time for policy development, planning, finance, personnel, 
organizational control, program evaluation, systems development, labour-management relations, 
federal-provincial relations and general administration of the whole correctional service. 
 
He has received his graduate and post-graduate training in the fields of computer science, mathematics, 
business administration, economics and decision science in Canada. He was the first, and I believe, only, 
recipient of the Resource Management Award by the Government of Canada. It was presented by the 
then president of the treasury board, which consists of a taxable $5,000 honorarium, and if I can quote 
from the reference given at the time: 
 

It’s tangible evidence of the government’s commitment to federal government’s statement as to 
management. They are honouring the concept of excellence in management as well as paying tribute 
to the individual who has earned it, for his outstanding contribution in the fields of administration, 
financial and personnel resource management. 

 
Mr. Siu was the first, and I believe the only, recipient with the Government of Canada of the Resource 
Management Award for excellence in administration. 
 
His responsibilities under the authority of, in consultation with the deputy minister of justice; manages 
the operations of the department; insures that the resources of the department are used effectively and 
efficiently, in accordance with the established government practices and legislation; develops and 
co-ordinates and establishes the department’s practices and legislation; develops and co-ordinates and 
establishes the department’s budget plans; provides executive direction to all levels of management in 
the delivery of programs and services; manages the co-ordination of policy, prosecution, the court 
services system and corrections insofar as it is appropriate to do so, having regard to the independence 
of the judiciary, the role of the director of public prosecutions and the legal responsibilities of the peace 
officer. 
 
I believe that that is the information that the hon. member has asked for. I could give as well some of the 
organizations of which Mr. Siu is a member. He has served as speaker or keynote speaker in numerous 
national and international conferences, including the Canadian Comprehensive Auditing Foundation, the 
Financial Management Institute, the Institute of Public Administration, the first internal conference on 
social impact assessment, management consulting institute, and the American correctional association, 
and The Society of Management Accountants. He is also a lecturer at the School of Public 
Administration at Carleton University. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Sounds very well qualified, Mr. Minister. Did you give his salary? I was disturbed 
here once or twice. If you didn’t you may do so in writing. I don’t necessarily need this broadcast over 
the television. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — His salary is 74,000, which I believe is a slight increase of what he was receiving 
with the Government of Canada. I might add that, in addition, he has a Bachelor of Science, Computer 
Science in Mathematics; he is Master of Science in  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2059 

Business Administration; and a Doctorate in decision theory. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — He seems to have some minimum qualifications, doesn’t he? 
 
With respect to RCMP policing, is there any change in the staff levels at any of the depots? If the answer 
to this is complex, you may give it to me in writing. If it’s relatively simple, you can give it to me orally. 
If it’s complex you may give it to me in writing. I’d like to know any changes in any staff levels at any 
of the depots. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I will undertake to supply that information. The staffing, of course, is in 
consultation with the assistant commissioner, and there will be some new detachments opening up. But I 
will supply that information to you. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Do you have any information now that there would be any reduction in any staff 
levels at any depots? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, there will be some relocation, not from the smaller detachments, perhaps the 
cities. There will be an increase overall of three on the provincial complement. And I might advise that 
we are the only province in Canada this year to increase the number of RCM Police personnel. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Okay. Well, I’ll wait to receive that in writing. I recognize it may be a complex 
question. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would appreciate a report on the status of the Indian and native constable program. How 
many do we have? At what centres do we have them? I say, Mr. Minister, that I think this is a program 
of very considerable potential to solve what is a critical policing problem, and that’s dealing with 
natives. And I would appreciate, Mr. Minister, a report from you on how many positions have been 
established for Indian and native constables, whether that’s an increase or decrease over last year, and 
how many of those positions had actually been filled. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll have my officials pull that information. If you want to proceed with the next 
question, I’ll supply it to you. 
 
I can now give the hon. member the information, if he’s ready. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Yes, I am. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The approved establishment for the Indian special constable program is 39 
members. As of February 21, 1983, there are 29 Indian constables in the field, 5 in training, and 4 
scheduled for training commencing in April 1983. In addition, there are approximately 50 applications 
under review. Nine Indian constables under the program have converted to regular members and are 
currently posted to detachments having Indian populations within their area. 
 
Mr. Engel: — One short question. During your last estimates, Mr. Minister, you were giving us some 
assurances that there would be no changes in the fundings in the court-houses, say at Wynyard, 
Gravelbourg, Shaunavon, Assiniboia. Is there any change proposed in this coming year as to staffing and 
the kind of program that’s going to be delivered by the court-houses, or was that internal document that 
we received copies of just a proposal, or are you planning on implementing that? 



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2060 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — It is certainly being reviewed, but no final decision has been made on it. We frankly 
are trying to balance off what may be good administration, which I am not prepared to let override yet, 
and some cost savings, but there’s been no final decision on it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — If I may, Mr. Chairman, I would like to raise issues on some of the court-houses that I am 
familiar with, particularly in Assiniboia and in Gravelbourg. I think if you look at the costing of it, they 
came out ahead with some other court-houses. Even some city ones were costing you more than you 
were taking in as far as revenue is concerned. And, from my visits with people that have legal practices 
in this area, particularly a place like Gravelbourg that has three law offices, they tell me that if they have 
to take their court cases to the city, to Moose Jaw, say, or Swift Current, that that would be a direct 
detriment to the practice and would likely put two of them out of business in Gravelbourg, and be just as 
serious in Assiniboia. So I wish that in your consultation with your department, that you would look at 
it, and also do some travelling to the areas concerned and talk to the people that are involved in 
delivering services in the communities, because I think they’re providing a very worthwhile service 
there. Although none of the practices are really booming practices, with say three lawyers in a town the 
size of Gravelbourg, they’re all making a comfortable living. But I think if you look at their record there, 
you’ll see that there wasn’t a direct financial burden through your department, like there would have 
been in some of the courts. I wouldn’t mind a comment on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I have some difficulty agreeing with the member. For example, the Shaunavon 
court-house — the revenue was $26,000; the Swift Current court-house — it would be $257,000. But 
that’s only by way of example, because we cannot run our court system based on the question of 
revenue and how much, whether it’s a money-maker or a money-loser. And the court system is not 
designed that way, nor can it be. And certainly the question of service and the accessibility to our 
judicial system by the public is the overriding concern. I do throw into that some significant rule 
changes which have been brought into effect over the last couple of years, which allow matters to be 
done with over telephone, including registering documents, that sort of thing, which tend to make it 
easier for the rural solicitor to carry on his practice, but unfortunately has a negative impact at the local 
level. 
 
So I’m certainly aware of the concerns. They’ve been expressed by others, and they will be given, you 
can be rest assured, full consideration, because, as I say, we are not looking at a court system designed 
on revenue, it’s on what’s best for the judicial system. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, the point I was trying to make is that even if you look at the revenue end of 
it, the kind of arrangement you have with a part-time sheriff and a court reporter serving both Assiniboia 
and the Gravelbourg area, with a potential of having a fully bilingual court operation out of 
Gravelbourg, I think you would be ill advised to look at financial reasons for discontinuing an 
established service like that, that’s been there as long as the province has been in place. So I would make 
a strong appeal that before you decide to change that you either go for a public hearing or do some kind 
of a public review where there would be an opportunity for some local input before they would lose that 
valuable service. I know there has been an ongoing battle between the department . . . (inaudible) . . . the 
Attorney-General that’s carried on for some time, and I hope that you will be as wise in your decision 
not to make any changes, like the former attorney-general was. That’s all the questions I have on the 
matter. 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2061 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Probably wiser because you’re aware of the commitment to rural Saskatchewan that 
the new government has made, and already we’ve had several examples of that. I could reiterate. I wish 
I had my colleague, the Minister of Agriculture, here to discuss those. So I leave it on that basis. 
 
So that there’s no confusion, I would like to clarify to the critic that in fact the OC appointments that we 
referred to earlier are in fact subject to that 6 per cent increase. So I apologize for not giving accurate 
information at that time. 
 
You asked the rest of the staff. There is a Miss Patti Ehman at a salary of $2,152 per month, and 
secondly, Ingrid Perkins, in the Provincial Secretary’s office, $1,470 per month. I believe that gives the 
information. If you add that 6 per cent to that information that I gave you before, it would give you the 
accurate statements. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Koskie: — . . . (inaudible) . . . the minister, if he would account for the reduction in staff — 26.3 
down to 24.3 — in civil law, personal services. Could you indicate what are the nature of those cuts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Those were two vacancies that were not filled, one secretarial position and one 
part-time vacancy that was vacant. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
 
Item 3 agreed to. 
 
Item 4 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I would like the minister to advise me: the fairly significant cut in staff, what accounts 
for the decrease there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The positions were vacant — deleted non-permanent positions. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — That’s confirmed. Could you indicate as vacant positions . . . Can you identify the 
particular positions that were vacant? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Three of the positions were based on the previous budget expectation of extending 
the unified family court to the city of Regina, which has not been proceeded with because of the reasons 
given in earlier discussions. And the others are . . . Well, I don’t know how you call it a cut when the 
program is not there, but it’s rather a weird definition of cuts. And the others were scattered throughout 
the province, and I’ll have that information delivered to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just one further question in respect to that. The previous budget in 1982-83, the 
estimated amount under judicial centres was 4,878,610 thousand. What I’m asking . . . As you indicated 
that within the ’82-83 estimates you had three persons identified for unified family court in Regina. That 
has been decreased — the positions. I suspect that the funding was also present in the previous budget, 
and that you didn’t proceed with it. So I think I am justified in saying that what you had proposed 



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2062 

in the previous budget, you have cut in this budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There’s also a cut in other expenses, which can be office administration, etc. 
 
Item 4 agreed to. 
 
Item 5 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to ask the minister: in respect to other expenses, there’s a very substantial 
decrease from 1,024, 870, to 792,760, and I would like an explanation of the major cut in expenses. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have devised a new contract for travel in the North which will result in 
significant savings. Secondly, we dropped a computer system proposed by your administration that 
turned out not to work. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — You indicated that you had a contract which would lead to major savings. I would like 
you to detail the nature of the contract and the nature of the savings. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ll supply that information to you. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I don’t want the details of the contract. I want sort of the general outline of the nature of 
the contract and how it occasioned the significant decrease in the cost. I really have to have some 
information, in a general form, in respect to that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, two major aspects. We are now putting a prosecutor into La Ronge, which 
will cut a considerable amount of the travel between P.A. and La Ronge which was a major expense. 
 
Secondly, we will be allowing a change in the procedure whereby in the past the prosecutor and the 
judge travelled in the same plane, but defence counsel and the . . . I think that is . . . Yes, judge and 
defence would travel together. The prosecutor would travel separately. 
 
We’re allowing them to fly in the same plane and it’s going to result, as I say, in significant savings and 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, it strikes me that if that is the argument, that justice must not only 
be done, it must be seen to be done, it was questionable whether the judge and defence counsel 
travelling together . . . Was that wise? It seems not to have had the problem in northern Saskatchewan 
that . . . You have argued earlier tonight that it’s unique up there, and that it should be dealt with 
uniquely. 
 
I’m assured that in fact there won’t be a problem. If there is a problem, we’ll certainly change the policy. 
You have that assurance because I agree with the concept that I must not only be done; it must be seen 
to be done. But in fact there will be significant savings in not duplicating air travel. 
 
Item 5 agreed to. 
 
Item 6 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2063 

Mr. Koskie: — In the budgetary allowance in respect to salaries of the chief judge and provincial court 
judges, is there any anticipated increase of salaries anticipated during this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’re not anticipating; we haven’t budget for any. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Well, the increase then, from 3.142 million thereabouts to 3.324 million — is that to 
take into account the previous increase of 11.8 per cent that you provided to the justices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Are you indicating that in fact there will be no increase in the salaries of the justices 
during the current fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, we’re not anticipating any and we haven’t budgeted for any, but I remind you 
that there was the compensation committee established some time ago and whether they come forward 
with proposals, I simply can’t anticipate. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — One further question. Will the compensation committee also be restricted to the 
guide-lines that have been applied to other public servants by the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I don’t know whether the committee itself is restricted to the guide-lines. 
Certainly I hope they take the guide-lines into account and the government would certainly take the 
guide-lines into account. 
 
Item 6 agreed to. 
 
Item 7 agreed to. 
 
Item 8 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I know the crime, mayhem rate — plunder and murder — has gone wild since you 
people were elected, but I’m surprised that this increase of 20. I can only assume there’s some 
explanation which doesn’t readily meet the eye. Have you taken over some persecuting of some centre 
or something? Why the increase in prosecutors here? Increase in staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I don’t know if this great upsurge in nefarious crimes didn’t occur as a result of you 
people over there having so much free time on your hands, is a more likely answer for the increase in 
crime. And I say that facetiously. No, it takes into account two factors: one, the completion of the 
take-over of the municipal prosecutors, Saskatoon and Regina; but secondly, we have increased the 
number of prosecutors by seven over and above that. The prosecutors were in fact overworked and, I 
think, under a great deal of stress as a result of the work-load. And the rest of the positions . . . That 
would total nine . . . The rest of the positions are clerk-typist positions. 
 
Item 8 agreed to. 
 
Item 9 agreed to. 
 
Item 10 



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2064 

Mr. Koskie: — To registration of land titles, I note in reading the very brief review of the 
Attorney-General, by the now Minister of Justice, in the past one of the concerns that he used to raise 
consistently was the staffing of the land titles office and indicating the great concern by the members of 
the bar that there was not sufficient staffing. And what I’m really asking him: why the cut from 175 to 
169? I can think of a possible answer, that there is so much less economic development and activity 
going on that the work-load is in fact less during these economic difficult times and as a consequence 
not as many staff is required. But I wonder if you could in fact indicate whether or not, in you view, you 
have a fully staffed registration in the land titles office. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I’m satisfied that certainly at present it’s fully staffed. We will be monitoring, 
as it was monitored in the past, to make sure that service to the public is adequately maintained. I think 
the real question that will have to be looked at in the future is whether the investment in computerization 
of the land titles system is the appropriate way to go. Realistically it is a system that lends itself to 
computerization. That may be where public demands will take us. Until such time as we’re in that 
position, we will continue to monitor it as was done in the past. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, what do you consider as an acceptable 
turn-around time for registering a mortgage against a land title or for a land title transaction to take 
place? What would you consider would be an adequate turn-around time for, say, a credit union to 
register a mortgage against a title or for an attorney or whoever to administer and have their titles come 
back? What do you feel would be a decent turn-around time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, the preferable time, of course, would be, in my view, one day. I don’t know if 
we’ve ever reached that. My understanding is that you tend to get complaints if it goes beyond a week. It 
seems to be a rough guide-line of where concerns start to arise. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I’ve had several firms draw this to my attention in our area in particular, and I don’t want 
to point fingers at either the Moose Jaw or the Swift Current land titles offices, but they’re telling me it’s 
taking more than a month, and it used to be a week and a half; it used to be a week and a half. I can give 
you examples from a firm that tells me it’s taking them up to a month delay time, and when you’re 
registering a mortgage, in particular, that’s very serious. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — All right. And if that is accurate, it would be very serious, and I hope you’ll bring 
the specific matters to my attention, because that’s not the information that I have. I have Swift Current 
at seven and Moose Jaw at eight days turn-around. Now that’s the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s weeks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — No, that’s days. If you have information that is contrary to that, I wish you would 
bring it to my attention because we will get on it right away. That would certainly be an unacceptable 
situation, and we would move to correct that as rapidly as possible, because that is unacceptable in my 
mind. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I sure appreciate the minister’s remarks because I know I’ve had an individual draw it to 
my attention. I don’t want to make the matter public, but on registering a mortgage, after three weeks 
delay, a client was still waiting for the returns 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2065 

from Moose Jaw Land Titles Office, I can give you the specifics of it because I know the people 
involved very well. And they are very concerned because of reductions in staff, and called me a number 
of times on that evening when I got home. And I’d like you to look into that serious allegation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m very pleased to . . . I’d be very pleased to look into the matter. As I say, the 
information that I have at present . . . (inaudible) . . . It is an area that we’re monitoring, but I caution the 
hon. member to, if he’s talking to a client . . . Because if the material that’s submitted to land titles was 
not properly documented or not drawn up properly, it’s then sent back, and if that’s the case, it certainly 
would be well longer than the turn-around time established. 
 
So I would like to clarify that, because if it’s submitted improperly, it will be bounced and then the 
start-up time starts all over again. So I’m prepared to discuss it with you. As I say, it’s an unacceptable 
amount of time. If the information you give me is that that is the situation, we will endeavour to correct 
it as soon as possible. You have my assurance on that. 
 
Mr. Engel: — One of the particular matters . . . The first time it was drawn to my attention was at a 
loans office at a lending institution. And this loans officer shared with me, saying that somewhere down 
the line that land title office needs beefing up because it used to take a week; then it went to 16 days; and 
he says now we can’t get them back in a month, and it’s seriously affecting their business. So I wish 
you’d look into that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve given the commitment that we are prepared if you would give me the examples. 
And I understand your concern not to make it public and I would give you that assurance; and we will 
check it out immediately. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Just one final question . . . (inaudible) . . . that you thought you were satisfactorily 
staffed in the registration of land titles, but there has been a deletion from a 175 to 167.9. Could you 
indicate the particular positions that have been deleted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll supply you that information in a minute. 
 
Item 10 agreed to. 
 
Items 11 to 14 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 15 
 
Mr. Koskie: — Mr. Minister, in respect to the Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, there has 
been representations made by Mr. Ken Norman, chairman of the human rights commission, if I’m 
correct, indicating, in fact, that the human rights commission should be subject to the control of the 
legislature, similar to the Ombudsman, rather than having the relationship directly with the, and under 
the control of, the government per se. I would like to ask the minister, since the human rights 
commission is a quasi-judicial body, it’s independence of operation has to be, certainly, set apart from 
the potential interference — direct interference by government. This has been the recommendation of 
the chairman of the human rights commission. And I wonder if the Attorney-General would, in fact, 
move in this direction. 



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2066 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well I have some sympathy with the concept of making the human rights 
commission as independent as possible. It’s certainly not a judicial body that would be free from 
legislative review, and I would think all members accept that. I hope that the hon. member is not 
suggesting that this government is remiss in not doing it. 
 
I believe the existing commission, in fact, was appointed by the previous administration. I certainly 
wasn’t consulted on any of the appointees when I was in opposition. And certainly you had the 
opportunity when you were the government to bring it before the assembly and arrange the 
appointments at that time . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The hon. member says, ‘Just about to do it until 
a bolt of lightning came in on April 23rd.’ Unfortunately, I checked through the files in the office when I 
got there, and I couldn’t find any. And, so perhaps the hon. member, if he wanted to bring back some of 
the files that he took home with him when the government changed, could show me the evidence that 
the previous government was, in fact, intending to do it. I say that facetiously. I’m sympathetic to the 
concept of keeping the human rights commission as independent as possible, and we’ll give active 
consideration to that proposal. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I just want to make one comment. I am pleased that the minister is sympathetic. I would 
like to know whether or not he has reviewed the other jurisdictions in Canada, and whether there are any 
precedents in the other jurisdictions in respect to where the human rights commission is, in fact, 
answerable to the Legislative Assembly rather than to the Minister of Justice as a particular subvote. 
 
And I also, while I . . . While you’re searching for the answer, I just want to comment that it gets a little 
tiresome listening to you every instance that we ask whether you have done anything, and you 
continuously revert back to the previous government. 
 
I suppose if you carry that to its logical conclusion and if we had done absolutely everything, then you 
have nothing to do. I just want to say in comparison to the record you have displayed to date in your first 
year, I want to say that the record of the previous attorney-general stands out among, and rightfully, he 
stands out not only as an outstanding attorney-general for the many progressive legislations that he 
introduced from 1971 to 1982, but I am indeed assured that the progress that he had initiated and the 
many forward steps that he had taken would have been continued uninterrupted had it not been for this 
interruption of having a new Minister of Justice incapable of moving forward. 
 
All we have so far is excuses that we should have done it and all we get is that you are sympathetic. I 
want to say that that is certainly the statement of one of your leaders. Mr. John Diefenbaker. He was also 
sympathetic to a lot of things and during his stay in government achieved very little. 
 
I hope that more than being sympathetic, you will in fact in the years to come not continue to address the 
issues in saying that the former government should have done it, but I hope that you in fact will give 
some leadership in this direction. 
 
Two questions. Have you in fact looked at other jurisdictions to see whether or not the human rights 
commission is in fact answerable to the Legislative Assembly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, if the hon. members opposite had done as much in the 10 years as they said 
they were going to in the last year, they would probably still be the government. In fact, talk is cheap 
and that is all we get from the hon. members about what they were going to do. You had 10 years to get 
a lot of these things done. I intend  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2067 

to remind the people of Saskatchewan that you had 10 or 11 years and you didn’t get these things done. I 
think that is quite proper in my mind to remind the people of Saskatchewan what in fact was not done. 
 
I’m advised that on terms of the human rights commission and its reporting to Legislative Assembly — 
we’re not aware of any provincial legislatures. I do refer you to the new privacy commissioner 
appointed by the Parliament of Canada and I believe that that appointment is made with the approval of 
all parties, and appointed by parliament . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I just answered the question. It 
may not be what you’re asking, but I’ve answered the question. 
 
Item 15 agreed to. 
 
Item 16 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, I have a very brief comment, and I intended to make it earlier and 
forgot. It has to do with The Jury Act. Notwithstanding the fact that the act was passed by administration 
with which I had some association, I share many of the concerns which have been expressed by the bar 
about that piece of legislation. I just say that for the record, I share many of the concerns expressed, and 
I think the hesitation which has been exhibited by this administration and the former administration may 
be well placed. And I just say that for the record. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I would just say for the record that you’re going to see the leadership that will 
take your socks off, because in the next week or two you’ll have an ample opportunity to indicate to 
both the public and the law society whether in fact you do share their concerns, and you’ll have 
opportunity to debate amendments to The Jury Act which you’re requesting, and have ample to see 
whether or not you do in fact share their concerns. We’ll bring the proposals forward. 
 
Mr. Koskie: — The Jury Act was introduced and received third reading. And the Minister of Justice had 
the opportunity in respect to the criticisms of that. There was one issue that was raised. One single issue. 
And to date there has been two sessions. And we have been sitting now for almost 40 days, and you 
haven’t brought it in yet. Now in this area I don’t think there’s a possibility of you saying that we didn’t 
do something. We set the legislation for you. You can’t even get it into the House. When are you going 
to move on it.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I just want the public to understand that when the members opposite were the 
government they brought in legislation, and it went through first, second and third readings and was 
passed by this House. Unfortunately, the legislation was seriously flawed and many people had serious 
reservations about it and they forgot, or failed to get the Lieutenant-Governor to approve the legislation, 
thus bringing it into act. So it sat there for, I believe, well over a year . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes 
it did . . . Oh yes . . . I’m glad the hon. member has a smile on his face, because the truth hurts. The truth 
hurts. I believe that legislation was 1981. 
 
Another item that they were all prepared to act upon . . . They had a year to act upon it; they brought in 
legislation that was very seriously flawed. They brought in legislation that had serious concerns brought 
to the attention of the then government, by the members of the law society, particularly. 
 
As I’ve indicated that not only, Mr. Chairman, does this government have the obligation  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2068 

of coming up with its own new legislation — we’ve had ample examples. I know the hon. members 
don’t want to hear this. But we have to go through the whole process of correcting some of the messes 
made by the members opposite when they were in government. So not only will we bring in the 
legislation to correct the mistakes that they made; we will bring it in and give them an ample opportunity 
to see whether, in fact, they do share the concerns of the law society and members of the bar. 
 
Item 16 agreed to. 
Items 17 and 18 agreed to. 
 
Item 19 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Mr. Chairman, I have a question to the Attorney-General and it’s regarding 
corrections, and individuals who are released out of correctional institutions. I was made aware of this 
earlier on in the summer that individuals being released out of institutions in Prince Albert or wherever 
they may be, are given transportation back to their homes or where they were originally sentenced. My 
concern is that individuals who are in institutions from the west side of the province, from Meadow 
Lake north — Green Lake, Beauval, La Loche — are given a bus ticket from Prince Albert to use Prince 
Albert as an example) to Meadow Lake and then they have to find their own way home from Meadow 
Lake to La Loche, another couple of hundred miles north. I have brought this up before and your 
officials are aware of it. Could you indicate to the House whether you have changed that policy, or what 
is the policy right now with releasing individuals and transportation back to their home town? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I’ll have my official respond, but I’m not sure exactly what you’re asking for. 
Could you advise me? 
 
Mr. Thompson: — My question to the minister is: what is the policy with individuals who are released 
from institutions, regarding transportation from the institution back to their home town? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, the policy is that they will get transportation back to their home by public 
transportation, but it does not mean chartered aircraft. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Okay. Just let me give you another example. A young fellow from La Loche is 
taken out and serves his time and is released out of the institution at Prince Albert. He is given a bust 
ticket because that is the only public transportation that we have up in the north-west side of the 
province. He is given a bus ticket from Prince Albert to Meadow Lake. That bus gets into Meadow Lake 
late in the evening, and that is the end of the public transportation. And that is the serious problem that 
they are facing up there. I’ll let you respond to that before I continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’m advised by my officials that, in fact, they try and pre-arrange it to get the time 
as close as possible, so that there aren’t the transportation problems. But I’d be prepared to look into the 
problem that you raise. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Yes. I would ask you to take a serious look at this because it is a very serious 
problem. When an individual is serving time from Weyburn, and he’s in the Prince Albert institution, 
he’s given transportation from that institution, when he’s released, back to his home in Weyburn. But for 
the citizens up in north-western Saskatchewan, where there’s no public transportation, this is very 
serious problem, because they are released, given a bus ticket to Meadow Lake, and then that bus comes 
in late in the evening. So they get out of the bus and then they have no more transportation. They have to 
start looking at 9, 10 o’clock in the evening to get a ride  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2069 

back home. I think this is a very serious problem, and I’d ask your department to address it and see what 
can be done about this. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We would, as I say, be prepared to look into it. I would say that I’m not prepared to 
look at charter aircraft to fly, people back home. I realize the transportation difficulty on the west side of 
the province, where the bus route only goes so far. It is a problem, and I grant you that. But the cost of 
flying people that have been released from prison, from correctional centres, by chartered aircraft back 
home would be a very costly one and perhaps prohibitive. And so, I simply say, we’ll take a look at the 
problem that you raise. It may be a very difficult one. There’s also the inadvisable, at least in my view, 
solution of lengthy cab rides. I wouldn’t suggest that, but I’m prepared to look at other alternative 
proposals. 
 
Mr. Thompson: — Would you not agree that it is a very serious problem? I think, just because they live 
in the part of Saskatchewan where there’s no public transportation, I see no reason why they should be 
penalized to the point where they are dropped off a bus and left on their own; where an individual who 
lives in La Ronge, and there’s a bus service up there, they get on the bus and they go home. I did not 
indicate in any way that I expected the department to fly them home, but I want to say that it’s your 
department who takes them from their home down to the institution. You take them there. And I don’t 
know how you take them — if you take them with vehicles or if you fly them out. But I think they have 
the same rights as any other citizen of this province. If they are released, they are entitled to the same 
services that anybody in any other part of the province receive. And I tell you that it’s serious, and I also 
ask you: do you not agree that it is a serious problem, and it should be addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, I have agreed that we’re prepared to take a look at it. I’ve ruled out . . . I’ve 
ruled out . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You know, the hon. member opposite says ‘No action’. Let me 
tell the hon. member opposite that if in fact the bus route ends at Meadow Lake and if in fact people 
north of that were in the correctional centres that . . . and the only two alternatives to get them back 
home, were chartered aircraft or taxis — if that was your proposal, then I question your solution to the 
problem. 
 
I said that it would be certainly unwise to recommend those solutions, but we have to look, and I’ll agree 
with the hon. member, that perhaps we have to look at other solutions, particularly in the case where 
there may be an early release for whatever reason. I would be prepared to take a serious look, but I’m 
also indicating to you that we will not have a policy of flying the released prisoners home by chartered 
aircraft or using long taxi rides. There may be another solution; we’ll have to try and find one. 
 
Item 19 agreed to. 
 
Item 20 
 
Mr. Koskie: — I’ve just got one question. I couldn’t hear you, Mr. Chairman, and we can run through 
these. I just want to ask the minister in respect to corrections administration. I note that it has been cut; 
that administration, corrections administration, has been cut from 32 down to 25.2. I want to ask you 
how in fact you can cut the administration level of corrections when, indeed, the corrections facilities 
and the whole problem of the numbers being incarcerated is, indeed, on the increase. And from last year 
it’s cut down from 32 to 25.2 and I’d like to have the details of the nature of the cuts. 



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2070 

Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ll be very glad to give them to you, because it indicates a difference in 
administrative approach between this government and the other one. If you will notice, by combining 
the corrections with the Department of Justice, there was a reduction in community corrections . . . I’m 
sorry. The administration . . . Or the numbers you’ve given, there was an increase of only 18, if you go 
back to administrative services, subvote 1 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s right, you see what 
happens when you combine, you can sometimes get some efficiencies, get some effectiveness, and you 
save some duplications, and you save duplication of office equipment, little things like that, and office 
supplies, so I would suggest to you that an efficient government can have some savings. 
 
I’m glad the hon. member has his Commonwealth. I was very interested to read to find out where the 
letters to the editor were coming from and I see in the latest Commonwealth that in fact the letters to the 
editor are being printed by the caucus, and being sent out by the caucus, and I’m glad that the hon. 
member has the magazine in front of him; I’m sure all hon. members will wish to read it. 
 
Anyway, the actual savings result in a saving of seven: three training positions, one social worker, one 
personnel admin officer, one research officer, and 1.5 person-years non-permanent. 
 
Item 19 agreed to. 
 
Items 20 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Item 28 
 
Mr. Shillington: — For this subvote and the next subvote, you could give me a list in writing of the 
grants which you have budgeted for. I would appreciate it, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Certainly. Did you want them tonight? We can supply them tonight, but I can give 
them to you in the next day or so. 
 
Item 28 agreed to. 
 
Items 29 to 32 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Nil Vote 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I can supply the information on the land titles questions. I’ll just send it over to you. 
It’s handwritten, but . . . 
 
I would like to thank my officials, Mr. Chairman, for their assistance and hard work and dedication, and 
I’m sure all hon. members appreciate the effort that they’ve made this evening and this afternoon. 



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2071 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

DEPARTMENT OF TELEPHONES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 38 
 
Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’d like to introduce Mr. Gil McCormick, president of Sask Tel and deputy minister, 
Department of Telephones. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, could you indicate very quickly how many 
companies have joined in 1982 — rural telephone companies? How many rural telephone companies 
have been assimilated with Sask Tel in 1982? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — There were 52, I believe. Kyle has now voted to join Sask Tel, so there’ll be a 
reduction of one. The number of subscribers was 2,200 — with Kyle joining Sask Tel it will reduce that 
down to 2,000 subscribers. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Do you have a fair amount of applications in for ’83 now or not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We have one other. We’ll have to get the name for you, but only the one other. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Will there be any changes in the connection fee from what it previously was for ’83? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ll get that information for you and supply it right away. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — One other question, and that has to do with the free telephones for senior citizens that 
has been brought up in the past. You said it was under consideration in the last estimate that we went 
through. Has there been anything transpired since then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, it’s certainly well under consideration. We run into a bit of a problem. We’ve 
honoured so many of our promises as a government that we didn’t want to do everything in the first 
year, and so these things will . . . to quote another politician, ‘The universe is unfolding as it should.’ 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Could you have a closer time frame for the senior citizens as to when they might expect 
this to happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — In due course and at an appropriate time. 
 
The connecting fees will increase from $2.15 to $2.40, and that’s rate group 3, rural. Rate group 2 will 
go from 1.85 to $2.05, and rate group 1, which is all exchanges other than Regina, Saskatoon, Estevan, 
Melfort, Melville — the cities — will go from $1.40  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2072 

way up to $1.55. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — How about the new rural connection fees — will you be increasing those any? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Those were the figures that I gave. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — I mean new phone connections, new lines. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Push-button service, residential, will increase from $2.75 to $3.05; the business will 
increase from $3.75 to $4.15. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — I don’t think I’m making myself clear, Mr. Minister. I’m talking about new connections 
in rural Saskatchewan, to residents there. Say, a new farm phone that’s been put in — this is going to 
mean a new line. What is the fee going to be for that new line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — We’ll get the new line fees for you and we may not have it tonight, in which case, 
I’ll supply it to you tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Is there going to be any changes, or are there any additional staff in your office that 
deal specifically with telephones, or is it just the same staff that you had? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It’s the same. There has been a change; Mr. Patrick Carey, who is my special 
assistant, is going to be assuming the role of deputy minister of telephones. As we bring the 
communications secretariat into that area, there will be a change there. Other than that, the officials in 
the communications secretariat we’ll be discussing later, but they’re pretty much the same, I think. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — With the new role, or mandate that communications coming into telephones, now, 
could you sort of give me an overview of what new mandate and role is going to be at telephones? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — The Department of Telephones will always maintain its mandate and its role and its 
legal obligations to maintain the rural telephone system and the rural telephone companies, so long as 
they themselves choose to remain in operation, and that role has been thus, since Sask Tel began to take 
over many of the lines by assimilation; that mandate will be maintained and will stay the same. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Then, Mr. Minister, you’re saying that Department of Telephones will not be 
responsible for licensing. It will be all under communications, then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Correct. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Item 2 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Mr. Minister, you had spoken earlier about, I believe . . . I did not clip the 
comments, but it seems to me . . . I will start again . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Thank you for that 
invitation and that opportunity. Some time ago, Mr. Minister,  



 
March 10, 1983 

 
2073 

you indicated that you had some intention of introducing legislation to deal with pay TV. 
 
I think that was your comment in an effort to strengthen the provincial jurisdiction over pay-TV. And I 
am wondering, Mr. Minister, what plans you have with respect to pay-television to ensure provincial 
jurisdiction over this area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Well, we expect to introduce what I believe to be rather significant legislation this 
session. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Is that this fall or this spring, Mr. Attorney-General? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Spring. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, in some of the information that you had passed on here earlier, there has 
been something like 24 sets that have been purchased by the department, and are out in the country in 
various areas, that are monitoring or testing the television cable signals. Could you indicate where these 
sets are? Not just the towns — are they in private homes, or where do you have these sets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — My understanding is they’re all in the offices, just testing the cable signal as it 
comes across. And I gather it’s been an ongoing practice of basically, Sask Tel, to monitor the cable-TV 
reception. 
 
Item 2 agreed to. 
Vote 38 agreed to. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND LOANS, ADVANCES AND INVESTMENTS 
 

SASKATCHEWAN TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
 

Vote 53 — Statutory 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

PROVINCIAL SECRETARY 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 30 
 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Will the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — Yes, I would introduce Mr. Mike de Rosenroll, deputy provincial secretary; Kathy 
Langlois of the department of revenue and supply, director of financial services branch, and behind me 
Bob Leonard, who’s director of the Provincial Inquiry Centre. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — I wonder, Mr. Minister, if you would send me the salary for your acting . . . Is it an 
acting deputy minister? Did I catch that properly? It is deputy. Would  



 
March 10, 1983 
 

 
2074 

you then send me the salary? You can do it in writing if you like . . . salary of your deputy minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — I’ve already supplied it to the hon. member this afternoon when he asked for my 
personal staff. I can get if for you, but I’ve supplied it. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Just one other question then. Apart from handling the Provincial Inquiry Centre, 
apart from being responsible for the Provincial Seal and, I gather, the expenses of the 
Lieutenant-Governor, does this department now have any other functions but those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lane: — It hasn’t had any change in administration from the previous policy and it also has 
the function of the certificate signing that people request, and again that was an administrative function 
that it carried on before. 
 
Item 1 agreed to. 
 
Items 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Chairman: — I’d like to thank the minister and his officials. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 10:43 p.m. 


