






















































Hansard: April 05, 1983


523 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
April 5, 1983 

 
EVENING SESSION 

 
SPECIAL ORDER 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATE 

 
MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE (BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed motion by the Hon. Mr. Andrew that the 
Assembly resolve itself into the committee of finance and the amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Shillington. 
 
Mr. Yew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank you legislators for the enthusiasm attitude 
that you have just displayed. It’s a great honour, again, Mr. Speaker, to rise, to rise and to take part in 
this debate. Once again, I want to take this opportunity to thank the people of the Cumberland 
constituency for choosing me to represent them in the Chamber, and I hope that I can live up to their 
expectations. 
 
I have tried, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to be fair in all my criticisms. I, I fell that there is no use in 
pointing the finger all the time, but rather that the government and opposition should work together to 
solve the special problems in northern Saskatchewan. However, however, Mr. Speaker, I am afraid that 
the government has let us down on that end of the deal. 
 
I want to congratulate the Minister of Finance on his second budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — He will, nevertheless, ensure a speedier return to the NDP government than any other PC 
cabinet minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yew: — A deficit of $317 million is shocking, Mr. Speaker. Together with the November 1982 
budget of each, each . . . Together with the 1982 budget, each man, woman and child owes $537 in 
accumulated debt, and thanks to the PC government. In the election campaign year, we said, we said we 
could not afford all those promises. And now the bills are starting to come in — bills that it will take 
generations to pay off, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Deficit Bob Andrews is definitely going to leave his stamp on the political and economic history of the 
province of Saskatchewan. He is following, he is following closely behind the footsteps of his mentors 
Allan MacEachen and John Crosbie — two other finance ministers in Ottawa noted for their deficits and 
financial bunglings. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Minister, stop playing with the future of your grandchildren as well as mine. Balance 
your books; tear up your charge accounts, charge cards; get back to sensible financing like that of the 
1970s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have said it before: the North is shrinking. I first noticed this in the budget  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
524 

speech last fall. Virtually no mention of the northern half of our province — no mention of the northern 
half of our province, Mr. Speaker. And again with the Speech from the Throne last month there’s no 
mention of the top half of this province. Virtually no mention of the North. Virtually no mention of the 
North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new deficit budget again makes no mention of the North. Shame. And it’s, and it is 
little wonder why. The real story lies in the estimates, Mr. Speaker. Sharp reductions in jobs in northern 
Saskatchewan and in DNS; 16.5 per cent decrease, reductions in grants for economic development. 
When I heard the Minister for DNS announce July 17th of last year in his memo to the departmental 
staff that economic self-sufficiency would be number one and meaningful local government, it’s a 
shame that the government opposite would reduce their budget this year by 16.5 per cent, and then again 
for capital projects budget a mere $450,000. You cannot even put up a sewer and water system for one 
community in northern Saskatchewan with $450,000. Shame on the members opposite. 
 
Construction grants in virtually all sectors frozen or decreased. A paltry 4.2 per cent increase in health 
services. And I thought we were going to be number one in Canada in health — not number 10, not 
number 10. Mr. Speaker, the cuts go on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to Environment for a moment. I would like to say a few words about the 
Department of Environment. This is an issue that is gaining support and recognition world-wide. Every 
day in the newspapers and on TV we hear about, of a demonstration here or a march there, all in support 
of a new pollution-free world. But what, Mr. Speaker, is this government’s response to this call for a 
clean environment? A full 10 per cent cut in the budget of the Department of Environment, 20 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker. Down 1 million from 10 point million to 9.3, from 9, from 10.1 million to $9,000,300. The 
number of positions, positions have been cut from 170 positions to 138 positions. These cuts will ensure 
that environmental assessments are not done. Mr. Speaker, it will ensure that mines pollution will go 
unchecked. It will cut non-governmental environmental groups of much needed financial support. 
 
Let me illustrate, Mr. Speaker. Environmental assessment branch, 1.3 million down to 1.8 million. 
Pardon me, Mr. Speaker, environmental assessment branch, 1.3 million down to 1 million. Staffing, 25.3 
persons to 14 persons — a reduction, a decrease of 44.6 per cent. Mines pollution branch, $667,590 
down to $517,140 — another decrease of 22.5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Staffing, 11.9 down to 7.0 — 
another decrease of 41 per cent. Total staffing, 170 down to 137.8, Mr. Speaker — a cut of 19 per cent. 
What kind of a commitment to environment is this? Once again the people have been fooled by the, the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan. 
 
Before 1982 they said no deficits. Now we have two deficits worth $500 million, Mr. Speaker. Before 
1982 they said we could afford their election promises. Now we know this is not true. And before 1982 
the absentee member for Maple Creek (and I notice again she is absent), now the Minister of Supply and 
Services, introduced Bill No. 96 of 1980-81, The Environment Magna Carta Act. I have a copy here, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The member for Maple Creek would have us believe that prior to 1982 that she 
really cared about the environment. Polluters would be investigated. They would be checked, Mr. 
Speaker. Cabinet document, documents should be examined, she said. Non-government interest groups 
should receive funding priorities, she said. And now that the Conservatives are in power the 
environment is suddenly of very low priority. Why? 
 
The multinational chemical companies and mining interests that contribute so  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
525 

extensively to the PC coffers have gotten to this government. They have gotten to the Minister of Supply 
and Services, certainly, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we say shame, pity and shame, to the members 
opposite, to the members in government. We in the opposition caucus call on members of the 
government to stand up and be heard on environmental issues. Use your influence to ensure that we 
leave behind for our children, your children, a clean and safe environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to another area in terms of another world-wide topic, that of the cruise 
missiles. The strange silence from the government back benches also applies to cruise missile testing, 
Mr. Speaker. Members opposite will know my opposition to cruise missile testing. They will know that I 
worked the trap lines under which the missiles will fly. They will know there are people up there today 
that work, who work under the air space where the missiles will fly, yet not one peep, not one peep, has 
come out of this government in protest to the cruise missile tests in Canada — not one telegram, not one 
telegram, not one letter of protest. They content to ride the fence, Mr. Speaker, they content to ride the 
fence. This is not a defence weapon. Let us not be mistaken, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is not a defence weapon that will protect us; it is an instrument of attack for offensive purposes 
alone. And I’m not talking about bows and arrows. I’m talking about destruction. If members of 
government would only listen, you’d get a little sense into your noggins. Clearly the Devine 
Conservatives are in bed with the Trudeau Liberals in Ottawa for this major issue. Clearly they are in 
bed with the Trudeau Liberals, being puppets also, being puppets to the Reagan administration, Mr. 
Speaker. Otherwise, why would they not stand up and be heard? They’re certainly heard tonight, they’re 
certainly heard tonight. But take them out in the streets, out in the media, we haven’t heard any 
opposition to the cruise missile testing and I question why, why. 
 
There is a growing concern, Mr. Speaker, over this very serious issue. The people will have their say 
eventually on this matter. We in this legislature must be leaders and not followers. Now is the time to 
act, Mr. Speaker; now is the time to act. Now is the time to stop the testing of the cruise missile in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of northern Saskatchewan were looking for some real relief in this budget. 
Unemployment today is as high as 90 per cent in some communities, and probably the majority of the 
communities in northern Saskatchewan. Welfare has become a way of life for most families in northern 
Saskatchewan. Alcoholism, family breakup, and crime have increased. This is a human tragedy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We in the NDP propose a five-point recovery plan for northern Saskatchewan. Number one, a detailed 
economic development plan that would see more money in the revenue-sharing plan go to the North to 
expand much needed services to local communities. 
 
Secondly, a capital construction program that would see Northerners employed in building much needed 
facilities like the hospital in La Ronge, the nursing care home for La Ronge, permanent health clinics in 
outlining, outlying communities and much needed highway improvements. Jobs today, assets tomorrow. 
 
Number three. Deputy Speaker, a new emphasis on the traditional way of life. This would include 
funding for fish hatcheries, funding for wildlife operations and forestry initiatives. We do not regard this 
as a step backwards, but rather support for those who chose to live the traditional way of life. 



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
526 

Number four, Deputy Speaker, Northerners want economic self-sufficiency. This will only come about 
when they have a land base to work from. We propose the Government of Saskatchewan move ahead 
with land entitlement to resolve this quickly. 
 
Number five, we propose that surface lease agreements, specifying 50 per cent native Northerners be 
hired, be extended, not renegotiated as hinted by the Minister of DNS. 
 
I go now for a minute or two, Deputy Speaker, to a meeting I attended a week ago last Thursday, a 
meeting of northern Saskatchewan local elected leaders. This meeting was attended with an open mind, 
an open spirit of co-operation by the locally elected leaders in Prince Albert. They came in to discuss 
issues of prime concern, education being one of them — training and education, local self-government 
being another, economic development being another. And when the minister came into this meeting, he 
came in, not in a spirit of co-operation, but in a spirit of confrontation. He perpetuated confrontation 
with the, with the northern local governments that were elected to do a job, that were put there to do a 
job, that were given the responsibility to look after the residents of northern Saskatchewan, to look after 
the communities of the North, the northern administration district, to look after the welfare of the people 
up north. And what did he do? He perpetuated the confrontation, and I will get after that minister time 
and time again until I can get some concrete, solid commitments — concrete, solid commitments that he 
will advocate for the welfare of those people, because that is the responsibility that this minister has 
been given: to advocate and to look after the health and welfare of those people in the, in the top half of 
this province. 
 
I mentioned earlier that the top, that the top half of this . . . that this province was shrinking. It was 
shrinking and shrinking. I note from the former budgets presented by the government that the North is 
neglected. It’s neglected; it’s ignored. It’s neglected, and it’s ignored. Now, compounded with that fact, 
the minister responsible to advocate for the people of the North has perpetuated confrontation. 
 
Getting to the number five . . . Getting back to number five on surface lease agreements, Mr. Speaker, I 
know that in that meeting that the minister came out with a new plan. He came out with a new plan, and 
I asked the minister during question period in this legislature whether he had been petitioned by an 
organization, whether he had been petitioned by a community or the North as a whole, and he said, ‘No.’ 
He responded, and he said, ‘No. I hadn’t been propositioned or been given a formal presentation by 
anybody,’ but that there were individual representations. 
 
I question the minister: where are his priorities? I thought you were supposed to have taken directions 
from communities and from organizations that represented people such as was represented at the 
northern area meeting. That northern area meeting was represented by locally elected local government 
officials. 
 
And now I find that the minister has turned around and he wants to do away with the surface lease 
agreement that were, that were advocated by the communities throughout the northern administration 
district, commitments that were derived at by large, full-scale, provincial-scale, provincial inquiries. The 
Cluff Lake and the Key Lake inquiries took in a large part of the provincial population. And they looked 
at the problems at the local level. They look at the problems of the people at the community level in 
northern Saskatchewan and what we had to contend with to get jobs up North. 



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
527 

But now the minister tells me that those surface lease agreements . . . He’s telling them, the residents of 
northern Saskatchewan, that those surface lease agreements are not right. They don’t serve their 
purpose. Well, I’ll tell the Minister of Northern Saskatchewan that that meeting which was represented 
by at least 24 northern communities out of 33, that those surface lease agreements are actually 
supported, encouraged, and they want this government to maintain those surface lease agreements. But 
what does this government want to do? They want to disperse, do away with the surface lease 
agreements. They don’t want to have any preference for northern natives. That’s what it boils down to, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This five-point plan would be a start to reducing the massive unemployment in northern Saskatchewan. 
But these are only short-term, temporary solutions, Mr. Speaker. The Conservatives have been quick to 
dismantle DNS without proper consultation, without proper involvement, without proper participation 
by the people who live there. But so far they have not offered their solution to replace the department of 
northern Saskatchewan. What is the solution? Why dismantle a department that was doing a job, that 
was responding to the needs of the people in that particular area? Where is the solution for the 
dismantling of a department that was doing a fair and adequate job? 
 
An Hon. Member: — A heard something about running amok once. What happened there? 
 
Mr. Yew: — Running amok. That’s a good question, Mr. Minister of Health. I would challenge you to 
show me the facts and figures that that department was running amok. What about the people 
themselves? What about the people themselves, the northern communities? I challenge the members 
opposite to go into northern Saskatchewan and face, face the people of the North. 
 
I’ll make this officials, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to make this official, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I 
hope the media gets this because I suggest that the media is in their pockets. Where there are, where 
there are serious issues in northern Saskatchewan, will you hear a peep of those very serious issues? Not 
a one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to my five-point plan, I also call on Premier Devine to call an all-party 
committee together, composed of members of this legislature, to hold public hearings, public hearings in 
northern Saskatchewan, and to hear the people out, to hear the people out. Let’s hear the people out in 
northern Saskatchewan, as to your government’s performance. Let’s hear them out. I challenge you. 
Let’s find out what they have to say, for, for, for an instance. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, this all-party committee, would be charged with recommending long-term economic 
strategies for northern Saskatchewan. That is what it would be charged with. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say to, to the Premier of this province that the boundaries 
of Saskatchewan do not end at the northern end of Shellbrook-Torch River. They don’t end north of 
Prince Albert and Meadow Lake. They go further. They go beyond P.A. and Meadow Lake. Your 
government is responsible for all of this province, right to the end of the 60th parallel. 
 
The inaction, Deputy Speaker, the inaction your government has shown in the North so far is a disgrace. 
That is what it is: it’s a disgrace; it’s neglect; it’s ignorance. That’s what it is. It is. You will be leaving 
behind, when you leave office, a legacy of 100 per cent  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
528 

unemployment. That is what you will be leaving behind. A reliance on welfare; that is what you will be 
leaving behind. A deteriorated public service; that is what you will be leaving behind. Social unrest; that 
is what you will be leaving behind: social unrest, and high unemployment, welfare reliance, 
deterioration of public services and programs. 
 
The time to act is now. And with that, Deputy Speaker, I thank the legislators for having heard me out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Dutchak: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to speak in favour of a budget that’s addressed itself 
to the needs and aspirations of the people of this province. All aspects of the budget have been carefully 
planned with a high degree of autonomy between the various departments. In the past we’ve seen waste, 
we’ve seen confusion too, through duplication of services. It’s crucial to note that this duplication was 
not conducted to help the people and to assure that they receive the various services. It simply happened 
because one department didn’t know what the other was doing. And that’s what we inherited when we 
took power. 
 
Now, the direction established by this government through our budget is for growth in the ‘80s. In order 
to advance economically we must become more competitive and productive. It’s as simple as that. For 
years we’ve been proud of this province’s natural resources and yet we have generally forgotten about 
the most important resource — the people resource. For years the previous government has been 
satisfied with simply scooping up our natural resources and shipping them away to the markets which 
waited. 
 
And our educational system turned out people that were educated in limited educational fields, and also 
the markets waited for these people outside of our provincial boundaries. They too were shipped away. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget has altered the priorities in this province. Our people will receive a 
higher degree of education with the view to applying their skills right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the Japanese entrepreneur, for example, was baffled and are baffled when 
they look at Saskatchewan. We have so much potential; we’re sitting right on the resources; and yet 
we’re not producing the way we should be. The reason for that was the misdirection and 
mismanagement of the previous administration. And now we’ve changed that. We turned in to a new 
direction. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our budget has provided a key to enable us to achieve our economic goals. The 
high priority of technical and trades training in the budget is long overdue. I’m pleased that education in 
the province will be enhanced to the level that our people deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only will technical training spaces increase by 60 per cent over four years, the 
educational system in this area will adapt to the needs of industries and enterprises that are interested in 
locating in this province and that are already located here. It does us no good to teach people skills 
which they can’t use, where there’s no demand for these skills. 
 
This government has knit related departments together so that those who help develop  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
529 

curricula will realize the needs of this province. The Department of Advanced Education and Manpower 
will keep its finger on the pulse of the economy in order that we as government can join all sectors in the 
province and form a powerful economic unit. As an autonomous unit we will lead this continent in 
growth and economic activity and development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am particularly proud that the Prince Albert trade school is part of this process which I’ve 
just described. The trade school will be one of the most advanced in North America. And I again 
commend the Minister of Education for his efforts in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for too long the Prince Albert area has been considered a northern outpost by other 
government — Siberia, in fact. In fact, my predecessor, the ex-DNS minister, the ex-MLA, once called 
Prince Albert a government town. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s nothing to be proud of. If Prince Albert is, 
in fact, a government town, it’s only because the former administration did nothing to encourage growth 
of other sectors in our community. 
 
I look forward to the opening of the trade school in Prince Albert which will cause people to refer to 
Prince Albert as the educational hub of northern Saskatchewan, instead of Prince Albert, the government 
town . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It would have replaced Spiritwood. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is confident in the people of northern Saskatchewan. A few days ago, one 
of the opposition members — I believe it was the member from Regina Centre - referred to Northerners 
as unsophisticated. This was the attitude of the former government, and it isn’t the attitude of our 
government. The people of northern Saskatchewan are just as energetic and ambitious to develop as 
anyone else in this province. All that the people require is an assurance that the government believes in 
their strengths and initiatives, and this budget delivers a clear message that we, as Northerners, will not 
be punished for working hard and utilizing our entrepreneurial qualities. 
 
The budget clearly indicates to us in northern Saskatchewan that the new government is more interested 
in seeing northern people acquire strength, rather than the previous administration’s attempts to make 
government more powerful than it should be. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has changed 
its priorities from government to the individual, and I commend this government for doing so. 
 
I listened with interest to the member from Cumberland. This afternoon in question period he used the 
figure 99 per cent as being the unemployment rate in communities of northern Saskatchewan. And I am 
familiar with all these communities — I’m sure he’s referring to La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, and so on. 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is exactly what I’m talking about. The budget that we have seen from our 
government addresses itself to a long-range plan, something that makes sense, something that’s going to 
build and grow, something that will result in stability that won’t be shattered by the next economic 
recession if we should have one. 
 
The member from Cumberland clearly admits that his government failed — totally — because here we 
are; we’re in power for less than a full year and already there’s 99 per cent unemployment in the area 
that he speaks of. Well, surely he’s not attempting to tell the people of Saskatchewan that it’s the new 
government’s fault that his government  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
530 

didn’t build anything of any lasting stability, and that’s really what he’s getting at. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I predict accelerated economic growth and advancement for northern 
Saskatchewan. This government has changed its priorities in Prince Albert and area. We are not going to 
build more government towers and fancy buildings. We believe in channelling the funds, as this budget 
has channelled the funds, to trade schools and technical institutes. That’s where the real building takes 
place. 
 
With a trade school in place, Prince Albert and area will be qualified to offer itself as a viable location 
for new business and industry. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these advances in our educational 
system will allow us to take a place in the high-technology field. This exciting new field has an 
unlimited future. High technology developed in Japan and the United States and has moved into Canada, 
and Canada has done well in that area. 
 
For years we’ve suffered an economic hardship in Saskatchewan. That economic hardship or handicap is 
transportation. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the field of high technology, this handicap is negligible. The 
saleable product generated by this industry is generally compact and easily transportable, and because of 
this we are eligible to enter into this field with all of our energies and initiatives. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government’s advancement of technological training facilities coupled with its 
progress to support high-technology development in the province will produce results. This is because 
we are new and we’re not afraid to break new ground. I’m proud that our finance minister, our finance 
minister does not sit back and focus on the dark side of every issue that faces him. Our venture into the 
field of high technology will be successful. Some criticized our home mortgage plan, for example, but 
we knew it would work. It was new and yet other provinces are now copying it. It was a good idea. Like 
the good people of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are innovators. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has criticized our deficit. However, the Leader of the 
Opposition fails to tell the people of Saskatchewan that if his government had acted responsibly, we 
wouldn’t have a deficit. 
 
In the field of education this government would not have to spend $120 million over the next four years 
as we are going to, to expand our technical training. In the 1983-84 fiscal year alone, we will spend $7 
million to fund 1,200 new training spaces. The people in my constituency are asking me why. Why are 
we in such a position that we have to play the catch up game? The people of Saskatchewan are looking 
beyond the political rhetoric emanating from the members opposite. The answer is simple as to why we 
have to play catch up. They, the opposition, the former government, were spending too much time in 
other areas. They were empire-building. And the education expenditure slipped. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a newly elected member, I look at things probably quite similar to the way the 
public does. I found it amazing and disappointing that the Leader of the Opposition condemned the 
budget, the deficit budget, and yet asked for more spending. He stayed away from suggesting increased 
taxation, which his colleagues in Manitoba opted for. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, I intend to function in the political arena in the same manner in which the good 
people of this province would prefer, in an honest manner. I therefore  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
531 

decided, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when I found a politician stretching the truth, or saying things that 
would mislead the people of this province, I would take it upon myself to produce the real facts and 
bring it to the attention of this Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan. I notice a news clipping, and I 
have a copy of it here, from the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix dated March 17, 1983 wherein the Leader of the 
Opposition was reported to have spoken to the University of Saskatchewan students. The article reveals 
that as usual, the Leader of the Opposition rode in like a white knight, as if he were the champion of the 
students, and spoke to the masses. 
 
It’s reported, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Leader of the Opposition stated that the NDP increased 
operating grants to universities by 155 per cent, 155 per cent. This must have truly impressed the student 
body that were listening. I found the information interesting when I saw it, and I decided to do a bit of 
research on the point, and as I suspected, the facts were not consistent with the statements made by the 
Leader of the Opposition. In fact, I studied the figures supplied by the universities commission, which 
sets out exactly what the operating grants were. And I studied the figures dating back to 1974, just in 
case the Leader of the Opposition was talking about some other year. 
 
But let’s consider what the Leader of the Opposition said in relation to education. He said that the NDP 
increased grants to universities by 155 per cent. Now what does that mean? Does that mean in one year? 
I suggest that that’s what he was trying to tell the students, or will he now say that he meant a 
combination of 2, or 3, or 4 years? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I took the facts and figures, and the facts 
reveal that you, if you add all of the increases from 1974 to 1982 inclusive, they only add up to 125 per 
cent in total. Where did he get the 155 from? Clearly, a misleading statement made to these students in 
the usual careless way that the members opposite seem to conduct themselves. 
 
As a result of this meeting, I received calls from young people asking me about this, and I explained to 
them what the real facts were because these facts are documents. Mr. Speaker, these figures further 
reveal other things which should be of interest to this Assembly. The highest increase that the members 
opposite made was in 1975 where they increased 26 per cent, and the low was 1979 where 6.9 increase 
existed. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I took the liberty of applying the consumer price index calculation to the 
number which I reviewed, and the results revealed actual decreases in spending by the members 
opposite in two out of the eight fiscal years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the facts indicate that the Leader of the Opposition was not correct in his 
statements, and he further showed that his government had other more important things to do with the 
taxpayers’ money; education was not a priority. They didn’t have time to build the technical school, or 
the trade school, in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. They talked about it for two elections, but they didn’t 
have the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the same meeting with the student body of the university on the date mentioned, the 
provincial Liberal Leader, Ralph Goodale, indicated that the government should be actively pursuing 
technical training for high-technology jobs. He indicated that it would be a tragedy to have to import 
people while their home-grown people were left out. I agree with that, and I am sure that the students 
who met on that occasion were pleased to hear about our government’s focus on technological training 
in the budget. 
 
I think that the members opposite, the members opposite should caution themselves, because from here 
onward we’re going to be watching; we’re going to be watching  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
532 

what they say to the press. And I would hope that the press follows the example which I have just 
enunciated and looks into some of these figures and facts that are being enunciated by the members 
opposite, because they’re misleading to the people of Saskatchewan, and the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve more, and deserve better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the educational system is going to be upgraded by our budget. There’s no question about it. 
We are going to do more than arrange to have picketers surround the Legislative Buildings to prove a 
point. I looked with interest the other day when I saw several students picketing in front of the 
Legislative Buildings. And the Leader of the Opposition again seemed to be right there right on time to 
say a few words to the masses. I wasn’t invited, and I’m not sure if any of our members were invited. I 
did recognize, however, that some of the, some of the people, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that were carrying 
the picket signs, were from an organization associated with the NDP party. In fact, in fact, one of the, 
one of the picketers interestingly enough happened to be the son of a former defeated NDP member. 
 
So there were these people getting all the headlines, getting all the media attention. And this little circus 
went on for some time, while our finance minister was announcing that we were making giant steps in 
the field of education for the young people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, enrolment increases, enrolment increases at the University of Saskatchewan are predicted 
to be somewhere in the 7.8 vicinity — 7.8 per cent. Our Minister of Education is monitoring this 
situation, and we’re committed to increasing the standards of education. It’s my belief, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that with adequate technical training facilities in the province of Saskatchewan, the pressure at 
the university level will be decreased. Our government is committed to a far-sighted strategy in this area 
which was lacking totally under the former administration. 
 
However, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I suggest that this budget allows our educational system to begin to 
develop into that which is essential if we are to develop economically as a productive unit in the global 
market-place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I therefore support the motion, and oppose the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to participate in the budget debate on behalf of the good people of 
The Battlefords. Firstly, I’d like to congratulate the Minister of Finance for the creative and 
forward-looking attitude that he took in developing this budget which we’re here to debate today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the federal level, they have a tradition where the federal finance minister wears a new 
pair of shoes whenever he delivers the budget. When my colleague, Mr. Andrew, was appointed, 
appropriate garb for him might have been a pair of hip waders to wade through the corral of economic 
promises and garbage that he found in his search for the true provincial funding situation. 
 
In November, when Mr. Andrew announced his mid-course correction, it was widely accepted around 
the province as a sound statement of the financial facts of this province. Now, Mr. Speaker, we have 
before us a document that looks toward the future, and is very unequivocal in the terms in which it does 
that. We have a statement  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
533 

that says forcefully that the people of Saskatchewan come first and that Saskatchewan is moving 
forward with confidence and conviction, to take its rightful place as the leader in the world order, was 
the leader in the world order. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a great deal of speculation about the contents of the budget prior to its delivery. 
In the March 29th issue of the Saskatoon Star-Phoenix, the Leader of the Opposition called for a number 
of measures to be included. He was looking for job creation and he got it. He was looking for the road to 
economic recovery and he was shown where it was. In fact, virtually all of the things that he’d called for 
to be included in his budget were there, and more. And that, Mr. Speaker, is because there’s so much 
more that we’re going to be and this budget is a first step in that direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand the hon. gentleman of whom I speak will be retiring soon. With his great gift 
for prognostication, he may want to think of a retirement career as a clairvoyant. But if, but if he decides 
that that career doesn’t pay very well, he may want to think of a career as a magician. Certainly the 
whole House was impressed on budget night with the masterful way that he dealt with a half a bundle of 
ten dollar bills. He piled them high and he stretched them long. We’re no doubt going to, to be able to 
coin the phrase now that he was playing with the Blakeney bundle. And possibly he’ll want to step out 
of his position now before his team-mates send him down the road for the Blakeney bungle of April 26th 
of last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Morin: — Mr. Speaker, getting down to the meat of the budget. In going through the estimates we 
see that the taxes, tax revenues are up. Now since our government didn’t see the need to raise the level 
of taxation, one can only draw the logical conclusion that there are more people working. Personal 
incomes taxes are up by 16 per cent. Corporate income taxes are up by 9 per cent. And sales tax 
revenues is also up by 19 . . . by 9 per cent, I’m sorry. Well, the rates didn’t go up. There’s more money 
coming in. Obviously there’s more confidence in the economy and more people working and higher 
salaries being earned. All these . . . (inaudible) . . . increase confidence in the economy. So the people of 
the province are doing well, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, receipts from ‘government enterprises’ in the 
heritage fund are down 12 per cent, which only serves to enforce the argument that we’ve been making 
in this House for 11 months: that if you leave the economy to the people, it will run well. Wherever you 
have the government to have its fingers in it, you have a problem. 
 
What about expenditures, Mr. Speaker? Well, what is the government spending its money on? On page 
9 of the estimates we see that Advanced Education and Manpower spending has increased 13 per cent; 
that Culture and Recreation spending is up 21 per cent; Education up 10 per cent. The Executive 
Council, and I found this quite interesting — the people that work for the Premier, down 47 per cent 
from the other administration. Health up 34 per cent. Ordinary Highway expenditure is up 26 per cent. 
Justice, something that society today is more and more interested in, up 46 per cent. And, of course, the 
department of northern Saskatchewan, which we wouldn’t want to forget about, is the mere 28 per cent 
of its former strength. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in The Battlefords, the expenditures with the Saskatchewan Hospital, which is a major 
employer in my riding, are up 9 per cent. The expenditures in the Department of Highways for The 
Battlefords region, which is also a major employer in my riding, are up 10 per cent in the personnel area 
and 13 per cent in other categories,  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
534 

and total capital expenditures for the, for the riding of The Battlefords will be $3.8 million this year, and 
that’s a significant injection into our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the province have heard the paradoxical argument that we’ve hard here 
today, that we hear all over the province — that we should have increased spending in all different 
categories and yet we should have reduced the price, the deficit of the budget. Well, they heard that and 
they judged it for what it was and they just didn’t put any credibility in it, and that’s, that’s a credit to 
their sound common sense, and not much credit to the people that are making the argument. 
 
The expenditures that are outlined in this budget, Mr. Speaker, are reasonable and consistent with needs 
and aspirations of the people of this province. We recognize that you can’t get inflation under control by 
continually spending more tax dollars. In government . . . people of the province and people of the 
country are tired of hearing governments preach one thing and practise another. Last year we launched 
an, an economic recovery program which will make, help us to be part of the solution to inflation. We 
said that everyone should spend 1 per cent less than the inflation rate, and consequently the inflation rate 
must be drawn down. Well, this year in the delivery of this budget by the finance minister, we’ve come 
in with increased expenditures of 6.8 per cent, which is within the target guide-line. So it’s leadership by 
example for the first time in this province’s history that I can recall. 
 
The deficit that we’re faced with is largely the result of decreased revenue, and the major culprit in that 
area is the resource sector. In 1978 the spot market price for uranium was $45 per pound American. It’s 
currently in the neighbourhood of $20 a pound American. Increased sales in uranium are helping 
somewhat to offset this reduction in revenue, and hopefully the price will come back and in the long run 
we’ll, we’ll be able to recover and have provincial revenues increase greatly. 
 
Thanks to the efforts of the Minister of Labour in the potash area, Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan 
has recently announced a major sale — 200 million tonnes, I believe he said. Yet for the past 10 or 11 
months we’ve heard him criticized for his approach to potash marketing, and yet in the first three 
months of this year, we’ve sold more potash than that corporation sold last year entirely. And we’ve 
done that in the period of time when our traditional markets have been drying up, when our market in 
the United States has been hurt by government action in the United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to pass over potash too quickly because really the potash industry is one of the 
reasons that we’re in the, the difficult financial straits that we’re in. In 1980-81, this government, or this 
province, rather — it should have been this government, it would have been better handled — took in 
about $280 million in potash revenue. This year, we’re going to be lucky if we take in about 30 million. 
Now in 1980, the expenditures were set. Rather than behave like rational people, as you or I would, Mr. 
Speaker — save a little money when you had a windfall — every nickel was spent. The result is that we 
were locked into some long-term programs, and when revenues fell, naturally there is going to be a 
deficit position created there. 
 
Finally, the other big culprit in the revenue drain in the oil industry, and certainly we’re all aware of 
what’s going on in the world scene with oil. Prices are falling. They’ve fallen. OPEC (Organization of 
Petroleum Exporting Countries), has restructured its bench-mark price from $34 to $29. They’ve cut 
back productive capacity to 17 million barrels per day. In spite of the actions taken by this government, 
which have increased all drilling by 49 per cent in the last year, and going higher and higher all the time, 
we’re  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
535 

facing a situation where last year we took in $711 million; this year we’re expected to take in $539 
million or a resulting shortfall of $172 million. 
 
The fall in revenue is somewhat of a concern, but it could be considerably worse. Through all this 
difficult times, when other areas are losing their market and laying people off, we’ve been successful in 
protecting our markets, in keeping our people employed, and if and when the economic recovery gathers 
a little momentum, the demand for oil, petroleum will go up. The price will correspondingly go up and 
our revenues will go up. In fact, we’ll be in a stronger position than we’ve ever been in because we’ve 
maintained our markets, we’ve been aggressive, and we will be in a position, then, to build on those 
strengths and to expand our markets. 
 
We produce about 165 million barrels, thousand barrels, I’m sorry, a day in this province, of oil, Mr. 
Speaker. And of that number about 115,000 are exported. Now, the Canadian price for crude oil, for old 
oil, is determined by averaging the three previous months costs of imported oil at Montreal — that’s the 
price that we get paid in Canada. For the oil we export, which is far and away the major share of the oil 
that comes out of this province, we get the differential between the Canadian price and the American 
price, and there’s an export tax on that. Our share of that tax is one-half. At the present time, that export 
tax has declined 89 per cent, and that has created a major drain on, on our revenues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the, again dealing with oil, if the former government, when it signed the national energy 
agreement with Ottawa, had recognized that they were trading an international commodity, in an 
international market, they might never have agreed to the energy program, which virtually decimated the 
oil industry in this province and in western Canada in fact, and we wouldn’t then face the problems we 
have today because our revenues would have been up in the past, and we would have been able to ride 
over the rough spots. But, of course, they didn’t do that, and the sector which used to contribute one 
dollar in every four to the provincial treasury is now substantially hurt because of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget that we discussed today addressed the future. It creates 19,000 jobs to alleviate 
the hardship faced by Saskatchewan citizens due to the recession that we’ve just come through. It 
addressed the problem of inflation with a reasonable attitude and a plan for return to economic stability. 
It deals with education and re-education so that the people of our province will be able to gear 
themselves up for the jobs of the future, and enjoy some job security in a very turbulent and changing 
job market. 
 
It does all these things without increasing the burden on the taxpayers of this province. If we were, if we 
were to have, have eliminated our deficit, it would have cost each man, woman and child in this 
province $320. Now I haven’t gone to the trouble of calculating what that would have been per taxpayer, 
but I would suggest it’s probably about $2,000 per taxpayer. And that would have been the NDP’s 
solution, Mr. Speaker. They would have taxed you to death; they would have driven people away, as we 
saw them drive away the young people out of this province; they’d have driven business into bankruptcy 
and seen the people drive away. 
 
Now, what we chose to do instead was to make an investment in the future. No different than, than when 
you or I go out to, to purchase a car, to do anything else. You deficit now based on the strength of your 
future earnings. What we’re doing is making an investment in the province with this budget. It’s an 
investment in the strength of our  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
536 

people, in the courage and the spirit of our people and, and there’s no doubt in my mind or in the mind 
of my colleagues that, that this investment will pay off and pay handsomely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it should go without saying that I will be opposing the amendment and supporting the 
budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, fellow members of the opposite side, Her Majesty’s loyal 
opposition, an earlier count tonight indicated there were two or three or them. Right now they’re down 
to two. 
 
I would like to congratulate the Minister of Finance on one of the province’s most positive budgets 
tabled in this House in 12 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — The last Liberal budget couldn’t have impressed too many people, the NDP won the 
election. Their last budget didn’t impress anybody; they’re down to eight members in this House. 
 
I have a document with me this evening which was the budget speech tabled in this House on March 22, 
1982 — an election budget speech designed by that government to buy an election in this province. We 
came out with a positive platform designed for the people of Saskatchewan and we got elected as a 
government. We didn’t have to depend on the rhetoric of an election budget designed for that purpose 
and that purpose only. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Job creation was one of the major platforms of the finance minister’s budget of last 
Thursday. I would just like to repeat where job creation was in their budget of March 22. ‘Public 
investment,’ it says, ‘of $1.9 billion will create 18,000 jobs.’ I would like to let the people of 
Saskatchewan know that 18,000 jobs divided into $1.9 billion works out to approximately $105,000 per 
job. Now, I realize they had a lot of overpaid help, and some of their, some of their administration that 
they carried over into our administration, but I didn’t realize they were planning to pay the help 
$105,000 per job in this province. 
 
In Blakeney’s . . . The hon. member from Elphinstone, in his redress to the budget, he pointed fingers at 
us and he said that we were cutting and slashing the programs that they designed in this province. We 
were not cutting and slashing the programs that they designed. This government has taken a new 
direction in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we will continue, through innovation and programs 
designed for people, to get away from the old programs the NDP designed to hoodwink the people in 
this, in this province. 
 
This budget, and I’m sure the members opposite have all read this budget — they studied it carefully 
prior to the last election — indicates that we would have approximately $1.14 billion in revenues to 
spend on programs, as they outline in this budget, to spend on current programs and investment. Their 
target fell a little short. The exact numbers that the target fell short off this budget were approximately 
$207 



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
537 

million. That $207 million they’ve targeted for investment. There was talk before the election in 1982 
that that investment would concentrate on possibly the CPR, and other areas, so that they could gain 
some control, and the word control is very, very conducive to their philosophy, so they could gain some 
control over the railroad picture with the Canadian Pacific Railroad. Fortunately, they weren’t elected; 
that money was not spent in that area, and it’s presently being invested in programs designed for people. 
 
One of the programs recently initiated is our Build-A-Home Saskatchewan program. Again, a 
comparison does present itself versus the program that they announced for housing in 19, in 1982. We 
expect that approximately 3,000 new housing starts will result from our program, at a cost to the 
provincial taxpayer, Deputy Speaker, of less than $10 million. Again, outlined in their own budget 
speech of March, 1982, they say, ‘The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will construct 1,850 new 
homes, and 2,050 low and moderate income rental units at an approximately cost of $200 million plus.’ 
Now I think if we do our arithmetic, we’ve saved in the neighbourhood of $190 million as a government 
to, in fact, initiate the same number of jobs, and initiate the same number of housing units in this 
province through private initiatives of home-owners in Regina, in Saskatoon, in Bienfait, in Carrot 
River, and yes, Mr. Speaker, also in Kuroki. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — When we were elected in April of 1982, we were approximately number eight in 
health in this country. And we were fast, we were fast . . . Our position was dropping quickly. Since our 
election, with an additional input of revenue through this budget of approximately $70 million, I think 
we can expect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to become at least number three or maybe number four. 
 
In our first year we’ve moved four places with response to health care in Saskatchewan. A very 
commendable . . . And I think we can be proud as government members that the health care in this 
province is improving, and once again we have the interests of people, not simply the interests of 
administrations and government head-hunters such as the two or three I see across the floor whose 
primary interest was in their own self-justification and not in the health care of the people of this 
province. They carried the big lie to the people in 1978 that suggested that we, if we were elected as a 
government, would remove health care and would not offer the, the health care that the province had a 
reputation of carrying to the people. This health care was developed in an administration long before 
they became government — an administration that was interested in health care and was interested in 
people in this province. Since 1971 that’s disintegrated to number eight in the country. And I can 
promise the opposition, and I can promise you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we will, before this 
administration finishes a four-year term, we will be knocking on the door of number one in health care 
in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — In Regina, which is my own area . . . I feel that it’s important that we let the people in 
Regina know that there’s also something in the budget with respect to health care designated for the city 
in the, in the, in the way of capital expenditures. We are, we are continuing the programs that . . . the 
capital programs of hospital expansion in the city. We are also expending $700,000 for cardiac care in 
the Plains Health Centre. Now, in the last two or three years the needs of that particular, that  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
538 

particular facility have been somewhat short-changed by the former government. We are seeing to it that 
the patients that require that help, that help — and it’s required immediately when it’s required — will 
get that help. As a result of this program, we will at least rise to the level presently available in the cities 
in Alberta and will definitely exceed the levels arrived at in many other provinces in this country. That is 
in the direction of being number one in health care in this country and definitely, possibly in North 
America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I have heard the NDP opposition in this debate suggest that new plans, new plans . . . 
And I heard the member earlier suggest that . . . I can appreciate they are a little confused about new 
plans. There weren’t any for 11 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think the onus is on that, on the 
opposition after 11 years of experience in government maybe to suggest some constructive plans. We’re 
a new government, we listen. We’re listening to the people in this province, and we may even listen to 
the NDP if they can come up with something constructive. It hasn’t presented itself in this debate. I 
don’t expect it to present itself in this debate, but if it does, I can promise the member who was up 
earlier and invited me north on a fishing trip that if he does come up with something constructive, we 
will listen to it as a government, and he will be the first to know about it. 
 
Tax policy was touched in the budget speech — and I want them to listen closely — tax policy was 
touched. 
 
Earlier, we discussed a budget that they tabled in March of last year, and one of the highlights of this 
budget, and I have them all checked off . . . They’ve got about, oh, six or seven highlights her e- 18,000 
jobs at $105,000 a job. But one of their highlights, on the backs of the children of this province, was 
simply to eliminate sales tax on children’s clothing and footwear. Now why, in 11 years of government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why was that not addressed before the 1982 election? Why did they suddenly have 
to remove a tax that they had imposed and agreed with for 11 years, moments before an election 
campaign? 
 
They were again trying to missile the people of Saskatchewan. They’d successfully done it in two 
campaigns. Fortunately, the people of this province weren’t missiled in the 1982 campaign. 
 
In the budget speech, we announced tax concessions for small business in this province which will, in 
fact, put people to work. It also gives the, the owner of a small business in this province the additional 
cash flow that he is required to have to run his own business. 
 
I have heard not one single positive response from any member of the opposition who has stood and 
spoke on that program. Are they not interested in small business? I think in 11 years they’ve proved they 
aren’t interested in small business, and the small business in this, businessman in this province went to 
the polls on the 27th of April and he let them know how he felt. And, as a result, we feel a program such 
as our program, designed for small business in Regina and Saskatoon and Maple Creek and Moose Jaw 
and all centres in this province, is designed specifically to get the cash flow moving and get the people 
back to work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
539 

Mr. Sveinson: — They so ably presented a rosy picture in 1981 which included . . . And this is a, this is 
a very complex little document, as you can see. It included, as they mention, an 8 per cent increase in 
Saskatchewan’s gross national, gross provincial product. Now, it was mentioned earlier in the, the 
debate today that oil, during their administration, went from $2 a barrel to in excess of $32 a barrel. 
Anybody could have run the province. It could have run by itself, and it did. And it did. 
 
In many instances, businessmen were being driven out of this province. The level of optimism in this 
province had fallen to an all-time low. At least in the ‘30s people were still optimistic and they were 
hearing from an optimistic Conservative government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — In this recession, I haven’t heard a note of optimism from the members opposite since 
I’ve been elected, and I think they should, in fact, apologize to the people of this province for 
responding to positive programs that are designed to help the people, such as our mortgage interest 
reduction plan. 
 
They also, in this little document, outlined in their last budget a program that was going to cost $20 
million to help mortgage owners in Saskatchewan — home-owners with mortgages. Our program . . . 
We approached the whole thing universally. It didn’t matter what you earned, you were entitled to some 
mortgage assistance. Our entire program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, cost approximately what the program 
they introduced in March of 1982 would have cost, would have cost. They promised to spend the 
money, and they would have spent it. We touched everybody, and we didn’t spend any more money. At 
least, if we did, it was only a few dollars more, and that’s in the first year. And we helped everyone in 
this province who was a mortgage holder, and they were suffering. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — The mortgage holder was suffering. Interest rates had doubled. What did the NDP do? 
They said, they told the wives in the families, ‘Go out and get a second job. Go out and get a second job. 
You don’t have to sit home and look after the kids any longer. Go out and get the second job.’ Earlier in 
the debate today, they were talking about women’s rights. Women’s rights. Again, in this budget 
document, they do not mention women anywhere. All they’ve done is told them to go out and get the 
second job so they can afford to pay for the programs and the taxes that that government across the way, 
when they were in power, gave us as the people in this province to look forward to. 
 
And that is a shame. That is a shame. I’ll tell you, if there’s one consensus in this House, it’s that they 
should hang their heads in shame. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Earlier today, it was mentioned that one of our members, one of our hon. members, 
one of our very hard-working hon. members, went to Bulgaria to expand a trade program. I was talking 
to him. I asked him, ‘Did you kiss the earth when you got back to Regina?’ He said, ‘Yes, I did. Yes, I 
did.’ And you know, he is not an exception. How many people who have travelled to the Eastern bloc — 
and I don’t know what their philosophy might be — come back to this province or this country, get off 
the airplane, 



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
540 

get down on their knees and kiss the earth? I think even members opposite would. Murray, I think that 
you might do that. 
 
You know, the sad litany of this whole story is that I’ve talked to people who have taken off in Regina 
and landed in Edmonton, before the election, and done the same thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Now they’re doing it in Saskatchewan. The people who we drove out, who the 
politicians in this province drove to the line and forced them out of Saskatchewan are returning. And 
when they get off the plane, if you see people on their knees kissing the ground, they’re just coming 
back here to work because we offer them programs that are designed for people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — They’re not designed for governments. We’re trying to usurp some of this power of 
government so people can in fact live a life in this province with some dignity. The government takes 
that away from you. Their philosophy is to take it away from them. Leave them no dignity, and we can 
do what we want. Well, that’s not what we’re doing. And I apologize to those people in the province 
who may, on occasion, because of a change in direction, may be eliminated from our work-force. But I 
can promise them this: that we will offer them an opportunity to get into another area and go back to 
work before they have to get on the plane and kiss the ground in Edmonton. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I’m just listening to some of the feedback from across the House, and I’m finding it 
somewhat inerv . . . inervating . . . inver . . . Inervating? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Enervating. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — No, it’s not the right word. Enervating means you actually have a nerve. I don’t think 
they have nerves over on that side of the House. 
 
Another industry that I believe has been dealt a fatal blow, almost, from the private sector, is the mining 
industry. Now I know the members opposite are experts in mining now. They took over an industry in 
1975 and they offered mining companies a sweet little deal, and with the taxpayers’ dollars they took 
over an industry, but not only a potash industry, they also eliminated a hard-rock industry. They 
eliminated a placer industry. The people in the mining industry in this Canada, we want them back in 
Saskatchewan. They are not yet coming back. They haven’t got the confidence that they need to come 
back into this province. But I was just reading today, in fact, that in the next quarter in that industry, in 
the mining industry, and I’m including all mining, all mining endeavours in that statement, they’re 
expecting a 38 per cent increase in employment in that industry in the next quarter. We don’t share in 
that because of the opposition and the government that they led. We do not share in that because they 
did not give these people the opportunity to participate in our mining industry. 
 
Would you, Deputy Speaker, if the government came in and took half your farming operation, would 
you be pleased about it? Would you go out and tell your friends you have a friendly government? They 
want to get friendly or they want half my operation. Invite them in, they take half of it, they legislate it 
so they can have it. Would you stay in  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
541 

the province and farm if you could get out? Well, they left. 
 
And earlier today, I heard one of the members talk about the shaft, and I’m just trying to think of the 
song. But I’ll tell you, the mining industry . . . If we had two or three more shafts in northern 
Saskatchewan, we wouldn’t have an unemployment problem in this province, we’d have people 
working. That industry is just trying, is just trying to struggle back up to where it was five years ago. It’s 
going to be there. It’s cyclical. But it won’t be there in Saskatchewan because these people in that 
industry who are looking after their money and other people’s money who are shareholders in their 
endeavours, have looked at Saskatchewan and said, ‘No, we’ve been burnt there, we’re not going to be 
burnt there again.’ And I, I see the member opposite with his back to me reading the newspaper. He was 
with that operation. He knows what I’m talking about. He should have his head bowed in that 
newspaper. And you know I see he’s reading the mining page. It’s interesting. 
 
All I’m trying to say is that we have done our best, and I, I say we as a government, and I am saying 
them as the former government, they did their best to drive anybody with any initiative, with any capital, 
with any ambition, with any optimism, they have driven them out of this province, and some of those 
people have not yet come back. 
 
Now we’re talking about . . . Earlier in the presentation, I was talking about the, the runway kissers. The 
runway kissers, the runway kissers have not entered the mine. The mining industry has not sent in any 
runway kissers yet. You folks across this House, as government you put the kiss of death on the mining 
industry. And I know, Lawrence, that as the member for Cumberland, you can’t be proud of a 
government that done that. You can’t be. That government that did that left your jobless you were 
talking about a few minuets ago. You’ve got a 90 per cent unemployment problem in your, in your 
constituency. Where is all the mining opportunity in this province? Where is all the mining industry? 
Where should it be? It should be in your constituency, Lawrence. How can you get up and blame us for 
programs that don’t work, when your government initiated them? Answer that. 
 
We have a North in this province that’s the most beautiful in this country, that’s the most beautiful in 
this country and the most bountiful. And it does present opportunity. But you can’t just have the 
government solving all your problems, Lawrence. You can’t do that. Sometimes you have to have 
people solving their own problems. And I appreciate your initiative. I appreciate the member’s initiative 
for suggesting an economic platform. You know, we agree with that, and we may even listen to some of 
it. But I’m asking the member: how can he live in the opposition when he knows that they, they initiated 
it all? How can you do that and keep your head up? Your member opposite, your member from Quill 
Lakes is hiding his head. He’s hiding in the newspaper. Now he’s on ‘Sports.’ 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — You know . . . And I just want to outline, before I give up my position on the floor, I 
want to outline, I want to outline to this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how we can be missiled, missiled 
by the ex-government. I’ve got to take a drink of this Saskatchewan water, this Regina water. And that’s 
one way they missiled us. They did nothing for us. I want to read from Hansard, the Hon. Mr. 
Blakeney’s redress to this budget speech. And I want to read verbatim so I don’t make any mistakes. 
Lawrence, you listen carefully because as of . . . the mining sector is in your constituency. It says,  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
542 

quote . . . I might be on the wrong page but I’ll find it: 
 

They are going to remove the ceiling which says they can only take 80 per cent into revenue. 
 

And for those who don’t understand that, they’re talking about the heritage fund. Well, the heritage fund 
is all talk and I will get into that later. 
 

They’re going to remove . . . and take 80 per cent into revenue and are going to take 100 per cent 
into ordinary revenue. And that will mean, (Mr. Deputy Speaker), that there will be nothing out 
of that fast depleting resource for the generation to come. 
 

Well, the fast depleting resource he’s talking about, we see just a little above this, is potash. I made 
some inquiries and I’ll tell you how fast potash is depleting. At current production we have over a 
thousand years of known reserves. Now that’s what they told us about medicare, that it was going to, 
that it was going to go downhill. Now they’re telling us we’ve got a fast depleting resource. You know, 
that’s what, that’s what creates depressions. That doesn’t answer the problem. Tell us the truth. That’s 
what they want to hear. That’s why they threw you out, because they could never get the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Well, I think Mr., the Hon. Mr. Blakeney should stand up and maybe correct that 
mistake he made. 
 
An Hon. Member: — He’s not here. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — He’s not here this evening. He’s possibly . . . I, I don’t know where he’d be. But I saw 
him stomp out earlier. 
 
But those things are something that, as a government, we are going to address. And our budget speech 
addresses many of these problems. It’s also mentioned in that speech you cannot, you can’t solve all 
problems immediately. It takes time. It takes time and a little bit of patience. And the people of 
Saskatchewan are showing that patience. They’re member from P.A.-Duck Lake, he’s patient. That’s 
what you call patience. They’re willing to wait, because they saw 11 years of what can happen when 
your side of the House is in government. They saw, they’ve seen 40 years of it. We’ve lot our children, 
Lawrence. I, I hate to single you out. You’ve got 90 per cent employment because maybe they haven’t 
left. You know, if our, if my, if my family and, and families of this government side of the House and 
friends and neighbours had all stayed, can you imagine with your kind of philosophy where we would be 
as far as unemployment is concerned? We could lead the western world in unemployment quite easily. 
 
I prefer to talk, talk in terms of employment. This province employs more people on a ratio basis than 
any other province in the country today — 93 per cent or somewhere in that range — 93 per cent. Now, 
that’s a commendable, that’s a very commendable . . . I don’t, I don’t, I don’t know how an opposition 
member can get up and point his finger like this, and say we’re doing something wrong. Now you 
answer me. I can’t figure it out, and neither can the people out in the street. They’re, they’re baffled. As 
long as we’re in power, I could say we want to make sure they’re baffled, but that’s not what we’re 
going to do. We’re going to include them in the secrets. That’s the difference in governments. That’s a 
lot of the difference in philosophy between this side of the House and that side  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
543 

of the House. It’s government by inclusion, not government by exclusion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — And I can just say that with respect to a lot of the feedback I get out of my 
constituency . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You won’t be around next time. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I hear the member from Quill Lakes suggest I won’t be around next time. You know, 
like I’ve been trying to, I’ve been trying to demonstrate to the opposition that occasionally a finger, a 
finger of optimism is necessary. They can’t even find a thimble of opposition. They can’t even find a 
thimble of opposition, of, of optimism. And they can’t find much of a thimble of opposition either. But I 
don’t want to get into that. I think I’ve said enough — I think I’ve said enough . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I see them, for the first time in the last couple of weeks, lean back and say, ‘You know, 
maybe he’s right.’ 
 
An Hon. Member: — I believe you. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Lawrence, I can see that you are almost convinced and I’m not inviting them to cross 
the floor — we don’t have room. Half of our government is on their side right now. For those folks in 
the province, for those folks in the province who aren’t familiar with the set-up in the House, even 
though it’s televised out to Saskatchewan, they don’t some of them aren’t aware of it. We have so many 
members in here, we have to send a lot of them over on the other side of the House. You could be 
watching the Leader of the Opposition and you could see the Legislative Assistant to the, or the Minister 
of Finance. And it’s an honest mistake . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and he says, ‘Thank you for that.’ 
Maybe it’s not an honest mistake. I didn’t mean that the way he understood it, I can promise you that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — I’m just going to excuse myself and I think maybe in closing, I’d like to touch on one 
area that is the difference between success and failure in any venture. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Optimism. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — It’s not only optimism, but it’s the willingness to go into areas that are maybe new, 
and it’s something that the opposition are not familiar with as a government. And we are going to 
expend $50 million in the private sector on research and development, $50 million. You know, one 
innovation, I don’t care whether it’s a John Deere tractor or whether it’s a Morris cultivator, or whether 
it’s a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — NDP mousetrap. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Somebody suggested an NDP mousetrap. I don’t think it would employ many people 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . But, they got caught in it as the member opposite suggested. But, one 
innovation, one innovation, one innovation coming out of the mind of one individual can result in 
employment that would include everyone in the city of Regina. Everyone, everyone in the city of Regina 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ve just been invited to cross the floor. You know I’ve, I’ve offered, I’ve 
offered to go into their caucus and bring them up a little bit — I said I’d do it. Until now  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
544 

they turned me down flat, but I accept that. I’m going fishing with the member from Cumberland; I’m 
going to talk with the member from Quill Lake — he wants to take me shooting. 
 
But it’s a serious matter, and the people of Saskatchewan, we take it seriously. We aren’t as committed 
to a philosophy, we aren’t as committed to a philosophy or an ideology. We’re willing to listen, and if 
direction dictates it, we’re willing to move, very movable. 
 
They wanted our farmland; they wanted our businesses; they wanted our mines; they wanted our homes; 
and they chased the kids out of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Now is that a compassionate government? Who can stand up in this House and 
suggest that we, we are the ones that aren’t compassionate, we don’t offer compassion to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
I’ll tell you this: that on, on the freehold ownership of land, that is the basis of all freedom. The basis of 
all freedom, the basis of all freedom is the freehold ownership of land. That’s the basis of the freedom to 
live, eat, to do whatever you bloody well have to in order to bring, in order to bring the grub to the table, 
and those are . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . those guys understand. I don’t want to get too high, or too, 
too far above them, or it will shoot right over them, and I see one member leaving now. 
 
Our, our grandparents, our grandparents nurtured, nurtured the ownership of land, they nurtured the 
ownership, and our grandchild expect the ownership of land . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — . . . and that was being denied by the government opposite. And they took them en 
masse in the farming community and they threw them out. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do not support the amendment, I think that’s clear. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do 
support the motion, and I am almost embarrassed that the opposition, after virtually driving a wreck . . . 
a wrecking truck through the economy of this province, has the guile to come in with an amendment like 
they did, after we as a government have offered so much to the people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to . . . I would like to thank the one 
member of opposition who I have decided is probably the most intent member on that side of the House 
— he’s always listening, he never says much . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I think that said it all 
— he may be looking for a little bite in that leadership race. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I think he’s got it. 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — And he might have it; he might not want it, but he might have it. He might win by 
acclamation. 
 
But I would like to say that I . . . I in support of our motion, I believe, as I stated earlier, that it is 
probably the most compassionate budget we have seen in this province in 12  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
545 

years, that answers the need of people in this province who have decided that they want to stay here, and 
they want to work and they want to make our economy work and they want to support this government 
and make it work. And they’re coming back to do that, and they’re coming back to do that; they’re 
kissing the ground to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Sveinson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank the House for the patience they’ve had during 
this presentation. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — I thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s again a pleasure to enter into the budget debate. 
It’s a bit disappointing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that when members rise in the House now to debate issues 
before the Assembly, that we have almost no audience whatsoever, other than our own members . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I hear one lonely voice holler, ‘I’m here’, and that was the member for Pelly. 
I think it should be, should be noted which member that was. The member for Pelly is certainly in his 
seat. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, given that . . . Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, given the fact that we have 
very little in the way of an audience in the opposition, and given the fact, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker, 
that the volume of the last speaker, the hon. member for Regina North West, who gave a very good 
speech, although at a slightly, although at a slightly larger tone than I intend to give mine, and 
considering, again, the fact that I suppose I’m only speaking to those wonderful people out there in TV 
land, that I would ask them that maybe if they wouldn’t mind turning up their sets now or they may 
think they’re watching silent movies. 
 
None the less, there’s certainly a few comments that I want t make. I would like to start out, naturally, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, by congratulating our Minister of Finance. Our Minister of Finance has brought in 
a, a very good budget — a budget that I would say, in my mind, is a very imaginative budget. It 
certainly is full of ideas and opportunities for the ‘80s. I feel that it, it holds out to the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many, many of the dreams and the basis that people in this province 
have built this province with. And they’re, again, back to that basis and it’s been brought to them and 
brought around and history has repeated itself. The Minister of Finance has given us a budget that again 
Saskatchewan can hold up their heads and be proud to be Saskatchewan people, and go ahead and build 
again on this great foundation and their dreams that they have. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in all matters in life, whether it be government or any other walk of life, the 
greatest, I believe the greatest aspect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that anyone can have is a matter of trust. Do 
people trust you? And this is a very important aspect of politics. If people trust and respect politicians, 
then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they most definitely will have a tendency to understand more clearly and 
have confidence and faith in the direction that you’re setting out as a government. 
 
Now I want to take a few moments, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to outline why the people of Saskatchewan 
have a right and a responsibility to trust this government under the leadership of Premier Grant Devine. I 
want to refer all members, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to a, to a publication, Business Review, in which it has 
the picture of the Premier on the front page, and it has ‘Premier Devine Addresses Chamber Outlook 
Conference.’ Taking a look at what the Premier had to say at that conference: 



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
546 

Saskatchewan taxpayers can expect to see a new role for the provincial government, with 
government working as a partner in the economy with business, instead of as the boss. ‘We will 
work towards a sustained and healthy expansion of the private wealth-creating sector of our 
economy,’ says newly-elected Premier Grant Devine, speaking at the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce’s Business Outlook Conference, May 5th in Saskatoon. ‘With government acting as a 
partner with the economy, not as the controller, not as the owner, and not as the paymaster. But 
as a sensible partner for the people of Saskatchewan, we’ve worked to build better and more 
prosperous lives for ourselves and for our children.’ 
 

Another highlight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the Premier’s address at that chamber of commerce meeting 
was, and I quote: 
 

‘In recent years,’ he explained, ‘the competition has been to see which crown corporation or 
government agency could use up the most taxpayer dollars available to serve its own 
bureaucratic ends. There is no better example than Saskatchewan, where under the previous NDP 
government tax money was used for projects ranging from setting up crown corporations to 
buying the farmland. We want to see resources used so that we can facilitate the ownership of 
farms, homes and businesses by the people, not by the government. There is a considerable 
difference between helping people own the farm and ownership of the farm by government.’ 
 

Another quote that I thought was, was very appropriate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was that he had stated in 
this speech that ‘In Saskatchewan one of the biggest factors causing inflation is the provincial 
government raising prices. Rather than controlling people,’ the Premier explains, ‘it’s our intention to 
control costs. Controlling costs fights inflation and it also gives us the competitive edge.’ 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I take the time to provide some of these quotes, and there are others, and I, I 
just took some time today and marked a few of them out in, in yellow. And what this proves to me, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that, that the things that the Premier had stated in that address have been put in place 
by this new government, and in particular by our Minister of Finance in his budget. And let’s take a look 
at some of those things that, that have come through: 
 

The provincial government intends to alter the taxing system for the oil industry to bring the 
fields back into active production. While not privy to all of the background information on the 
national energy program negotiations prior to the final deal being struck, Devine does have one 
observation of the program: ‘On the surface it appears as though one government after another 
said, ‘More for me,’ giving no though to how they were killing the proverbial geese that were 
laying the golden tax eggs.’ 
 

On that issue alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is very clear that our government, under the leadership of 
Mr. Grant Devine, our Premier, has acted, and in particular in the south-eastern part of the province 
which is a part of the province which I represent, where prior to the election the oil fields were only 
operating at approximately 36 to 38 per cent capacity. Now through the new oil structuring tax that we 
have placed as a new government, we now have those oil fields operating at 100 per cent capacity and 
that’s new revenue for the people of Saskatchewan. He also stated, and I quote again: 



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
547 

That three or four years ago the mega-energy projects were seen as a central vehicle for the 
future. Now the entire subject of energy is a national disgrace and an international 
embarrassment. 
 

And the third area that he identified is where government should be active is in working to identify 
opportunities for economic development and job creation: 
 

To translate those opportunities into real jobs where it makes sense, we will invest public money 
in new enterprises, but only where it makes sense. The government would like to see a rural 
natural gas distribution system, which in addition to meaning low cost fuel and low operating 
costs, will generate employment to build the system and orders for steel and other products. 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s common knowledge now we have a 10-year plan for natural gas 
distribution in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, and I quote again from the Premier’s remarks in the speech: 
 

There’s a big role for government in health, education, social services, and environment, and 
there should be. It’s a natural. We belong there. Money will be spent there, but not in buying 
farms. ‘Saskatchewan,’ Devine says, ‘is Open for Business.’ 
 

What our Premier had stated at that time was prior to the introduction of the budget by our Minister of 
Finance, the Hon. Bob Andrew. The issues that he was identifying as being absolutely paramount and 
crucial to the people of Saskatchewan were identified there, and are in place now as a result of that 
budget. 
 
And that brings me back, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to my opening theme, and that was trust. Do the people 
trust the politicians? Do the people trust Grant Devine? And do the people trust our Minister of Finance? 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, obviously they have good reason to trust our Premier, because he stated what he 
was going to do, and he has had his influence as Premier, understandably, and that direction and that 
new course has been put forth by our Minister of Finance in the budget. 
 
So, Mr., Mr. Deputy Speaker, how the opposition can be so negative and get up in this House and 
condemn a budget that reflects the honesty, integrity, and the trust of the Premier of Saskatchewan and 
the members of his cabinet is absolutely beyond me, when it’s been verified and proved right in the tripe 
that I’ve just given you. 
 
Now let’s compare that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let us compare that with the supposed honesty and 
integrity that we are hearing from the Leader of the Opposition, the former premier. And we will 
understand, and understand very clearly, why he is not the Premier, and why he is now the Leader of the 
Opposition. We will also understand, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why their numbers are of only eight. 
 
If we take a look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the transcript in our Hansard from the Leader of the 
Opposition’s comments which he spoke here in the legislature in his address to the budget . . . And 
again, I’ve taken the time to just mark it out in yellow, the comments that I thought were relevant, or 
non-relevant I should say, and let me quote. What does the Leader of the Opposition say? He says: 



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
548 

Traditionally, budget speeches are a time for the Minister of Finance to blow the budget, the 
government’s horn, to resort to rhetorical flourishes in describing the government’s spending 
plans for the coming year, and often the facts and figures in the documents fail to justify the 
record, and that’s common enough. But in this case, Mr. Speaker, the budget documents not only 
fail to justify the budget speech rhetoric, the rhetoric in fact seems designed to hide the true 
impact of the budget documents. 
 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my comments on that particular paragraph are these: that it may well have 
been the position of the previous administration, the previous minister of finance, to stand in the 
Assembly (and it certainly was as I sat in opposition and listened to him), blow the government’s horn, 
brag about all the things that they had done with the people’s own money. Those were the comments, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he was making. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are a different government with 
a different philosophy. And we don’t believe in standing here as members, either whether we’re finance 
ministers or members of cabinet, and blowing the government’s horn, when, in fact, what we’re really 
doing is just trying to tell the people what we’re doing with their tax dollars. 
 
So, certainly we have taken a, a new course, and a change in direction in that respect. The Leader of the 
Opposition refers to it as a tradition. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it’s a tradition that we have 
broken, and it was long since overdue. 
 
Some other comments: he says, ‘Savage cuts in services and deficit budgeting,’ and then he says, ‘and 
that’s why I say this government has misled the people of Saskatchewan.’ Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
it’s very obvious that it was the Leader of the Opposition, the former premier, that misled the people of 
Saskatchewan. He misled them on a daily basis. He misled them into thinking that his family of crown 
corporations was in the interests of the people of Saskatchewan when in fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
was only in the interests of the government. Certainly, certainly the government of the day was getting 
richer and the people were getting poorer. As governments of the day, as the government of the day took 
the taxpayers’ dollars to build monuments unto themselves, great wondrous buildings that I think it 
could be fair to say were architecturally unsound — maybe pretty from the outside, but unsound — and 
using past NDP members’ names to name the buildings. Monuments unto themselves. Well, I believe, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it says something in the Bible about people who build monuments unto themselves 
and whether they worship the true God or their own monuments. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again the Leader of the Opposition, and I would like to quote again, says: 
 

Given the government’s policies, these expenses are regrettable but necessary. The government’s 
spending in other areas is not too high. No. What’s wrong with this government, and what’s 
wrong with this budget is not that they’re spending too much; what’s wrong is that the income is 
too low. 
 

Now if I could just stop there. Earlier, he had indicated that the people were now paying the price for 
these very expensive election campaign promises of the Tory party, now the Tory government. That 
what he had said, and now he’s indicating that it’s not that we’re spending too much, but that revenues 
are too low. So when we do something like adjusting the royalty structure for the oil companies to get 
the revenue up, so we broaden the tax base, then he criticizes us for doing that, and says that, in fact, 
we’re not  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
549 

making moneys available through programs and grants for the people of Saskatchewan, but rather we’re 
financing the multinational oil companies, our supposed buddies. 
 
Now again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition is the one that is misleading this 
Assembly, and he not only . . . You know, it’s not the matter of my saying he’s misleading the 
Assembly; it’s proven by his own words that he is the one that is misleading the Assembly. These are his 
words that I quote, the Leader of the Opposition’s words that I quote . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know I hear a member speaking behind me suggesting that maybe there 
should be a point of order on some of these matters. And maybe that’s a good point. Maybe we ought to 
start and just be, be very careful to listen to what they ay, and maybe we will start moving a few points 
of order in the House as it respects what the members of the opposition are saying as it relates to 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, I’m not going to go into any detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about all the facts and figures that he 
tries to outline in terms of the dollars that were coming in or being lost in oil revenue. I just say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that the facts are there — it’s in black and white, or I should say it’s now in yellow 
since I marked it in — certainly very clear to anyone who cares to read the Hansards that the Leader of 
the Opposition was in fact misleading the House by his own words. 
 
What does he, what else does he go on to say? He says that health is not promoted, that health is 
demoted. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to leave that topic for just a moment and come back to it, 
but I just want to flag that issue because health is a very important issue to the people of Saskatchewan, 
and how the Department of Health is administrating its responsibilities as a government. So I’ll come 
back to that. 
 
What else does the Leader of the Opposition have to say when he’s replying to the budget speech? He 
says: 
 

What does this government offer to deal with the rising costs that farmers face? Mr. Speaker, the 
increase in costs for farm diesel fuel since this government came to office are 23 per cent. 23 per 
cent! As the price of Saskatchewan oil has gone up twice since the government came to office, 
the costs of farm diesel has gone down, gone, rather, up and this government has taken no action. 
There’s money for the oil companies, money for CP Transport, but no money to help farmers 
with the cost of fuel. (Then) that’s not true in Alberta, where the government has a farm fuel 
distribution allowance which rebates farmers 31.8 cents a gallon . . . 
 

Now, here we have the Leader of the Opposition talking about an Alberta program that rebates the 
farmers on their fuel costs. Now, how he could, you know, I don’t know how he could bring himself to 
make that observation again in this Assembly, unless, of course, he wasn’t here when I spoke earlier in 
this Assembly on the throne speech debate, when I outlined very clearly that not only once did the NDP 
in government remove the farm cost reduction program, which was a farm cost reduction program aimed 
at rebating farm fuel costs to farmers, not only once, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but twice. Once by the 
minister of agriculture who represented the riding of Saltcoats, and then later, by the minister of 
agriculture who at that time represented the riding of Last Mountain-Touchwood. 



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
550 

And then we have the Leader of the Opposition, that same party, now not in government but in 
opposition, indicating that they feel that we should impose, or bring into place, as a government, a farm 
cost reduction program to offset the costs of fuel for farmers. Now how he can say that when it was their 
government that removed it, not once, but twice, is absolutely, Mr. Deputy Speaker, beyond my 
comprehension. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems obvious again that the Leader of the Opposition has been misleading the 
people of Saskatchewan. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m rather tired of their rhetoric about how, about 
how there’s subsidies and assistance for CP Rail, and those kinds of corporations, the multinational 
corporations. 
 
They never talk about how the taxpayers of Canada have to subsidize Air Canada. They never talk about 
the subsidy that the taxpayers of this country have to pay out for Canadian national Railways. Only they 
talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the multinational oil companies and the private oil companies, the CP 
Rail. Whenever you hear them debate the, the Crow rate, the transportation issue, in this legislature, you 
never hear them talk about how CNR is, is out of line. It’s always CPR, not CNR. 
 
And then they, and then they talk about diesel fuel costs. Well, you know, I didn’t hear them applaud all 
that much when our Minister of Finance increased the diesel fuel costs for the railroads. I didn’t hear 
them applaud that. It’s likely that the . . . They are likely the closest buddies of multinationals than we 
are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I can tell you that, to the best of my knowledge, there was no money 
coming into my constituency from any multinationals. 
 
Besides that, as it relates to multinationals, I would challenge any one of the eight members in 
opposition to, to try and spend a week and not deal at one time with a multinational. Likely by the end of 
the week you’d be starving to death. 
 
None the less, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go on and just quote again from some of the comments 
that were made by the Leader of the Opposition. And this is a very interesting subject, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a very interesting subject to me. He talks about . . . And let, let me just quote again. What does, 
what does the Leader of, of the Opposition say about women? He says: ‘Now, who else needs protection 
in our society, Mr. Deputy Speaker?’ Notwithstanding the fact that the NDP in opposition need 
protection. Certainly they do. I can remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it was we on that side of the 
House, and we were the ones that needed protection. About the only protection, as the saying used to go 
at that time, were the game laws in the province. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, here’s what he goes on further to say: 
 

. . . well, women in the work-force. All the statistics show that women are paid less than men, 
even when they do the same kind of work. We in our party believe that people should be paid for 
the work they do, and should have the chance to do any job if they can qualify. Whether they’re 
male or female shouldn’t make any difference. And we all know that that isn’t true, Mr. Speaker, 
in our society. One of the main jobs of the women’s division is to help give a better break to 
women in the work-force. But the budget ends all that, and the Premier has made clear that there 
will be no women’s division in the new department of advanced education. The entire women’s 
division has been abolished — axed completely, axed completely by this compassionate 
government. Another group of people who should be getting protection 



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
551 

from this government and aren’t. 
 

All right, now what has he said there, Mr. Deputy Speaker? He said there that women are paid less than 
men. Well he should know as well as any other member in this House. We could take the Minister of 
Social Services as example. Now that’s a, that’s a woman, and she’s paid more than I am and I’m a man. 
Now I wonder why he didn’t allude to that particular fact. What I’m saying that for, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is because I’m trying to tell him that in Saskatchewan women have an equal opportunity if 
they’re prepared to move out and acquire those equal opportunities. Our Minister of Social Services is a 
good example of that. 
 
I’ll grant you that over the years there has been a lot of areas where there were some inequalities, and it 
was difficult to compete on an equal basis with men, but those things have been changing over the years. 
In fact, in some areas, they’ve changed so far that it might be fair to say that some day we’ll have a 
men’s liberation group. None the less we may be a little ways away from that. 
 
I want to remind the Leader of the Opposition, and the, the two members that, that are here tonight to 
hear my comments, to take this message back. And the member for, the member for Cumberland would 
be the best member, I suspect. I see him smiling over there and listening to a few of my comments. 
When I was in opposition, I was the critic for the status of women. It wasn’t in the women’s division of 
the Department of Labour at that time. I was the critic for the status of women, and those women had 
one of the most effective lobbies ever at the legislature of any organization, male or female. And they 
had a very unique system, a very unique system. They had a great big score-board at the front of the 
legislature, and they rated every MLA. Now, I’m telling you, if you, if you weren’t in your office and 
weren’t able to meet your, your group of women that came in to see you, you were in big trouble 
because you know what you were rated on the score-board, a big zero. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to say that as a Progressive Conservative member of the 
legislature, in opposition, I was at that time rated number three out of 61 members of this legislature. 
Number three. 
 
Now how the Leader of the Opposition can say that we on this side of the House do not understand the 
issues of women, and make charges, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re, we’re stripping the rights of 
women through the reorganization of government is very misleading again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Very 
misleading, because what we have done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in our reorganization and in our funding 
priorities in government, is to make available in a very fair way opportunities for women in government. 
And we thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were doing something that was honourable, was right, that 
was good for the female segment of our society. And it will be, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we got 
condemned in this legislature by the Leader of the Opposition — condemned for that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I think that’s very unfair. And again I say that’s very misleading, because I for one believe 
there are many, many opportunities for women and I believe that the greatest opportunity for them is, is 
now in Saskatchewan. The greatest opportunity in Canada is here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to touch on another issue and that is the issue of unemployment. In 
this country unemployment is the number one concern of Canadians — number one. And out of all of 
the words that the Leader of the Opposition spoke, that is but one paragraph where he addresses himself 
to the question of unemployment. And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and yet, what do we hear in this House 



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
552 

during question period? Questions about unemployment. And, ‘What are you doing about a job creation 
program?’ Criticisms of the Minister of Social Services respecting the joint program between the federal 
government and the provincial government and job creation. Criticizing. And yet in his own speech, he 
allocates one small paragraph out of all of his rhetoric to the question of unemployment. 
 
I was going to, to enter that quote into the, into the record as well this evening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
I, I don’t feel that it’s, it’s really, it’s really worth it. He, he really never said anything in that particular 
paragraph. I even read it a couple of times trying to find out what he did say and, and he indicated 
absolutely nothing. 
 
So I’m going to close, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the comments of, of the Leader of the Opposition. But I 
want, and I want very clearly, the people of this province and the members of this Assembly to 
understand that the Leader of the Opposition, and I would suspect that he represents the other seven 
members in opposition, has misled this legislature and is deliberately trying to mislead the people of 
Saskatchewan — deliberately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that they can in some way regain power and sit 
on this side of the House. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, it tells me they have not learned one thing, not one 
thing, because they played politics with the people’s lives in this province for years when they were on 
this side of the House in government and they are continuing to do that now in opposition. And I’m glad 
they are because it’s going to keep them there for the next 20 years. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s take a look at a few very, very positive matters that have been brought 
to this Assembly through this budget by this government. I want to touch first on a reorganization. It was 
very understandable that, after our taking office, it was necessary to reorganize the government, to 
restructure it and redesign and redefine its, its philosophy and its principles and where it was going — to 
where it was going to take, ultimately the people of this province. Because the people of this province on 
April the 26th voted for a change. And when they voted for that change, they didn’t just vote for a new 
face of members but rather a new direction for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When the Prince Albert-Duck Lake by-election brought in yet one more Conservative member to this 
House, it confirmed that that initial thrust, when we set out on a new direction . . . It confirmed that that 
initial thrust was correct, that we were on the right track. And we’ll listen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and not 
just through by-elections, but we listen through joint committees and hearings all around the province to 
understand fully what the people of this province want and where they want us to, to work with them 
and the direction they want us to take them as a new government. And that, that new reorganization of 
government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is going to do a number of things. It will improve government 
productivity, and heaven only knows that was necessary. It will improve the government’s overall 
effectiveness, efficiency and economy by coordinating similar programs. Secondly, it will consolidate 
related functions under single departments to ensure greater accountability — a very important issue, 
accountability falling back again on my initial theme of trust. In order to have the trust of the people, 
you must account to the people. So our reorganization will accomplish that; it will allow for better 
accountability by this government to the people and it will improve public access to government by 
simplifying communication and reducing confusion. Those are the kinds of things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that are necessary. Those are the kinds of things that were, that were at the, at the basis of a new 
election. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I said I wanted to get around to health in my closing remarks, and I want to 
commend our Minister of Health. Mr. Deputy Speaker, he has taken the 



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
553 

Department of Health and he has reorganized as well the direction that they are about to take. A number 
of initiatives, and what are they? And I can flip through them very quickly. Maybe the, maybe the 
Leader of the Opposition, maybe the NDP opposition members should take note. You know it’s . . . You 
have access to this as well as I do, as any member in this House does. It simply comes out of 
information services and you can find someone to read it for you. I’m sure you could. 
 
Now let’s take a look at it: ‘New positions announced for Saskatchewan hospitals. The 1983-84 Health 
budget will create more than 180 new positions in Saskatchewan hospitals at a cost of $5 million, health 
minister Graham Taylor announced today.’ Now that sounds like a pretty good one to me. Now what 
was wrong with that? Was that a good health program? Are you opposed to that? Do you want to vote 
against that too, maybe? What else? ‘Funding advance for paediatric intensive care unit. The provincial 
government is providing $650,000.’ The member for Quill Lakes is babbling; he missed that. I better run 
that by him again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. ‘The provincial government is providing $650,000 in its ’83-84 
budget for the establishment of a paediatric intensive care unit at University Hospital in Saskatoon, 
health minister Graham Taylor announced today.’ Now do you oppose that? What else does he say? 
Again, I remind the members, maybe the member for Cumberland, these are available from information 
services. You can get them too, you, you know you can; there’s no problem. You can read these and it’s 
good stuff and you should read it. ‘Increased funding for open-heart surgery. The provincial government 
is providing more than $700,000 in its ’83-84 budget to expand open-heart surgery at the Plains Hospital 
Centre in Regina, health minister Graham Taylor announced today.’ That sounds good to me, too. 
Another good one — are you against that? 
 
Now those are some of the matters that I, I came across just in a few news releases, as it relates to the 
Department of Health. What else? The health minister was able to work with his colleagues, and I’m 
sure he must’ve stressed the importance of the Health Department, and I’m sure his colleagues were 
co-operative in understanding the need to expend moneys in the Department of Health, and I think, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s very important to identify very clearly what that cost is. What is that cost to the people 
of Saskatchewan? Well first of all, if you take the Health Department alone, it runs approximately, and 
the Minister of Health sitting close to me would correct me I am sure if I were wrong, it’s somewhere in 
the neighbourhood of 30 per cent of the total budget for the province of Saskatchewan — 30 per cent. 
And what does that break down to in a per capita? $1,000 per man, woman and child in the province of 
Saskatchewan, $1,000 per man, woman and child that this government, this Minister of Health has 
committed to the people of Saskatchewan for the health care of those very citizens. Are you opposed to 
that? I would challenge the member for Cumberland to vote against that one. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Health was able to gain a 9.6 per cent increase - $70 million, in fact 
- $70 million, and these were during bad economic times. He was still able to eke out $70 million — a 
9.6 per cent increase. And you people can still stand there and criticize the Minister of health and this 
government for not dedicating enough funds to health care. 
 
Well, I tell the member for Cumberland, you don’t know where it’s all at. You don’t even understand 
government. And I can appreciate that, because you just got elected. I didn’t understand it either when I 
came in here. If you want to learn it real quick, I challenge you: cross the floor and we’ll teach you in 
about a day. 



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
554 

Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Minister of Finance was able to approach his whole 
emphasis in terms of government financing in essentially two basic ways — twofold — essential 
services and community programs. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that ties into the direction the Minister of 
Health was able to take as well, because that’s what he is able to accomplish with the funding that he has 
in his department — essential services and community programs. And those are the kinds of things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that our Minister of health is able to emphasize in his allocation of the budget for the 
Department of Health. 
 
But let’s take a look at a few more things, very quickly, in winding down on this, on this budget debate 
in terms of my own remarks at least, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
$17 million to the Saskatchewan Cancer Foundation - $17 million, and $10 million for a new cancer 
clinic. Are the members opposed to that? I mentioned the 700,000 for expansion of cardiac services in 
Regina. Also, a half a million dollars allocated for small hospitals. What else, Mr. Deputy Speaker? $2.7 
million for a children’s rehabilitation centre in Saskatoon, in co-operation with the Kinsmen Foundation. 
That’s very significant, as I read it, as I read it into the record. $2.7 million for children’s rehabilitation 
centre in co-operation with the Kinsmen Foundation. That tracks right back, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
tracks right back to where I started. Our Premier, Business Review, speaking of a new direction, setting 
it out. Where are we going? Where are we taking the people of this province? Working together, not 
only for the people of Saskatchewan, but with the people of Saskatchewan. That has flowed right 
through into the budget, and you see it there with $2.7 million and it’s in co-operation with the Kinsmen 
Foundation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — Finally, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $4 million for the construction and renovation projects 
in special-care homes. The total since taking office - $11 million for special-care homes. Now how does 
that stack up? You know, to use some of the member for Quill Lakes’ expressions, how does that 
square? He used that terminology. How does that square with the previous administration? And I’ll tell 
you how it squares: it is 50 per cent more than the previous administration was able to accomplish in 
seven years. Now I tell you — seven years! So in other words, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are able to 
accomplish, through the Minister of Health and his department, just in special-care homes alone, as 
much in 11 months as they could do in seven years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — I hear a member say, ‘Shame on you.’ Now I don’t know whether that means all of 
the, all of them over there, or just the Yew from Cumberland. But none the less, either way it is shame 
on you. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to close on this comment. The only member that got a little 
bit rangy-tang over there was the member for Cumberland, and he was making awful threatening 
remarks. He was threatening members to go up north. I means, heavens, I mean, you know, we want to 
go up there. It’s a beautiful country up north. And I want to tell you something about the, your own 
province, about the own part of this province that you should know. My good heavens, you live up there. 
I don’t live up there. I’m a southerner; I live down south. Okay? You should understand that. 



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
555 

Now, I’m going to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and through you, I’m going to tell the member from 
Cumberland, that if you really cared about the people you represent, you would want to have them, as 
the Minister of Social Services said today in reply to a question in the question period, part of the 
mainstream of society. Do you want to isolate them and have them quarantined up north in some 
hinterland that you refer to it as? I tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I tell the member for Cumberland, 
I see the people you represent as being equals — equal with the people that I represent in southeastern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Birkbeck: — And I, and, and, through your, your debate it, in the House, if I could call it that, 
through your debate, which one, unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was not really a debate, what you 
had was a speech that was prepared for you by some more of your NDP hacks in the back, that never did 
understand politics up front, but their back-room politics. And I don’t know why an hon. member like 
you, and you were honourable when you came in, you . . . but you have let them, by preparing a speech 
for you, put you into a very bad situation, because what you had to say in here tonight is on the record. 
It’s on the record of the Hansard. And I say that it’s very unfortunate, Mr. Member, that you have let 
them drag you into that pit. Because, you know, they’re going down. And they’re going down fast. And 
it’s just like being near the Titanic when it was going down. 
 
Now, Mr., Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to tell you that the people in northern Saskatchewan do want 
to be part of the mainstream. And I’ve just outlined the commitment our Minister of Health has made to 
the people of Saskatchewan. And when he means the people, the people of Saskatchewan, when he says 
the people of Saskatchewan, he’s talking about the people that you represent as well — people of 
northern Saskatchewan and not just in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are some of my comments that I have to make respecting the, the 
member for Cumberland. 
 
Now, finally, in conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we felt, and I, and I certainly feel, as, as maybe one 
would draw from my comments, that we have an excellent budget — an excellent budget that reflects 
the, the direction of this government. And what do we, what do we have from the opposition? Now I see 
the member for Pelly, you know, giving us the old down sign. Well I challenge you, and I’ll pass this 
challenge out to the member for Cumberland as well, since you challenged our Premier. I challenge you. 
If you’re so confident about how solid you are in your riding, you resign and we’ll have a by-election up 
there. All right? And you too, the member for Pelly, you resign and we’ll have a by-election in your 
riding. Now, you know, there’s no point in me resigning, because you couldn’t find a candidate to run 
against me. 
 
Now then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have an amendment before the House, and I believe it’s very 
important the people of Saskatchewan should know what this amendment is that was introduced by the 
opposition members. 
 
The amendment reads, and it was moved by the hon. member for Regina Centre, and it was 
unfortunately seconded by the member for Cumberland. And that was too bad, because he seconded that 
motion and I don’t believe he even read it. I don’t believe he even read it. What does it say? It says that 
all the words after the word ‘That’ be deleted  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
556 

and that the following substituted therefor: 
 

This Assembly express its shock and dismay with the budget because: (1) it contains the largest 
deficit in the 78-history of the province, $317 million . . . 
 

Now then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the NDP members in opposition would like us to do, so that they 
could get into power, would be to lay heavy taxation on the backs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
What we’re doing rather, through a restructuring, as I said earlier, of the oil royalty, is to create revenue 
through the multinationals, which I suspect are their friends, and that way not have to tax the people of 
Saskatchewan. And we haven’t. In that budget, you can’t identify areas where in fact the tax has 
increased. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition alluded to some tax that, that the taxation was great. Well it was, because 
there’s people making more money in the province of Saskatchewan. People are coming back to 
Saskatchewan, and we know that; it was identified earlier today. It’s been common knowledge that since 
1936 we’ve lost a million people, and that’s based on the premise that since 1936 the nation’s population 
has more than doubled. And this province with a live birth rate which is higher than the national 
average, so they couldn’t say that it wasn’t because we were productive, we were productive in that area 
as well, we only had a million people. So by that understanding only, we lost a million people, and we 
lost them all over the, all over this country. And now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re coming back, they’re 
getting jobs here, and they’re taxable and understandable, understandably, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the total 
taxation has gone up. 
 
It says second, ‘coupled with the deficit of 1982-83, the Government of Saskatchewan is now more than 
half a billion dollars in the red.’ Now, that again, is misleading. Coupled with the deficit that we 
introduced earlier, in the 1982-83 budget — well, you don’t couple the two. I don’t know what 
understanding that is of a budget. Again, I say, the hon. members don’t understand they budget, they 
don’t understand what they’re debating in the House. Because the deficit in fact is 317 million. You 
can’t couple the two, otherwise you could couple the last 20 or 40 or 50 years and average them all out. 
So that doesn’t make any sense. 
 
He says that thirdly, that these ‘record deficits are not the result of government efforts to create jobs, but 
rather the result of government give-aways to big oil companies, American-based private potash 
companies, and interprovincial truckers such as CP Transport.’ Again he’s talking about CP Transport, 
nothing about anything else. And ‘it offers a totally inadequate job-creation response at a time when 
unemployment is at its highest level in Saskatchewan since the Great Depression.’ Well, I say they 
would know about the Great Depression because I feel that they’re still in the Great Depression, the 
Great Depression for those members in opposition. 
 
‘It contains no assistance for Saskatchewan farmers to deal with their worsening cost-price squeeze.’ I 
identified that as well that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they have done absolutely nothing. They’re hypocritical 
in their call for us to introduce a farm cost reduction program; as I said earlier, two of their ministers 
removed it. So, it’s hypocritical and it’s misleading to the people of Saskatchewan, to indicate that, if 
they were government, they’d do something. They were government for 11 years and did nothing. 



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
557 

Six and seven. Number six says, ‘it contains no economic development plans for people of northern 
Saskatchewan.’ Again, isolating Northerners from the rest of this province, isolating them as if they 
were some separate entity . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And that’s what I say. A member says, ‘You’re 
one of us, Lawrence.’ I agree with that. The member for Cumberland is one of us. I see you as an equal, 
as I see all other members in this House as equals. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the seventh and the last point is, ‘it contains savage cuts in needed government 
services for thousands of Saskatchewan people.’ And that’s an expression that was introduced in the 
House by the Leader of the Opposition. Savage. Now he used the word savage because he hoped that the 
media would catch that little cliché and unfortunately they did, and they used that word to headline one 
of the articles. 
 
Now that’s the amendment. And not only has the Leader of the Opposition’s remarks in the House been 
very misleading — I have proven that this evening — I have outlined, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the very 
positive approach this government has taken, the fine job our Minister of Finance is doing, the fine job 
our Minister of Health is doing in his budget and his Department of Health. And again, in the 
amendments introduced for the NDP members of the opposition, they’re still living in that, that doom 
and gloom land of negativism. And there’s the amendment, and again, as I’ve gone through the 
amendment, I’ve pointed out how it in itself is misleading. It’s not factual. It does not represent truly 
what the budget introduced by the Minister of Finance is meant to represent. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s understandable that I would be opposing such an amendment and 
supporting the main motion in this budget. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — Before the member from Arm River takes his place I would just like to remind 
the House that you are supposed to, by rule 319, refer to members by their constituency and not by their 
name. 
 
Mr. Muirhead: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I take great pride and pleasure to rise in my place 
to support and commend the Minister of Finance and our government on the presentation and content of 
the proposed budget for the year ’83-84. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it seems very strange to me that the Leader of the Opposition should condemn this 
budget because for the first time in many years a minister of finance has saw fit to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan the real facts about our financial finances. What I’m saying is, Mr. Speaker, that for many 
years the Leader of the Opposition and his expert advisers, known, commonly known as the Murray 
Wallace corporation, have been telling the public, on the future of Saskatchewan finances, we’re and 
would be in the black for many years due, due to their master-minding a crown corporation, etc. 
 
I’m sure that the public will recall the long-running expensive media promotion of the family of crown 
corporations. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would appear that the Wallaces and Dombowskys, etc., did not 
anticipate that just maybe the world economy would not stay buoyant forever, and just possibly they 
didn’t care, because it’s quite evident that with all their wisdom they failed to advise the ex-premier that 
they in their socialist  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
558 

fantasy had not made allowance for the down periods, which any astute businessman knows were bound 
to happen. 
 
The great advisers, and apparently now the Leader of the Opposition and his colleagues, were on a high 
that they thought would never end. Under all circumstances they thought the shuffling of accounts and 
numbers would always satisfy the public and their power trip would never end. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, oil revenues went down, potash revenues went down, and the NDP went down, leaving in its 
wake a financial situation that we soon found out was very serious. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the finances of this province were as spectacular as the NDP claimed they were 
during the ’82 campaign, we as a new government would have no difficulty whatsoever. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the fact of the matter is that the purpose of the NDP expensive advertising campaigns in respect 
to our financial buoyancy in the 1970s and early ‘80s was to set up a smoke-screen to keep the public 
unaware of the true facts. 
 
I recall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, many times when we were in the opposition, we took special effort to try 
to obtain information as to the financial situation of crown corporations other than those such as 
telephone and power. And time after time the stock answer we got was: the information we were 
requesting would not be in the public interest, or it would be detrimental to our competitive position. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the information we were seeking certainly would have been of interest to the 
public. And now we are a government that believes the public should know exactly where they stand in 
respect to their finances. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, everyone I am sure is aware that government has only two main sources of 
revenue, which are taxation and revenue from resources such as oil and potash. I’m sure it should be 
clear to the Leader of the Opposition, as it is to me, that in a time of world-wide recession, sales of 
resource materials are down, thus lower revenue. He should also be aware that when the mainstay of our 
Saskatchewan economy, which is agriculture, finds the products they produce are at an all-time high 
surplus and sales values are down, the revenue of this province and indeed all of Canada suffers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in short, what I am saying is that the production of agriculture is healthy but sales 
are a low level in respect to value received for crops and agriculture products produced. 
 
The facts, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are clear: that the position of the economy is not buoyant. The solution 
to this world-wide problem is not too clear. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is also clear that the previous 
government, who in, in a position to know when the downtown in our Saskatchewan economy and 
financial position was on the downturn, did not take steps to advise the public or make changes in their 
socialist financial planning to get off the state-controlled financial spending. Thus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
our Minister of Finance and our government were faced with two alternatives — increase general 
taxation or a deficit budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the majority of economists (I would point out that when I say majority of 
economists, I only include those that are not of any high political profile, such as Dr. Kelly) agree that in 
financial recession deficit budgeting is not the wrong approach to take. I am sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
if you were to ask the taxpayers of Saskatchewan whether they wanted general increased taxation or a 
deficit budget at  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
559 

this time, the majority would opt for a deficit budget, and express their faith in this province, in this 
government, that the deficit will, will be removed in the not-too-distant future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, recently there was a great uproar by the members of the opposition opposite, which 
I’ll admit was probably due to their unreliable spies, that our government was going to cut financing to 
the Office of the Ombudsman. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the estimates for 1983-84 indicate that the 
Ombudsman office will receive $51,580 more than last year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also note that under the Department of Consumer and Commercial Affairs we 
have a grant of $86,450 for commercial cemeteries, companies in default. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the only 
reason we are paying for cemeteries in default is because the Leader of the Opposition created and gave 
birth to the cemetery problem back many years ago when he was a civil servant for the CCF regime and 
then he failed to correct the problem when he became an elected member of the government. The time, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that he gave birth to the cemetery fiasco was in 1952-53. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the ex-premier gets up and decides to criticize and accuse our government in 
respect to expenditures or the lack of them, he should first of all recall his past mistakes and political 
errors. He should remember that when he adds up all of the past and the ongoing cost that his poor 
judgement or political endeavours have to date cost the taxpayers of Saskatchewan just for cemeteries in 
default, he and the taxpayers will realize the hundreds of thousands of dollars that could have been used 
to increase budgets for many government agencies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am sure that the majority of the members of this House are now saying, ‘What is 
Muirhead talking about?’ When I speak of cemeteries, Mr. Speaker, I can assure you that the Leader of 
the Opposition is quite aware of what I speak, and I am sure that there are many people in Weyburn, 
Moosomin, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, North Battleford and elsewhere who know about the cemetery fiasco 
created by his friends and himself, Mr. Speaker. I refer to the preceding only to point out that, although 
they represent small amounts of expenditures, they’re ghosts of the socialist past which must, from time 
to time, be brought to their attention to remind them that in their closets hang many skeletons. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my sympathy goes out to the Hon. Allan Blakeney, Leader of the Opposition. I 
will give him credit that we, he was an honourable premier, well-respected by nearly all of 
Saskatchewan citizens for his 11-year reign. Mr. Deputy Speaker, why I have sympathy for the Leader 
of the Opposition is on account of him making the biggest political mistake of his career in March, 1982. 
He knew the party was in serious trouble, going down month by month, week by week, so he was forced 
to call an election. Mr. Deputy Speaker, he did not have the political sense that Tommy Douglas had. 
Douglas was smart enough to know that when his party was falling, he turned the party over to 
Woodrow Lloyd and let him take the party down to defeat. Thus, Tommy Douglas moved on to greener 
pastures in the federal scene. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Allan Blakeney will always regret his mistake because he went down a loser, and 
there will be no federal scene for Allan Blakeney. I said a moment ago how well Allan Blakeney was 
respected as an individual when he was premier. That is one thing, but I think we should talk for a 
moment on the real reason that Allan 



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
560 

Blakeney’s government fell. 
 
Being a respected man and his philosophy are two different things. Allan Blakeney is considered by 
many, many people across Canada as being far to the left to red socialism as possible. His philosophy, 
Mr. Speaker, believed in state ownership. He believed private enterprise was a complete ‘no.’ He did 
everything in his power in the 11 years as premier to teach people a life of socialism of the worst kind. 
The people who followed him and trusted him were taught to depend on government instead of 
themselves as an individual. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Allan Blakeney followed in the same path as Tommy 
Douglas, and that was government ownership wherever possible. 
 
The Douglas government built box factories, shoe factories, rolling mills, etc., etc. Most of Douglas’s 
government own ventures went broke, but private enterprise business survived in Saskatchewan. The 
Douglas government also created seven crown corporations. In the great Mossbank debate, which many 
people will remember, between Ross Thatcher and Tommy Douglas, Thatcher proved this is where 
government could hide corruption. The people of Saskatchewan in 1964 said they had enough of 
socialism, so elected Ross Thatcher’s Liberals to power. 
 
In 1971, by people’s choice, decided to give socialism a try once again. In the Blakeney campaign, the 
NDP promised a moderate government, a little bit to the right of the previous Douglas regime, but, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that what happened in the 1970s? No, that is not what happened. They did the 
opposite or what they promised, of what they promised. Things happened very quickly. Seven crown 
corporations grew to approximately 25 — I believe it’s 27, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is where we had to fight them for information for eight years in opposition. For four of those 
years, I was in opposition. Any matter of important information, or of an embarrassing nature, they 
would always use their old line: ‘The information we are requesting would not be in the public interest; 
it would be detrimental to our competitive position.’ These things were only one small item, Mr. 
Speaker. This was the beginning of the NDP arrogance that led them to their downfall on April 26, 
1982. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, state ownership was the big move. They decided to own the farmland, turn this 
country into the same situation as what was happening in Europe. Day by day, they were turning 
Saskatchewan farms into government-operated farms. Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s compare why the 
Douglas government fell to why the Blakeney government fell. People in Saskatchewan turned on 
Douglas because of small government industries, small, such as box factories, shoe factories, woollen 
mills, etc. Very small, but they turned on them. But, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why did the people of 
Saskatchewan turn on Allan Blakeney’s philosophy? Because he tried to control the production of our 
whole province. The Blakeney administration took over the potash mines, farms through the land bank 
program, the oil industry, even controlled the uranium industry and even tried to control the shopping 
centres in Regina. Controlled the housing industry and even tried to control the civil service, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a result of all this, Allan Blakeney lost all his control on April 26th. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, people want less government. When I grew up on a Saskatchewan farm with my 
father and mother, I knew or cared little about government. They had no control over my family. Now, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, people in North America are controlled by too much government in their lives. Our 
goal, Mr. Deputy Speaker, must be to move to less government in our life, and to get back to the old 
philosophy of each and every person thinking and working for themselves. Mr. Deputy Speaker, people 
all  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
561 

over our country are waiting for a hand-out from their fellow man. This may take decades to turn this 
around, but we must begin the turn-around now. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you will recall that in a review of the expenditures for the previous fiscal year, the 
opposition members had a lot to say about expenditures related to the Executive Council. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think it is time the facts in relation to the NDP’s first year in office compared to the last year 
of the Thatcher government in respect to the Executive Council should be placed on record. The date 
used for the Thatcher regime is May 4, 1971. And the date used for the NDP under the Hon. Mr. 
Blakeney is of course May 4, 1972 — one year later. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Executive Council 
Premier’s Office as of May 4, 1971, under the Hon. Ross Thatcher had a total staff of eight persons. 
With your permission, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will read them. It’s only eight, so it won’t take long. 
 

Executive Council, Premier’s Office. (Mr. Deputy Speaker, you can see this is an old document. 
It came out of the Premier’s office not too many years ago, maybe 10. So he has people that like 
to send material over to our side. We thank him very much.) Personnel: M.A.D. (I want you to 
listen very carefully. This man had three positions.) Cabinet Secretary, Clerk of the Executive 
Council, executive assistant. Total salary of $8,650. 
 
D.H. . . . special assistant, $7,622. 
 
K.J. . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Your name is coming. K.J. Sunquist, special assistant, 
$7,341.70; Muriel DeCruyenaere, secretary to the premier, $6,768; Marlene Middleton, 
clerk-secretary, $4,512; Marlene Lerat, clerk-steno 2, $4,512; Donna Kwinlaug, $3,756; Jean 
Barnard, clerk, $3,756. 
 

The total salary, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of Ross Thatcher’s Executive Council was $46,919. 
 
Now, when I go on to compare, I want you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the members of this legislature to 
keep in mind the figure $47,000. Mind you, many of the staff of eight filled more than one position. 
Remember those figures I read and the names; they filled more than one position. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the total salaries of the Executive Council, Premier’s Office — remember $47,000. And remember this 
is based on 1971 dollars. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we now will look at the holier-than-thou Blakeney Executive Council, 
Premier’s Office personnel and salaries as of May 4, 1972. First, we find . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Now I see the member from Quill Lakes is starting to get nervous now. He’s getting very nervous, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And he’s got a reason to be nervous. First, we find that in addition to the usual 
Executive Council, Premier’s Office staff, which by the way has grown from eight persons under 
Thatcher to 17 persons under Blakeney, we now find in 1972, also, Mr. Speaker, also, a planning and 
research branch of the Executive Council, with a staff of 12 persons, for a total of 29 persons. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here comes the real . . . (inaudible) . . . The total salaries of the Executive Council, 
Premier’s Office, as of May 4, 1972 was not $47,000. It was $307,316. And they have the . . . 
(inaudible) . . . to stand over there this last few months and say what we’ve been doing is too much 
spending. Now what is the proportion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and members of this legislature, if we figure 
out  



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
562 

46,000 to a jump of the Executive Council of $396,000; 307,000, sorry. 
 
Now, I think it’s only fair, seeing that I read off the names of the Thatcher Executive Council, that we 
read off a few of the Executive Council, Premier’s Office. First, J.F. Kinzel, clerk of the Executive 
Council. Now, how many of us know J.F. Kinzel? Total salary of $17,000. Clare V. Powell, $10,812; 
G.A. Wilson, cabinet secretary, $14,500. Now let’s do some comparison here. These first three names 
that I’ve mentioned come to $43,000, and those three positions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, took place of the 
one position under Ross Thatcher of $8,652. One man, de Rosenroll did all three positions, and he 
replaced them with three of 43,000. So, I don’t think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we should be hearing from 
those people opposite about the extravagance of our government. 
 
Let’s reminisce a little more. Let’s, let’s reminisce a little more. D.G. McMillan, special assistant to the 
premier, 8,000. I’ll go through these fairly quickly. Brian H. Coulter, special assistant to the premier, 
10,500. Oh, oh! We won’t jump this one, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker. M.J. Koskie, crown 
solicitor 3 to the Executive Council, $18,888 — the highest-priced hack in the whole government. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the member from, the, this gentleman, Mr. M.J. Koskie, which I think you people know 
who he is, received just exactly half of what the entire Executive Council salary under, under Ross 
Thatcher was. 
 
Ian P. Phillips, special assistant to the premier, 8,800-and some dollars; Graham Barker, 10,000; Graham 
Forstad, research officer, 7,000 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You sure did. K.J. Carriere, 6,000; 
Florence Wilkie, secretary to the premier, 8,000; Keith Kasick, $6,450. I’m giving you some 
approximate on these, Mr. Speaker, to get through this quicker. Myrtle D. Harrop, V. Ann Gardiner, 
both getting 6,450; Doreen Dwernychuk, 5,448; Margaret Heinrich, clerk-steno 4, 5,724. That name will 
ring a bell out in Davidson. Jean C. Barnard, $4,248. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to mention this name, Jean C. Barnard, because that is the only name 
that appeared under Ross Thatcher. So, therefore, everyone in the Executive Council were fired, except 
Jean Barnard — everyone — slashed, fired. The holier-than-thou, Mr. Deputy Speaker, fired them all 
because there’s only one name that appears in the Executive Council under Ross, under the past premier 
— only one name, Jean Barnard. And I didn’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker, notice M.J. Koskie up under 
Executive Council before, either. 
 
Then they added another department, planning and research branch of the Executive Council. Hubert 
Prefontaine, $25,000. Now, you people remember a couple of weeks ago I mentioned the name 
Prefontaine. He was the man who wrote the letter to Smishek and Romanow and Tchorzewski about the 
water; he’s the man that had all the recommendations. We, we had tabled some information about him 
here a couple of weeks ago. 
 
Saddlemyer, secretary advisor, $18,000; Dr. Gartner, $21,000; Gene Darychuk, 15,000; David Abbey, 
$7,000; Richard Hill, $13,000; John McNeil, 9,000; Edward J. Reed, 10,000; Sylvia Ruth Baker, 7,000. 
A little note at the bottom — that’s a total of $307,000. Now they have a note on the bottom here. ‘Note: 
estimate for 1973 indicates the planning and research branch will spend $267,980 and employ 14 more 
persons.’ So they’re jumping from 152 to 267 from ’72 to ’73. It would be very interesting, wouldn’t it 
. . . Mr., Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wish to table this one here and  



 
April 5, 1983 

 

 
563 

send one copy over to M.J. Koskie right now, please, the member from Quill Lakes. Then he can look 
and read for himself. Just table this one, and this one over to Mr. . . . the member from Quill Lakes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have one more piece of information that I want to quickly go through. This is 
very interesting. I won’t spend too much time on it. But it shows in 1971 that there was a total of 18,647 
civil servants in the province of Saskatchewan. It shows in 1982 there’s 28,805. The increase each year, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, starts out with 874 and it keeps working down to 10,158. The figure I want to 
bring to you is what these 10,158 people cost the province of Saskatchewan. But, before I do so, I want 
to make it very clear that I am not condemning any civil servant that this happens to . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I’ll finish the story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when I’m ready. 
 
What I’m saying Mr. Deputy Speaker, that any civil servant that I’m mentioning here, it is not their fault 
that the past government created a civil service of 10,000-some more people. What they should have 
done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with those 10,000 people is gave them a job with productivity, because, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the Hon. Mr. Allan Blakeney in the ’71 election said that Ross Thatcher had too many 
civil servants — too many. So why did he create 10,158 more? He thought, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by 
creating this civil service it would keep him in power forever. But it didn’t work, they turned him out to 
pasture. 
 
The total salaries for the month of December in 1982 for these people, the extra 10,158 people, come out 
to $108,426,953. If you times that by 12, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you come up with $1.3 billion. Now that 
is exactly what this past government has spent for those 10,158 people. That would take care of our 
deficit budgets for the next three year s- $1.3 billion. Now they’re going to say to me, ‘Well it wasn’t 
wasted because we created a job.’ 
 
I want to take you to a conversation that I had with the past minister of agriculture, the Hon. Mr. 
MacMurchy, in the cafeteria, where he stated to me, where he stated to me that if you have five people 
that need a job . . . you need a job for five people and you can take five more off welfare, create that job, 
you’ve done a good thing. All you’ve done is taught 10 people not how to work. And I’m sure the 
people of Saskatchewan will agree. 
 
What that past government needed to have done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was to find a job that would give 
productivity to the province of Saskatchewan. It’s sure easy to see, Mr. Speaker, why the member for 
Quill Lakes just about wasn’t here at all. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to have one more remark. I just want to make a comment of the 
dollars and cents that this budget allocated to my constituency of Arm River - $3,978,400. I’m only 
going to make mention of one which I was very glad to see. Under Social Services — construction of 
residential care facilities, 12 new beds plus renovations at Outlook. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in closing, my last comment is this: that this world is in a very tenuous situation. 
We’re in a troubled, troubled times. The economy is low. I just want to state that I agree with President 
Reagan, in a statement that he said some three weeks ago, that our answers to all these problems are in 
the Scriptures, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s why I’m proud to be in this government serving under 
the Premier Grant Devine, who stated that God is first, the family second, and politics third. It is a 
pleasure to serve under Premier Grant Devine. 



 
April 5, 1983 
 

 
564 

Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I will not be supporting the amendment and it will be a pleasure 
supporting the budget. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 9:57 p.m. 
 


	EVENING SESSION

