






















































Hansard: May 19, 1983


(2384) 2385 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
May 19, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 2 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PETITIONS 
 
THE CLERK: — Under rule 11(7), I report favourably on the following petition: of certain citizens of 
the province of Saskatchewan praying that the Legislative Assembly may be pleased to urge to the 
government to reverse permanently the decision by Saskatchewan Government Insurance to close the 
motor vehicle division offices in four Saskatchewan cities. 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MR. BIRKBECK: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to introduce to you and of 
course through you to the other members of the Assembly, a group of grade 4 and grade 6 students. 
They are seated in the west gallery. They are from Langbank; Langbank of course being in my 
constituency. I certainly want to welcome them here to the legislature today. I would advise the 
Assembly that there are in fact 22 in number, so a good number of them have come in today to visit our 
legislature. And I would as well advise the Assembly that they are accompanied by their teachers and/or 
chaperones, Mr. Gordon West, Margaret Duke and Erin McKee. I will be meeting with the group at 
about 3 o’clock — between 3 and 3:15 — in the rotunda area for pictures, and later after for drinks and, 
I hope, some questions from the students as well as to the proceedings of the House today. I would close 
then by asking all members in the Assembly to join with me in welcoming them here to Regina, wishing 
them a very good visit and a safe trip home. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SMITH: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you, a group of 10 students 
from the Pense School. Their member is not in the House, so he’s asked me to do this for him. 
Accompanying the students are Debbie Quinlan, Pat Harlton and Bonnie Bell. They are sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery and I’ll be meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures, the second floor, in the rotunda, and 
drinks at 2:35. I wish all members to give them a hearty welcome here today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, I have the pleasure of introducing to you and through you 
today to members of this Assembly, a very distinguished guest, His Excellency Vagn Korsbaek, the 
Danish ambassador to Canada, who is accompanied here today by his good wife. His Excellency and his 
wife are seated in the Speaker’s gallery and the ambassador will observe a portion of the House 
proceedings before continuing on a busy and informative itinerary today. 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2386 

This morning His Excellency conferred with His Honour, the Lieutenant-Governor Irwin C. McIntosh, 
and this afternoon His Excellency will meet with the Hon. George McLeod and later with officials of the 
Hon. Paul Rousseau’s Department of Economic Development and Trade. He will also visit with the 
honorary consul of Denmark, Mr. Gordon Rasmussen, before enjoying a tour of our Queen City capital, 
Regina. 
 
So as one good Norseman to another, I would ask the ambassador and his wife to stand and be 
recognized by members of this Assembly. Welcome. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Briefly, Mr. Speaker, I want to second the comments made by the Minister 
of Co-operatives. We want to welcome a very distinguished visitor to Regina, and we have many ties 
with Danish people, forged in a very close way during the war and has continued since then. Many 
people in Saskatchewan have roots in Denmark — my friend, the member from Athabasca, his father 
was an Icelander so the ties are very close. We welcome you here and we hope you enjoy your stay in 
Saskatchewan as much as we enjoy having you here. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
MS. ZAZELENCHUK: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you and through you 
to this Assembly two school groups visiting us from Saskatoon. First, approximately 35 grade 8 students 
from W.P. Bate School. They are seated in the east gallery and accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Ron 
Boden. I’ll be meeting with them at 3 o’clock for pictures and refreshments. Also, on behalf of my 
colleague from Saskatoon Mayfair, I would like to welcome to the Assembly approximately 15 grade 8 
students from McNab Park in Saskatoon. And they are seated in the west gallery, accompanied by their 
teacher, Elwood Torgunrud (I’m sorry if I have the pronunciation wrong), and Mr. and Mrs. Suderman. 
I’ll be meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures and refreshments. On behalf of the Assembly, I wish them 
a very pleasant day in Regina and a safe trip back home. And I would like all members to join with me 
in welcoming them here this afternoon. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. PETERSEN: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce to you and through you a 
group of grade 4 students from the Wadena Elementary School in Wadena. They number 46. They are 
accompanied by teachers and/or chaperones, Mr. Reg Glennie, Anne Michaluk, Mair MacDonald, and 
Shin Jiro Miaji, as well as their bus driver, Jim Haggard. I’ll be meeting with them at 2:30 for pictures 
and at 2:45 for refreshments. Please join with me in giving them a good welcome here today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of this House a delegation visiting our province from Bulgaria. This is a return visit, Mr. 
Speaker, from the visit that I had in Bulgaria, the successful visit I had in Bulgaria earlier this year. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2387 

I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Hinkovski. Dr. Hinkovski is the president of the 
Bulgarian Agricultural Academy and, in addition, is the vice-president of the Central Council of the 
National Agro-industrial Union. That is comparable to our deputy minister of agriculture here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s responsible for all agricultural research programs in Bulgaria; responsible for the administration of 
the numerous agro-industrial complexes throughout Bulgaria; responsible for the dairy, goat, sheep, and 
beef breeding programs for Bulgaria; is the key person responsible for the importation of polled 
Herefords and Holstein cattle from Saskatchewan to Bulgaria; and is a noted scientist, particularly in 
animal genetics. And I would also like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that he has something in common with 
the Premier of this province in that they both went to Ohio State University. 
 
I’m pleased to announce as well that, after some considerable discussions, we will start the selection 
process later this year for an additional 500 polled Herefords for Bulgaria. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — We also have Dr. Dobrev. Dr. Dobrev is a doctor in animal nutrition. He 
is president of the National Agro-industrial Complex at Tolbukhin, which is located in the largest 
agricultural area in Bulgaria. And to give you an indication of the size of this farm, the complex has 
40,000 dairy cows on it. 
 
Additionally, we have Mr. Vlahov. He is consul and trade commissioner in Toronto, representing 
Bulgaria. His responsibilities are to promote trade between Bulgaria and Canada. He assisted, as well, 
with the export of Saskatchewan polled Hereford cattle to Bulgaria, and he’s responsible for promoting, 
of course, trade both ways and has been instrumental in discussions between his government and ours in 
an effort to get Bulgarian wines listed with our liquor board, which is in the process of happening now. 
And we’re also exploring other areas of trade between our two jurisdictions. 
 
I would ask our three guests to stand up and be recognized, and I would ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ever so briefly I want to join our colleagues in 
government caucus in welcoming our distinguished visitor from Bulgaria to Saskatchewan. We have 
many ties with Bulgaria. Very many Saskatchewan people came from Bulgaria and settled in this 
province and helped develop the agriculture industry initially. Those ties continue to this day. There are 
many items at issue between the government and the opposition and you may hear of some of those later 
on in the day. One item that is not an issue is our desire to increase our trade links with the people of 
Bulgaria, and we warmly welcome you here, and warmly support all efforts being made to enhance trade 
links with Bulgaria. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Cost of Operating Licence Issuing Offices 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2388 

HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I promised the member from Regina 
Centre that I would provide certain information that, incidentally, I had provided before to him in 
answer to a question of his. And before I do, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the hon. member, as well as the 
people of Saskatchewan, that when we took over the Government of Saskatchewan we found SGI to be 
in a terrible mess. And I want to repeat that many times because, as I say, it was in a mess, and the job of 
our government, and our board, and my job in particular, Mr. Speaker, was to make some very hard 
decisions for the benefit of efficiency in running SGI. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the question that was asked — I’m going to provide this information if the hon. 
member from Quill Lakes will be a little patient. Under the present system, the cost, and I will give you 
the cost of operating the four different issuing offices as it is under the system that we have today. The 
North Battleford cost total on a yearly basis is $96,786. I may just correct my original statement, Mr. 
Speaker. The transaction accounts are based on actual transactions processed from April 1, 1982 to 
February 28th, 1983, and march 1983 is projected, and that is the time frame. 
 
In Swift Current, the cost at the present time is 105,701; in Estevan $79,667; and in Weyburn $88,965. 
The total cost for issuing licences through agents, Mr. Speaker, would be — on a commission basis that 
is — would be, in North Battleford, $64,371, for a net saving of about $32,000 a year. In Swift Current, 
the net cost would be $80,717, for a net saving of $25,000. In Estevan, the total cost would be $59,703 
for a net saving of approximately $20,000. And in Weyburn, the net cost would be $59,232, for a net 
saving of $29,000 to $30,000. 
 
In total, Mr. Speaker, the total saving to SGI, using the method that we wanted to move to, and that is to 
provide the issuing of licences through SGI agents, would have been, in a one-year period, $107,096. 
And not included in that saving, Mr. Speaker, would be rental income that we would receive from the 
agents for leasing that space, or any space, which is a cost to us today. As well, not included in those 
costs, are other costs such as office equipment and operating costs for running those offices. So, the idea 
we had, Mr. Speaker, was to make the Crown corporation of SGI more efficient. It’s something that the 
NDP cannot understand. It’s something that for years they have mismanaged and messed up the . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order please. I think the member is getting a bit political in his answer. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Minister, if you recall, yesterday I asked you to table your cost-benefit 
analysis. I tell you, Mr. Minister, your track record in providing information is such that I’m from 
Missouri — when you give me information, if I can’t see it, I don’t really believe it. Are you prepared to 
table the cost-benefit analysis? Because unless you are, I’m going to go on to other information, and I 
want to go on to other questions. The information you provide simply isn’t worth responding to unless 
. . . 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, his track record is in fact that I have to provide information 
to him a half dozen times before he understands what he’s getting. And what I have told him is in fact on 
the record, is in fact tabled. And for the member’s further information, I can’t table anything during 
question period. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’m going to ignore the response then, I gather the minister is not prepared to 
table it. You can table it whenever you want and you can certainly give an 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2389 

undertaking to table it. Will you give me an undertaking to table that material to me? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Mr. Speaker, I have provided the information. Now if he can’t read it 
from Hansard, I’ll provide the proper slip — which is this information here. I’ve written all over this 
one, so I’ll get a fresh one and table it at a later time, which I can’t do during question period anyway. 
However, the information I’ll provide. Now if you want it in full detail I am prepared to take all the 
question period to give you every figure that’s on this sheet of paper, on the record, so that not only you 
will see it, not only the people in this legislature will see, but all of the people of Saskatchewan will 
better understand. Now I’m prepared to do that because it’s really good information so far as we’re 
concerned, and it’ll teach you or indicate to you why we are operating in the manner we are. We’re 
looking for cost efficiency in that corporation. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I will grant you it’s good information as far as you’re concerned. I’m 
questioning its accuracy. And I ask you again: are you prepared to table the cost-benefit analysis? I do 
not want any more information orally. I want you to table your cost-benefit analysis. Are you prepared 
to do that? 
 
HON. MR. ROUSSEAU: — Well, again, Mr. Speaker, it takes him a half dozen times before he 
understands. I did say yes, and if he wants me to repeat that again, I’ll repeat it again. But I’ll table it. 
I’ll get a fresh copy. I’ll get a fresh sheet. I’ll table it. I’ll read it in the legislature if you like. I’ll give 
you everything you need on the information I have. I’d be more than happy to supply all of the 
information that I have in respect to the analysis, in respect to the cost savings, and indicate to the 
people of Saskatchewan what kind of a mess that corporation was in when we took over this 
government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon NHL Franchise 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I will say, Mr. Minister, I’ll wait with very considerable interest all the 
information that you have. 
 
I have a question to the Acting Premier in the absence of the minister of culture and youth — the 
minister, I take it, responsible for the government’s participation in Saskatoon’s bid to gain an NHL 
franchise. Members of our caucus, like many people of Saskatchewan, were surprised by yesterday’s 
decision in New York to reject Saskatoon’s bid for an NHL franchise. We have a number of questions 
about this announcement, such as whether or not the provincial government plans to pursue this any 
further, alone, or together with anyone. Are there any contingency plans? And most important of all, 
what went wrong in New York yesterday? 
 
My question to the Acting Premier is: can the Acting Premier give this Assembly your assurance that 
you will ask the minister responsible, minister for culture and youth, to provide a ministerial statement 
to this Assembly as soon as possible upon his return? 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Well, in answer to the last question, Mr. Speaker, of course I would ask 
the minister. I’m kind of interested myself. And having said that, just because I ask doesn’t mean it’s 
going to happen, because we make kind of collective decisions over here. We don’t carry the big stick. 
 
But I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member is sharing the glee of the major cities in the United 
States and some city in eastern Canada. Mr. Speaker, or if he’s 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2390 

sharing the disappointment that we in Saskatchewan obviously feel today as a result of the 
announcement out of New York. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I want to . . . It’s not really a question; it’s a comment. I want to thank 
the Acting Premier for that undertaking. We have some questions as to what went wrong, and we hope, 
Mr. Minister, that in asking the minister to make the statement, it will be as full and complete as 
possible. 
 

Saskatchewan Forest Products’ Lumber Yards 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I direct my question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation. It has to do with the answers you provided in this Assembly 
on Monday concerning the sale of inventory from the Saskatchewan Forest Products Corporation’s retail 
lumber yard in Prince Albert. I had asked you whether or not inventory had been sold to Econo Lumber 
in Prince Albert, and why you had not called tenders, because there were other lumber yards in Prince 
Albert who would have been interested in the material. In your response, you denied that Econo Lumber 
had purchased the inventory; that instead, it had gone to a company called Visionex Enterprises Ltd. But 
I’ve done some checking, and in fact Visionex Enterprises Ltd. Is owned by the people who own Econo 
Lumber. So I suggest that you were being less than fully fair with the House with your information. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you confirm that the lumber was in fact purchased by the principals in Econo Lumber? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t confirm that. I just have here an inventory sale that says 
to Visionex Enterprise Ltd. Of Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. So that’s all I can confirm — the bill of 
sale, who it’s made out to. I can’t say who is the owner of it. So I couldn’t answer that directly. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Supplementary, Mr. Speaker. Would the minister not agree that your 
government lumber yard was selling inventory to only one of a number of yards in that city without 
calling tenders? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, in regards to that question, we’d been selling that lumber out 
since last fall and I think it was open to the public. Everybody was buying it, as far as I know. The last 
bit of inventory was sold to one person on an offer, I explained to you earlier this week, in regards to the 
market value less 15 per cent, which was fair. He took everything — the poor grades and everything. 
We thought it was a very fair value for the merchandise that was there. As you know, when you get to 
the bottom of any business, the last bits are never quite as good a value as . . . Especially in lumber. You 
know, lumber gets deteriorated. Piles are sitting outside as the member well knows. And so when you 
take everything and you clean it all up, it was a fair value, we felt, for what was left there and that’s 
what we received. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, you indicate that Econo Lumber Visionex purchased the 
remaining amount of lumber and you indicate that some of it was bad, some of it was culls, but not all. 
Could you indicate to the House, Mr. Minister, how many board feet of lumber that Visionex purchased 
without tender? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Mr. Speaker, I would have to go to certainly back to Sask Forest Products in 
P.A. for that type of information. What it was, there was more than lumber. It 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2391 

was just everything that’s left in a lumber yard. There’s nails, there’s just everything. They took it all in 
one block at the end, and they just cleaned it up so it would be left in a tidy condition. I couldn’t tell you 
exactly how many board feet of lumber or how many kegs or nails or what there was. I have no idea. I 
just know there’s a fair return for what was left and it was the end of a business that we’d sold right 
down as much as we could sell to the public. So it was sort of a clean-out at the end and it was, we felt, a 
fair market value. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. You indicate that you sold to Visionex 
lumber not only lumber but the rest of the materials from your retail outlet. And I would assume that you 
sold windows and sidings . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . rusty nails, as the Minister of Finance jokingly 
is commenting about. But I would assume that there are a lot of materials that you have at a retail outlet 
and I wonder, could you indicate to the House, and you’ll probably have to take notice of this question 
and bring it back, but just what was sold to Visionex lumber yard in Prince Albert without being 
tendered? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it was the end of a lumber yard. It was a clean-out 
at the end. I don’t know what was there — probably windows and doors and whatever was outside. And 
some of it was sitting outside. Some would be the materials and things. A lot of it was sitting outside. It 
was a clean-up at the end of a sale of all we could possibly sell to the public. They cleaned it out in one 
block, what was left. And it was a fair market value we felt we’d received for it. I think we had received 
a good return for what was left and that’s how we left it. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — It’s called a clearance sale. 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — My colleague here calls it a clearance sale. We call it a clearance of what was 
left, the culls of what was left. So I guess that’s how you would say it. 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — New question, Mr. Speaker. The minister has indicated that odds and ends were 
sold, and he calls it a clearance sale. I just wonder how you could indicate to this House that you are 
selling the property that’s owned by the taxpayers of this province without tendering, and you call that a 
clearance sale. You sold it to one individual, another lumber yard. My question is: Mr. Minister, will 
you indicate to the House after you have the information just how much material you did sell to 
Visionex; what was involved — whether it be windows or insulation or whatever it was that you sold 
without tender — and bring that information back to the House, because I impress upon you, Mr. 
Minister, all that material was owned by the taxpayers of this province? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in regards to selling it out, we’ve been selling it out at 
discount for a considerable length of time, some of the material. We’re still doing it at Sturgis, 
Saskatchewan. The people around Sturgis and the area around, any place, can go to Sturgis and get it at 
a discount right now. We’re doing the same thing at Sturgis. We’re selling it at a discount price, 
whatever the people will buy locally and whatever they’ll purchase. When we get to the point where 
they’re not purchasing anymore we sell it out as a block. We’ll probably do the same thing at Sturgis 
when we get it at that point, if an offer comes in that is a fair market offer. It is for retail sales. We will 
sell it at any time to anybody. I think it’s an open . . . In any business you’ll do that, so I just think it’s 
. . . To give you an itemized list of what we sold I think it would take days, and I don’t know if there’d 
be a complete itemized list. I don’t know if they’d go to that extent, so I’ll look into it, but to report back 
what there is I’d have to check it out first. 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2392 

MR. THOMPSON: — Final supplementary, Mr. Speaker. I would ask the minister to bring back an 
itemized account of all materials that were sold at that lumber yard in Prince Albert to Visionex without 
tender, because, as you indicated in the House, you sol, you put that up for sale. Most certainly it was 
not for sale. It was sold to another retail outlet who is going to resell that material, and I say that the 
citizens and the taxpayers of Saskatchewan have a right to know what they received, what was sold, and 
the amount of moneys that were received for that material. And also, that all the other lumber yards in 
Prince Albert also would like to know what was sold there, and would most certainly have appreciated a 
chance to also bid on that material. And I ask you if you would bring that information back to the House. 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, we felt we were very lucky to be able to sell it. It was 
the end of the piles, as you would call them, and the member well knows when you get to the end of 
whatever, it’s hard to sell. Secondly . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . If the member from Quill Lake will 
be quiet for a second I’ll tell you. Secondly, the total amount of market value of the products that was 
there was $140,000. That was done by an appraisal. We sold it for $110,000, that’s cleaning out 
everything that as there. So that’s about all I can give you. I don’t know it’s an itemized statement on it, 
but that would give you an idea of what was there. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — A supplementary on this line of inquiry. Will the minister not admit that 
there is an important qualitative difference between selling pieces to one and all, and a sale in bulk 
which disposes of the balance of the inventory? Will the minister not admit that there is an important 
difference, and will the minister not also admit that to dispose in bulk of an inventory in the public 
sector is in the highest degree imprudent without tendering? 
 
HON. MR. HARDY: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in regards to the amount of lumber that was sold, Sask 
Forest Products produces and sells many, many times that much each day. So it is sort of, I guess you’d 
say, a bulk sale through the balance of the retail yard which is certainly a good way to do it. There’s 
nothing wrong with it. We wanted to clean it out — it was . . . (inaudible) . . . products that was left — 
some was good, some was poor. It was a clean-out sale, a clearance sale. All stores do it. We sold it 
down until we couldn’t sell any more, then we turned and sold the balance out at a block payment. It 
was good business. We got a good return for our dollar and I can see nothing wrong with it. 
 

SPC Rate Application 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to, in the absence of the minister in charge of 
the Sask power Corporation, and in absence of the vice-chairman who is not a member of the legislature, 
I’d like to direct a question to a somewhat forgotten minister — the deficit Bob, the Minister of Finance. 
 
I want to ask the minister . . . As you know, the Saskatchewan Power Corporation has been asking for 
very high increases, and there have been submissions made to the public utility review board indicating 
very drastic effects that it will have. The Consumers’ Association of Canada indicated that there’s likely 
to be greater unemployment. Early in the week, the Saskatchewan Dehydrators Association, Estevan 
Brick, Avonlea Minerals, said if the increases are brought about, in fact then they’ll have to close shop. 
 
What I’m asking you, in view of the devastating effect — the devastating economic effect on companies 
already here, and the possible devastating effect on companies 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2393 

who would like to locate here — I’m asking you: are you still going to proceed, with the risk of these 
economic consequences? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — A couple of points, Mr. Speaker. The public utilities review commission is 
an independent judicial body that looks at the rates, and that is a positive step forward that we, as a 
government, developed. 
 
With regards to the question of Sask Power asking for these particular rates, I want to make it clear to 
the Assembly and to the people of Saskatchewan, one of the major reasons why Sask Power finds itself 
in a tough situation. When you were the government, when the NDP government, with their brilliant 
capacity to negotiate contracts with the federal government — tremendous capacity to negotiate 
contracts with the federal government, Mr. Speaker — agreed unilaterally, Mr. Speaker, unilaterally to 
absorb some of the national energy programs’ taxes, that were probably unconstitutional for them to 
impose upon a provincial government. They accepted it holus-bolus as their brilliant strategy of 
negotiating a contract. The people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, will pay $100 million a year for that 
terrible blunder by the NDP government and I hope the people of Saskatchewan remember that for a 
long, long, long time when they have to pay their power bills in this province. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Mr. Minister, a lot of rhetoric. But you indicated in your economic philosophy, as 
you espoused, is open for business, and part of that is to improve the economic environment for firms 
locating here and existing here. I want to ask you: in view of the devastating effects — increased utility 
rates seen making firms less competitive — how can you say that increasing these rates at the massive is 
consistent with your economic philosophy? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, I’ll try it again, Mr. Speaker, with another approach. The previous 
government, in their massive wisdom to develop Saskatchewan, believed it was better than developing 
and producing gas in the province of Saskatchewan, they’d buy it from our neighbours and friends in the 
province of Alberta. And they poured millions of dollars, not only into the federal coffers with their first 
debunkle, but they also now poured billions of dollars into the Alberta Heritage Fund. And the people of 
Saskatchewan, the consumers of Saskatchewan pay for that. 
 
We have to turn that around if we’re going to develop natural gas in the province of Saskatchewan; we 
have to turn that around if we’re going to deliver cheaper power to the people of Saskatchewan, so we 
don’t have to pay expensive costs to the people of Alberta. But here’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. again 
in their brilliant wisdom to negotiate contracts, they entered into a contract that runs until 1995 — 1995, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s a little bit difficult, Mr. Speaker, to get a grip on a contract that runs that long. And we 
will have to pay, and the people of Saskatchewan are going to have to pay, for the second blunder of the 
previous government. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I’d like to ask a supplement, Mr. Minister. When you were in opposition, members 
of your caucus asked and urged the government then to put in a five-year freeze. Sterling Lyon in 
Manitoba put in a five-year freeze in respect to power rates. You gave a freeze for one year to get 
electoral support. I ask you: why won’t you give a freeze 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2394 

now for economic growth? 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Well, let’s go back to the freeze of Sask Power. Do you recall, and some of 
the members that were here — not very many, because there’s a lot of new members — but you’ll recall 
when their budget came down last March of 1982, and in their wisdom they cheered and clapped as they 
brought in this new glowing policy of the NDP government, and what was it? To freeze the power rates 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The freeze was put in by the members opposite, at our request, Mr. Speaker. We indicated to the people 
of Saskatchewan that we were going to freeze those rates until we put in a public utilities review 
commission that could review them, and not being reviewed as it was under the previous administration 
— behind the closed doors of cabinet — where they would not only raise enough money to cover the 
costs of Sask Power, but also raise enough money to set up some of these other concocted Crown 
corporations that they set up as well. They’re losing millions and millions of dollars as well. That’s the 
third bungle that we have to put up with the members opposite. 
 
SOME HON. MEMBERS: — Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 55 — An Act to amend The Penalties and Forfeitures Act 
 
MR. LANE: — I move first reading of a bill to amend The Penalties and Forfeitures Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 — An Act to amend The Police Act 
 
MR. LANE: — I move first reading of a bill to amend The Police Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 57 — An Act to amend The Jury Act, 1981 
 
MR. LANE: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Jury Act, 1981. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 58 — An Act respecting Local Government in Northern Saskatchewan 
 
HON. MR. McLEOD: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill respecting local government in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 59 — An Act to amend The Property Improvement Grant Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill to amend The Property 
Improvement Grant Act. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2395 

Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 60 — An Act to amend The Senior Citizens School Tax Rebate Act 
 
HON. MR. BERNTSON: — I move first reading of a bill to amend The Senior Citizens School Tax 
Rebate Act. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 27 — An Act to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to on division. 
 
Clause 3 agreed to on division. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill. 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Highways Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — I have Mr. Associate Deputy Minister, Merv Clark; Al Schwartz, director of 
support services; Don McKillop, our legal adviser. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I think the only point at issue, Mr. Minister, between us is section 6 — 
implementing new 64(1). The opposition leader yesterday invited you to respond to his criticism by 
saying that the breadth of this vision, which is frightening, was in fact unintentional, and that you do not 
want to interfere with the legitimate right of people to protest on a public highway. 
 
I would point out for the benefit of the member, that includes the street out in front of this Legislative 
Building, which has been a traditional place for people who . . . Well, 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2396 

the member might check the definition of a public highway. I’m surprised he doesn’t know it, given his 
background, given his expertise. 
 
Mr. Minister, leaving the member from P.A.-Duck Lake alone, would you in fact assure us that this was 
an oversight and that you had no intention of restricting the right of people to protest, picket, and make 
their views known, sometimes in the only way they can, by demonstrating on a public highway? 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Chairman, I guess we should clarify this point for the members opposite. 
I think this is their main area of concern. Is that correct? 
 
Okay, Mr. Chairman, I’ll read to you what was proposed by the previous government and what is 
proposed by this government, Mr. Chairman. I’ll read it — section 64(1) — and I will provide you with 
some cabinet documents also to back this up: 64(1) — proposed: 
 

A person who obstructs or interferes in any manner with a public highway is guilty of an offence and 
liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding $200. 

 
Proposed by the previous government. Proposed by this government now . . . Proposed . . . I will share 
the cabinet documents that the hon. member is all excited about afterwards, where the previous 
government had called for this, Mr. Chairman. Now the proposed legislation . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . And if the member opposite, Mr. Chairman, says this is dummy, well I guess he’s referring to 
himself, because he was the one that proposed this . . . 64(1): 
 

A person who willfully and without lawful excuse places or leaves an obstruction on a public 
highway or who prevents, hinders or causes delay to a person desiring to travel on a public highway 
is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine of not more than $200. 
 

Now, if the members opposite would like some more information, I’m quite prepared to share that with 
them. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, that’s the lamest excuse for a response I’ve ever seen coming from 
anything this side of a deceased snake. That’s just absurd, Mr. Minister. You know full well, Mr. 
Minister, that what comes out of document, what comes out of cabinet, represents the decisions of a 
government, and not what goes into cabinet, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, I say to you this section is very broad, and coming from a government which strung chains 
up in the front of the Legislative Building to restrict the access of people who were o a peaceful protest, 
coming from a government with your track record, we have every right to be concerned about a section 
of this bill. 
 
I ask you again, Mr. Minister, to amend this section, to narrow it, to deal with the kind of problem to 
which you referred by way of example. I ask you, Mr. Minister, to amend this section to restrict its 
breadth. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I believe we have moderated this substantially to the 
position taken by the previous administration; and I will read it out again for the members opposite 
where they said, they stated: 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2397 

A person who obstructs or interferes in any manner with a public highway is guilty of an offence and 
liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding $200. 

 
Where we have said and stated and are moderating it in our new bill: 
 

A person who wilfully and without lawful excuse places or leaves an obstruction on a public 
highway or who prevents, hinders or causes delay to a person desiring to travel on a public highway 
is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction to a fine of not more than $200. 

 
Now, I will share with you, Mr. Chairman, some information and documents from the legislative review 
committee. It reads as follows: 
 

With respect to the amendments from the previous government, with respect to the amendments to 
The Highways Act, cabinet approved the legislation with changes in section 64 as follows: ‘Leave 
proposed 64.1 as is, and old 64.2 and .3 with such minor changes as may be required for consistency 
— example, deleting the reference to imprisonment for default.’ 

 
We have also removed that section, Mr. Chairman. Another letter: 
 

This will confirm that LRC, legislative review committee (dated December 7, 1981), at its meeting 
on December 3, 1981 considered the above referenced legislation and approved it without change. 

 
I mean, I can read you the whole document, Mr. Chairman. I guess what I’m trying to point out to the 
members opposite, that they had asked, they had approved when they were government this very piece 
of legislation. Now they’ve done a 180-degree turn and said, ‘It’s no good.’ Well, you can’t have it both 
ways. You know, when you were government, it was okay. Now you’re in opposition, it’s tragic, you 
know. What more do you want? 
 
MR. THOMPSON: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a few comments, Mr. Minister, and it’s 
regarding section 92 and that’s highway littering. I see that you have increased the penalty from $25 to 
$100, and I want to say to the minister that I have been very concerned about highway littering for the 
last number of years as I have watched ever-increasing amount of littering that we have on our 
highways, and I have expressed that in writing to the Department of Highways asking for stiffer 
penalties. I compliment you on increasing the fines. I think maybe we could have went a little bit 
further. 
 
I believe in British Columbia they have a $500 fine for littering and you see very little litter on their 
highways. But in Saskatchewan I’ve noticed in the last few years an ever-increasing amount of litter — 
garbage bags, and I’ve picked them up with my truck as I . . . I’ve picked up as high as nine bags in one 
pile where they’ve just dumped them into the ditch. Another thing that is a major concern of mine and it 
seems to be increasing ever so much, and that is broken glass. Bottles are just thrown out on the 
highways and you see smashed glass along our highways, and I agree that we have to step down on 
these offenders. And I see where you will increase the penalty to $100, but I think that you have to make 
sure, Mr. Minister, and I sincerely hope that your department will encourage the enforcement of this law 
and these penalties because it’s a major concern for Saskatchewan, the residents, as our highways are 
becoming more and 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2398 

more littered, and more and more broken glass. And I don’t know whether the $100, if it’s enforced, is 
going to solve the problem but I sincerely hope it does and you have made a step in the right direction. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well, Mr. Chairman, I’d just like to thank the hon. member opposite for his 
comments on this bill. That’s why we’re bringing this bill before the Assembly, because this 
government too, is also very concerned about the littering that does take place on the highways. We 
have a very lovely province here, and we want to continue that the travelling public, the tourists that 
come to the province of Saskatchewan, do see a very tidy and neat province to travel in. I commend the 
member from Athabasca for supporting this government in our stand towards keeping the highways and 
the roadsides in the province of Saskatchewan in adequate condition. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to go back to that section, that we have some concern. I want to point out 
to the minister that his reason that he has put forward here in the House is not really acceptable, because 
first of all when a bill is introduced to the House it’s the function of the opposition as . . . If we had 
introduced it, you may very well have taken objections. But the main thing is you can’t say we were in 
agreement with it until we have actually approved it, and have submitted it, and passed it, because it is 
without the scrutiny of the opposition. And so what we are doing here, Mr. Minister, is drawing to your 
attention the broadness of it and really just asking you . . . Fair enough, the intent of the section, but you 
know it is so broad that I think that it goes beyond the real purpose for which you intended. It says: 
 

A person who wilfully and without lawful excuse places or leaves an obstruction on a public 
highway or who prevents, hinders or causes a delay to a person desiring to travel on a public 
highway is guilty of an offence liable on summary . . . 

 
And it seems to me that the highway is a public roadway. And it really lends itself probably to an abuse. 
I don’t indicate that in the enforcement, but I think that one of the things that we should do in legislation 
which can infringe upon rights of individuals, cause them a tremendous amount of inconvenience, even 
if they’re not guilty . . . And what I ask you to do is to take a look at it. And I agree that, you know, 
interfering in a direct way in respect to the highway, doing damage to the highway, or total obstruction 
. . . But it seems to me that ‘who prevents, hinders or causes delay to a person desiring to travel on a 
public highway is guilty of an offence and liable on summary conviction,’ that part is very broad, and I 
think that you could limit the impact of it, and that’s really all we’re saying. I don’t think there’s any use 
of getting into the discussion of whether you copied the legislation which wasn’t proclaimed, or whether 
you’re . . . The thing is that we have a basic concern and we want it refined, and we ask you to take a 
look and see whether or not you could refine it in a more particular way, and that’s the only position that 
we’re making. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Well then, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. member opposite, I’ve got three or 
four points I would like to share with you, and one, I mean a change that is in 64(1) that I did bring in 
and I will read to you, the proposed-by-the-previous-government section, and it’s 6 and (4) where they 
stated: 
 

The minister, or a person designated by him for the purpose, may remove or cause to be removed 
any obstruction interfering with traffic on a provincial highway. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2399 

I was not quite comfortable with that, Mr. Chairman. I did change it to read: 
 

A police officer or representative of the department may remove or cause to be removed from a 
provincial highway any obstruction likely to interfere with traffic. 

 
Mr. Chairman, I think what we’re pointing out here is that I’m turning it over, not just for ministerial 
responsibility . . . I think it’s very important that we get this point out, that we’re turning it over to the 
very qualified law enforcement officers in the province of Saskatchewan who I have the utmost faith in 
for doing an excellent job in assisting the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Second point is that it was approved, and I’ve read it, and I’ll just refresh the member opposite’s 
memory again: ‘On December the 7th, 1981, amendments previously considered and approved by 
cabinet, with change required by cabinet in section 64.’ 
 
Third point section 64, subsection (1), (2), (4), (5), and (6) done from the previous government: 
 

The department staff had recognized the deficiency in existing legislation. Under existing 
legislation, charges may be brought against an individual for obstructing a highway and if convicted, 
the department can then remove this obstruction. 

 
The proposed legislation would allow the department to remove any obstruction to traffic on a 
provincial highway immediately. And that’s where I changed and brought in the police forces, Mr. 
Chairman, which I believe are very competent in delivering this. 
 
Further, on the day of the official opening of the bridge on Highway No. 155 at Buffalo Narrows and the 
opening of the educational facilities at Buffalo Narrows, the highway was obstructed for a period of 
several hours. The obstruction was removed by the individuals involved peacefully. Upon review of 
section 64 of The Highways Act, it was deemed efficient in that a lengthy legal process could be 
required prior to removing an obstruction. A person could be charged under section 64 of The Highways 
Act, and if found guilty, could be ordered to remove the obstruction, and if the order was not obeyed, 
then the minister could have the obstruction removed and the expenses charged to the individual. This 
portion of the legislation was retained. A change has been made in that if a provincial highway is 
obstructed, the minister may remove the obstruction and then may enter into a civil action to recover 
costs of this removal. 
 
Well, I won’t continue on, Mr. Chairman. The members opposite, I think, understand what I’m trying to 
say. I’m going to give you one example, Mr. Chairman, hypothetical, but something that does concern 
me. And we will take, for example, the Borden Bridge. Just say that someone was upset with something 
that an RM council was doing, or government may be doing — it doesn’t matter what — and decided to 
pull a semi-trailer truck across the Borden Bridge. We had an ambulance case from, say, North 
Battleford, that an individual, a patient, was being rushed to Saskatoon hospital. This individual could 
cost us a loss of life because there was not teeth in the legislation to remove, or allow a police to remove 
this obstruction. 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2400 

I’m only trying to do this, Mr. Speaker, for the safety of the people of Saskatchewan, not for any 
harassment tactics. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
Clause 3 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 4 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Mr. Chairman, before we deal with clause 16, we would have preferred to 
have had, and I don’t know what the rules are, but I’m asking Mr. Chairman for some comments. We 
would have preferred to have our objection to clause 6 recorded on division as it clearly was. Is it 
possible that the record may be amended to record our dissent on division? 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — It wasn’t clearly recorded by leave it could be recorded on division. Is leave 
granted? Carried. Clause 6 is agreed on division. 
 
Clause 16 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 — an Act to amend The Wakamow Valley Authority Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 28 — An Act to amend The Wascana Centre Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 29 — An Act to amend The Meewasin Valley Authority Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

Bill No. 22 — An Act to amend The Highways Act 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments be now read a first and second 
time. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2401 

Motion agreed to. 
 
HON. MR. GARNER: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be read a third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder if I might have leave of the House to introduce some 
guests today in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to introduce to you and to other members of the Assembly a 
group of six young people, students from our province, sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. They have been 
hired as guides for the Wascana Centre and will be commencing work on the long week-end which is 
coming up fairly shortly. Part of their duties will be to take the many visitors that come to the Wascana 
grounds during the summer months on tours throughout the grounds, on the double-decker buses that we 
see out by the Wascana Place. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that you will agree with me that this fine young group of students will ably and 
enjoyably act as ambassadors for our province as they take the many visitors, not only from 
Saskatchewan but from elsewhere in Canada and probably the continent, around our beautiful grounds. I 
welcome you here, and have a good summer. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 — An Act to amend The Non-profit Corporations Act 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That the order for the second reading of Bill No. 53, An Act to amend The Non-profit Corporations 
Act be discharged and the bill be referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
This is seconded by the member from Bengough-Milestone, Mr. Pickering. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 52 — An Act to amend The Religious Societies Land Act 
 
HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, moved by myself and seconded 
by the member for Bengough-Milestone, Mr. Pickering: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 52, An Act to amend The Religious Societies Land 
Act, be discharged and the bill referred to the standing committee on non-controversial bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Bill No. 54 — An Act to amend The Business Corporations Act 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2402 

HON. MR. SANDBERG: — Mr. Speaker, copies of the proposed amendments to The Business 
Corporations Act have been provided to all members of this Assembly. The majority of the proposed 
amendments are needed to allow Saskatchewan businesses to qualify for benefits and opportunities 
available under the national energy program and that is the key part of the amendment, Mr. Speaker: to 
qualify for benefits and opportunities available under the national energy program. This is done by 
expanding the constrained-share corporations provisions presently contained in this act. These 
provisions are adapted from the Canada Business Corporations Act. These amendments bring 
Saskatchewan law into line with the federal act. We are the first province, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 
such provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most oil and gas exploration corporations incorporated in Saskatchewan could become 
constrained-share corporations. Such corporations can make shareholding adjustments to become 
eligible for benefits under the national energy program. In order to qualify for the grant available 
through the petroleum incentive program, sometimes known as P-I-P, or PIP, set up by the national 
energy program, such a corporation must be 50 per cent Canadian-owned. For example, a corporation 
with 47 per cent Canadian ownership is not now eligible for the grant. 
 
We are, Mr. Speaker, open for business in this province. We are committed to seeing to it that business 
people in this province can avail themselves of any assistance that might be available. These 
amendments provide the legal mechanism for a corporation to, for example, float a public issue of shares 
which would enable it to elevate the Canadian ownership level to 70 per cent by restricting the 
ownership of those new shares to Canadian residents. 
 
Without the amendments it would not be permissible to impose such a restriction. However, I wish to 
emphasize to hon. members that these amendments are important, not only in terms of the national 
energy program, but for any future grants or incentives for other business corporations which may come 
with similar ownership conditions or restrictions. We will be ready, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
business will not have to scramble or play catch-up. The doors will be open for them to react quickly 
and take advantage of opportunities as they arise. 
 
The other proposed amendments contained in this bill will essentially affect regulatory reform and 
deregulation. In particular, Mr. Speaker, I note that the proposed amendments will result in a net 
reduction in the documentation which is filed with the Saskatchewan Director of Corporations. This 
reduction is made possible because of our thorough review of the legislation and regulations, part of our 
ongoing commitment to the people of this province to eliminate unnecessary government regulation. In 
this specific example, the information is duplicated elsewhere, and therefore it need not be required 
under this act. 
 
As well, extra-provincial corporations will benefit from the reductions in the documentation they will be 
required to file. Other proposed amendments significantly reduce registration requirements and 
streamline procedures for out-of-province corporations. It’s less paper, Mr. Speaker, and it’s less 
regulation. This is one more in a long series of improvements which are making Saskatchewan to 
attractive to outside investors. 
 
Most of the remaining amendments are of a housekeeping nature, such as correcting errors made in 
drafting the original legislation. I should note, for the information of 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2403 

hon. members, that all of the proposed amendments have been supported by the corporate law 
subcommittee of the Saskatchewan bar association. AS well, Mr. Speaker, these new constrained-share 
corporation provisions have been in place in the federal act for a year now, and they appear to be 
working well. 
 
I invite members to raise concerns or questions with me in greater detail during committee of the whole, 
Mr. Speaker, I recommend this bill to the Assembly. I move second reading of a bill to amend The 
Business Corporations Act. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I want to say to the minister that I have 
no serious objection; indeed I think I applaud most of the provisions of this bill. You’re probably right, 
the . . . I’m going to deal in a moment with those sections which are intended to ‘facilitate meeting the 
requirements of the national energy program.’ The other sections, however, are I think probably a 
worthwhile improvement, and I don’t think . . . We take no serious objection to them. 
 
I will be frank with the minister and state I have some concern with that portion of the bill which 
facilitates the — may I use my own phrase? — evasion of the national energy program and the 
Canadianization requirements therein. I don’t know that that is a fair characterization, but if it is, we 
may be less than supportive of that particular provision. And I went through this legislation and was 
frankly unable to assure myself that I understood what you were doing. I have a better idea, having 
heard your comments, but I want time to consider them. Therefore, I beg leave to adjourn debate on this 
bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 51 — An Act to amend The Oil and Gas Conservation Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to introduce an amendment to The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act. This amendment, Mr. Speaker, will clarify the process through which producers’ 
prices are established for the natural gas industry. The amendment will give the Lieutenant-Governor in 
Council formal authority to set the price or prices paid to producers for natural gas or the fieldgate price 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
In the past, Mr. Speaker, the prices were established through an informal process, as I’m sure the 
members opposite know. This relied on the fact that SPC is the sole purchaser of natural gas for the 
province of Saskatchewan. The Minister of Energy and Mines would, from time to time, recommend to 
the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Power Corporation a price schedule relating to the 
purchase of natural gas from the producers in Saskatchewan. The corporation in turn would purchase the 
natural gas based on this schedule. 
 
This amendment will clarify the procedure: who does what, and this is important for several reasons. 
The first reason is that setting the fieldgate price for natural gas is an essential part of the economic 
development strategy of the province of Saskatchewan. This government is committed to encourage the 
development of Saskatchewan gas for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. We believe that this can be 
done at substantially less cost than the alternative of importing 60 per cent of our needed natural gas 
from the province of Alberta. 
 
As well, I think, the members opposite have made several points throughout the last three or four days 
with regards to whether or not the government will go through the cabinet process so there’s an order in 
council, therefore, so that they can see what is in 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2404 

fact happening. This will allow that to in fact take place, and be accountable to the Legislative 
Assembly. In order to achieve this end, the fieldgate price must be set at levels which compensate for 
production costs, and provide sufficient incentive to carry out the exploration and development 
programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Second, formalizing the existing formal process will make a clear distinction between the cabinet 
mandate to determine economic development policy, and the review process now in place to review SPC 
consumer rates for natural gas. The amendment will make it clear that SPC is essentially a price taker 
when it comes to paying for natural gas, as it is for labour, other materials, and interest rates. All public 
utilities review boards and commissions in other jurisdictions accept wholesale and fieldgate prices as a 
given when reviewing rate changes to the consumers. The practice we are now adopting in 
Saskatchewan will be no different, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Third, the act gives cabinet power to authorize, to regulate prices in the new market such as export 
market or for the purpose of establishing price as the basis of royalty and taxes. At present, no gas is 
being exported from the province of Saskatchewan, and royalties are not related to the price which gas is 
sold. If and when these conditions change, Mr. Speaker . . . It is only our hope that they can in fact 
change and we can export some natural gas to the United States, to deal with the taker-pay contracts that 
we presently have with the TCPL, and therefore are unable to produce our own natural gas. If and when 
these conditions change, this act will provide the necessary legislative framework in order to regulate the 
industry as it develops. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, that we believe that in the province of Saskatchewan there is a 
significant deposit, or we believe, and most geologists and most oil companies believe, that there are 
significant deposits of natural gas in the province of Saskatchewan. I think that the energy industry has 
come to the realization that in fact there is significant deposits of natural gas in Canada, particularly in 
the province of Alberta, and to a lesser degree in British Columbia and Saskatchewan. 
 
We are going to try, Mr. Speaker, through a variety, particularly of negotiations, to try to get the oil or 
the natural gas that we can produce in the province of Saskatchewan to our consumers in the province of 
Saskatchewan as opposed to having to purchase that natural gas, which is now almost 60 per cent from 
the province of Alberta. And when we purchase it from the province of Alberta, of course, we’re paying 
significant royalties to the province of Alberta and to their heritage fund. Our view would be that better 
we pay a lower royalty to the province of Saskatchewan and to the heritage fund of the province of 
Saskatchewan. This is the move that we have to do. It’s not going to be easy. The negotiations with 
Alberta are in fact ongoing and sometimes quite difficult, Mr. Speaker, but we intend to persist. This 
type of legislation will simply allow us to in fact regulate that through cabinet as opposed to the old 
system of regulating it, Mr. Speaker. And with that, I move second reading of this bill. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is one of those issues which has 
sharply divided members of the old-line parties over the years and social democrats. The member from 
Qu’Appelle, formerly the member from Lumsden, will recall this issue surfacing in another movie. The 
approach taken by the NDP and the CCF before that was that natural gas, Saskatchewan’s natural gas, 
should be conserved for future generations, and that to the extent we can do that, we should be doing so. 
To the extent that we can burn Alberta’s gas and save ours, we should be doing so — at a reasonable 
price — and we should not be selling it for use elsewhere. That was the approach of the CCF and it was 
reversed by the Thatcher government — the Thatcher 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2405 

government which didn’t just sell the gas; it sold the gas fields, too — the Many Islands gas fields, etc. 
 
During the days of the former administration, the same policy applied. Natural gas was bought only by 
SPC only to the extent that Alberta gas wasn’t available. Again, that administration’s goal was to save as 
much of our natural gas resources as we could for future generations. This government . . . And it’s 
possible we may have been a tad conservative, if members opposite will excuse the use of that phrase. 
It’s possible we may have been a bit conservative in saving too much of our resources and wealth for 
future generations. I will admit that that perception may have been about during the election, but if we 
erred on the side of caution, this government has gone wild in selling whatever — I say to the member 
for Maple Creek — whatever there’s a buyer for. They’re selling everything that there’s a buyer for. 
 
The Crown lands — I use this as an example of this government’s approach to our natural resources — 
which governments of various hues — some progressive, such as the first government, the Liberal 
government of Walter Scott; some very conservative, such as the Liberal government of Ross Thatcher; 
and some in between — retained Crown lands that were not cultivated acreage — retained Crown lands 
in the Crown. For a variety of reasons I won’t get into now — I doubt that it would be in order to do so 
— this government is selling it. They’re selling whatever there’s a buyer for in their desperate attempt to 
carry on the government, and their desperate attempt to do something with the finances which you rifled 
with a totally irresponsible election campaign. 
 
So I say that this is part of this government’s approach. This is part of this government’s approach to sell 
whatever is available for sale, whatever there’s a buyer for . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m 
calling the electorate of the . . . I say to the member from Kelvington, I’m calling the electorate 
disappointed — disappointed and they feel cheated. When they voted for this administration, they did 
not vote for a deficit of $300 million . . . 
 
MR. SPEAKER: — Order, please. I’d just ask the member to stay on the subject that we have before 
us. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I did well to do that because I . . . (inaudible) . . . all along. I had intended all 
along to adjourn debate, for a variety of reasons, one of which was I was hoping the explanation just 
provided by the Minister of Finance wouldn’t be the explanation. I was hoping there’d be some other. 
There wasn’t. 
 
In addition, the critic for this legislation in our caucus is in fact the member from Elphinstone, and I 
want to give him an opportunity to make his own response. He was a part of all of those administrations. 
He was a part of the CCF administration in opposition during the Liberal administration, and obviously 
a part of the NDP administration. I know he will want to comment on it. I therefore beg leave to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 50 — An Act to amend The Public Utilities Companies Act 
 
HON. MR. ANDREW: — Mr. Speaker, as a consequence of adopting the bill, Bill 51, I 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2406 

wish now to introduce Bill No. 50, the public utilities companies act. 
 
This act will remove the present authority of the local government board to determine the wellhead price 
for natural gas in its natural state. The power would clash with the new power to set field-gate prices 
under The Oil and Gas Conservation Act and so must be repealed. 
 
The local government board’s power to set produced prices for natural gas has long been dormant and 
are recognized as such by the local government board. The board’s authority in this area dates from the 
day of the municipal utilities and has not been acted upon for many years. This is what would normally 
be referred to, Mr. Speaker, as a consequential amendment leading to or leading from The Oil and Gas 
Conservation Act. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move second reading of that bill. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — As impressed, Mr. Speaker, as I am with the minister’s brevity, I’m going to 
take a leaf out of his notebook and also be very brief. For all of the reasons that I mentioned in The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Act and because the minister is basically correct — this is consequential — I 
want to beg leave to adjourn debate on this bill as well. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

SUPPLY AND SERVICES 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 13 
 
MR. CHAIRMAN: — Would the minister introduce the officials? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my right is my deputy minister, Mr. Otto 
Cutts, Mr. John Law, Mr. Ian Laidlaw, Mr. Ken Brehm and Mr. Don Nevill, and various officials seated 
at the back also. 
 
Item 1 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, this takes us back to your last year’s estimates. I asked for 
certain information to be provided to me in writing. I did not receive it. I contacted a member of your 
staff, Elizabeth Cosswaite or Braithwaite or . . . I know I’m butchering that name, but Elizabeth 
somebody. She indicated she provided it to me. I took her word that she did, but I was never able to find 
it. I wonder if you can supply me with copies of the information which your staff say that you gave to 
me, consequenced upon your undertakings in your last estimates. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I find that surprising because the letter came directly from myself under my 
signature. We will send you copies, but it was all provided to the member. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No. I was not putting that in doubt. I was just saying that I was unable to find 
it at any one of the three offices which I get mail, as a member, at. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2407 

Madam Minister, I want to take you back to an issue which you resolutely refused to discuss when you 
were dealing with your supplementary estimates in the dying hours of the last session. And that was the 
former deputy minister. 
 
Did the former deputy minister, Mr. Cousineau . . . Was his services . . . Was he fired? Did he resign? 
And if he resigned was it voluntary? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can assure the hon. member that it was a voluntary resignation received 
by myself with somewhat of a regret, and yes, it was voluntary. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You indicated in the House, in response to a question put to you by the 
member from Shaunavon, that you first learned of it shortly before it became effective, in fact. So I take 
the minister’s word for it that it was voluntary and it was not something you had requested or sought or 
connived at. And perhaps the minister will just confirm again that that is the case — it’s not something 
you sought, connived at, or particularly tried to induce. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — All I can say to the hon. member is that it was a mutually agreed to 
acceptance of his resignation. I would say that he wasn’t connived into resigning. The letter arrived on 
my desk — I believe it was a Friday afternoon, if I recall — from Mr. Cousineau. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Given the size of the severance allowance, the difference is important. If it is 
something truly . . . You said in the House that he wanted to explore other opportunities available to 
him. If that was the sole reason for his leaving, I find the size of the severance package surprising, to put 
it mildly, Madam Minister when you say it was mutually agreed upon, that, in this House and elsewhere, 
has come to mean something different than a voluntary resignation. That has come to mean a resignation 
which was requested and which, after due consideration, the resignor agreement would be best to give in 
the circumstances. I ask you, Madam Minister, did you at any time before you got the resignation, ask 
for or suggest to him that it would be in his, your, or the public’s best interest for that resignation to 
arrive? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I didn’t ask for it or suggest or intimate or connive or whatever. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Okay. Then how do you justify the severance package? I repeat to the 
minister — and I repeat my comments which we were unable to deal with in your other estimates 
because of your refusal to answer the questions — I repeat, Madam Minister, that severance package 
was extremely generous. 
 
Madam Minister, I would regard that severance package as generous if you had canned them; if you had 
called them into your office and said, ‘Good morning, Mr. Cousineau, you’re done. I want your key and 
I want your car and I want you out of my office in five minutes.’ If that had been your approach, I’d 
regard that severance package as a little generous, but I find it numbing if as you say — and I take your 
word as a parliamentarian — that it was completely voluntary. I find that severance package generous in 
the extreme, and I’d ask the minister to tell this House what induced her to react with such exceptional 
generosity to someone who felt he had more attractive alternatives elsewhere. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I can say to the hon. member that it was on my recommendation that 
Mr. Cousineau uprooted his life in Ontario and came to 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2408 

Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, for all intents and purposes to the seat-mate of the 
hon. member asking the question, Mr. Cousineau had been in Saskatchewan for some time and had 
moved back to Ontario. Given that, I felt that we were under some obligation to make a severance 
settlement with Mr. Cousineau if for no other better reason except morally. 
 
And when we looked through the precedents prior, we came across one instituted by the former 
administration in the handling of the resignation of a Mr. R.H. Dowdell who was chairman of the Public 
Service Commission, who . . . And for the record I could say he resigned in 1976 after having been a 
provincial government employee for eight months; and he was, on the authority of order in council no. 
72976, awarded a severance settlement of $10,000. 
 
Now I understand at that time it was a resignation and not a termination. I would also say that when you 
compare a $10,000 in ’76, compared to $17,000 in ’82, it’s probably very equal to what was given by 
your administration. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, that’s why I explored with such detailed thoroughness the 
issue of how he left. I’m not going to be drawn into discussing Mr. Dowdell’s departure. He has gone 
elsewhere, probably a distinguished career elsewhere. Suffice it to say for these purposes that the 
situations are not comparable. I was in Executive Council at the time. I am intimately familiar with the 
circumstances surrounding his departure, and what you describe is something very different than what 
occurred when Mr. Dowdell left. I’m not going to discuss the subject any further out of fairness to Mr. 
Dowdell, but I tell you, the circumstances are not in any sense similar. 
 
I ask you, Madam Minister, how you justify paying that kind of money to someone who is leaving. I 
guess when you told us that you regretted his departure — and I take your word again as a 
parliamentarian for that. How do you justify paying someone $17,000 who got an opportunity to better 
himself elsewhere? How do you justify that expenditure of money? 
 
I’m not going to run past you — although I will if it’s information you don’t have — I’m not going to 
run past you the groups who have been cut, who’s had their funding cut. I’m not going to tell you about 
the deaf who lost their . . . and the council, the co-ordinating council, and etc., and etc., and etc. — all 
the people who have been cut by this budget. But I’ll tell you, Madam Minister that that money could 
have been used elsewhere. It isn’t as if money is burning a hole in your pockets and you can’t spend it. 
You have cut some groups and it has hurt those groups a lot, and your ministers have candidly admitted 
that, but claimed no alternatives. 
 
Well, here at least was an alternative. You didn’t have to make a gift of $17,000 to someone who went 
elsewhere on the theory that he could do better elsewhere. I ask you, Madam Minister, what kind of a 
formula did you use? How on earth did you justify such a figure? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The hon. member asks how we arrived at the 17.5. That is based on 
approximately three months salary, and I can only indicate to the member that it was a ministerial 
decision. I thought it was fair considering the uprooting of Mr. Cousineau and his family, and it was in 
line what was given Mr. Dowdell in 1976. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — But it wasn’t the same situation. And as I say, I’m not going to be 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2409 

drawn into discussing Mr. Dowdell’s case. That would be most unfair. But it is not the same situation. 
That’s why I asked you, that’s why I reviewed with such thoroughness the details of his leaving. 
Because had it been a resignation you requested, I might have wondered at your choosing him, but I 
might have been less critical of the severance pay. But, Madam Minister, that severance pay is 
extremely generous for someone who left voluntarily to better himself elsewhere. I take your word that 
that was the case. I ask you how on earth you arrived at three months salary for someone who is going 
off to better himself elsewhere. 
 
Compare it, Madam Minister to the way you treated the former incumbent, Dennis Foley, who had some 
10 years service in one capacity or another with the government, who — and I will not extol the man’s 
virtues — but who saved this government his salary 100 times over in one or two construction projects 
which he brought in and saved. If I recall correctly, it was about 25,000 or something like that that Mr. 
Foley got, after 11 years. How do you justify giving Mr. Cousineau 17 after nine brief months, and when 
he left to better himself elsewhere? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I don’t know how many times we have to go around this then until 
the member, who supposedly is a lawyer, will get to understand it. I felt we were under some moral 
obligation because of the uprooting, and given the precedent set when you were in power, I think we did 
it quite fairly and justly. It’s a three months settlement, and what you are saying is that no one should get 
a settlement, a severance settlement, if they go on to another job. And I give you the example of a great 
number of people who had left government with severance pay and going on to other better jobs, 
perhaps, in their own mind. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, no one — and I’ll say this — no one who goes on to 
another job to better himself should get a severance package that generous, except in the most 
exceptional circumstances which justify some explanation from the minister in the House. The only 
explanation you’ve offered is some case 10 years ago — not that long ago, seven years ago — which, as 
I say, I’m intimately familiar with, which bears no relation to the situation you describe. Why give the 
man $17,000 so he can go better himself? I really think, Madam Minister you owe us an explanation, 
you really owe us an explanation as to how you arrived at that figure, and why you would give it to 
them, why you would give someone whose resignation was not requested apparently, why you would 
give them $17,000. 
 
Is everybody, Madam Minister, who leaves and who decides that they’re going to pick up a new job in 
another province entitled to a generous severance allowance? Is that available to everybody who leaves? 
And if it isn’t — and it obviously isn’t because you haven’t given it to everybody who left — if it’s not 
available to everybody else, how did you single out Mr. Cousineau for such exceptionally generous 
treatment? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, let’s try it one more time. Mr. Cousineau came to Saskatchewan to 
work for the Government of Saskatchewan at my request, Mr. Cousineau found that he didn’t quite fit 
into the bureaucratic scheme of things, and I felt somewhat morally obligated to accept his resignation 
and give him a pay package which amounted to approximately three months which is comparable to the 
one granted in 1976 to another civil servant which information says was not terminated, but resigned. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Just to follow this up, you said you had a moral obligation. I think you 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2410 

had more than a moral obligation when you hired Mr. Cousineau, that you understood and knew what 
you were getting and his commitment to the job, because obviously you brought him in from Ontario. 
Now you say in rather than having a moral obligation for responsible action on your behalf in looking 
into what you are hiring, what you say is you have now a moral obligation to use taxpayers’ money to 
send him off to improve himself. How can you defend such a defenceless position? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Quite frankly, it’s a matter of opinion as to what is moral and what isn’t 
moral. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I’m going to ask you. You give me the specific facts why it makes it moral the 
taxpayers should in fact pay a severance of $17,000 to a person who you hired after firing the former 
deputy on a woman’s intuition. Now if you can be wrong so often . . . You know I think it’s time to start 
looking at your own intuitions. But I want to know, we have . . . I’ll give you another example: a Mr. 
Bill Tait that was with the department of consumer and commercial affairs a number of years, this 
government terminated him, and I can give you other examples, and after many years, $14,000. There 
was a formula established for all of those who were dismissed through the transition team. Here you 
have a politically chosen individual to come and satisfy the requirements as a deputy minister for 
yourself, and what I’m asking you is: is this rich payment to this man who had no commitment to this 
province, is it in terms of those that were put together by the transition team? Is exactly the same 
formula being used? Because I looked at the severance of some people who’ve been there for 20 or 25 
years and they were getting $20,000 or $22,000. And my colleague has gone out to get the list of the 
severance for long-term employees. So I want to ask you: in view of the fact — and you have to be 
aware, because Mr. Foley was in fact dealt with by the transition team in respect to his severance — did 
you have the same moral obligation to Mr. Foley who had spent 11 years, and do you think that the 
relationship of the severance for Mr. Foley is reasonable in comparison to the amount that is paid to this 
here Tory from Ontario? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can just reiterate what I said previously. You may consider Mr. Cousineau 
uncommitted to the province, but I’m pleased to say that Mr. Cousineau is finding a niche in the private 
sector in the province, and has set up a business that I’m sure not only the province, but people that he 
will be hiring will benefit from. I can only reiterate that he got a basic three-month severance, which was 
very comparable to what was given in 1976 when you people were in power. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to ask you whether or not in respect to the hiring procedure — came at your 
request — whether or not you personally interviewed Mr. Cousineau for the job. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I didn’t. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — What contact or what decision-making process did you have in appointing him as 
your deputy? Were you involved in the decision? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I could say that the transition team at the time was interviewing various 
people, and Mr. Cousineau was the one that was put into government services at the time. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I take it then, by your answer, that you did not personally interview him. You did not 
personally make the decision in appointing him as the deputy. You did not 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2411 

have final say. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I could have said yes or no, but based on the recommendations given, I 
took Mr. Cousineau. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I want to ask you whether or not it was . . . In checking out, did Mr. Cousineau have 
any previous experience working in government? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, he did. He had worked for quite a number of years, if I can recall, with 
the Government of Ontario. After he graduated from school in Ontario, he worked for quite a number of 
years with the Government of Ontario, before going into the private sector. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Could you indicate to me the length of time that he had worked with the government 
in Ontario, and also indicate the positions that he held? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — No, I can’t give you that information. I don’t have it here, and I do not 
think it’s relevant. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I’m going to indicate to you, Madam Minister, that it seems to me that you 
have an obligation as a minister, not just to pay out a very rich severance to a Tory brought in from 
Ontario who decides to leave, but certainly . . . Don’t you believe, Madam Minister, that you have an 
obligation to determine, in hiring a person, whether or not he has indeed a commitment to the job that 
you are offering? 
 
I want to ask you: what commitment did you have, since you didn’t even interview him? Do you know 
whether or not he gave any commitment when he moved here that he would in fact work for the 
government for an extended period of time? You give as reason for leaving that he couldn’t stand the 
bureaucracy. I’m interested to know that he had previously worked with a bureaucracy, so bureaucracy 
wasn’t new to him. So I find your whole story a little strange. But certainly it seems to me that there is a 
responsibility by the government that if they’re going to indeed hire someone . . . I know that you don’t 
necessarily enter into contracts, but you certainly should indeed get a commitment from the individual 
whether or not he has worked with the bureaucracy and whether or not he will give a commitment to the 
province. And it seems to me that you basically had nothing to do . . . And I guess what you’re saying is 
that you ended up with a dud as a deputy minister that got you into a lot of problems. You might as well 
come clean. I mean, why should you take all the blame? It’s not fair that you take the blame, because 
this here great transition team did all the interviewing and placed him at your disposal — and the guy 
turned out to be a dud, and you needed to get rid of him. And that’s the truth of the matter. 
 
I would like to know in respect to the severance pay: was that a determination made by you, after having 
worked with this Tory hack from Ontario as your deputy minister? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I think your comments cannot go unchallenged. I might say that I 
find you a little strange too. As far as Mr. Cousineau’s commitment to the province, I think it’s obvious. 
He’s in the process of opening up a new business in the high-tech field. I think it’s an area that we wish 
to pursue. As far as his severance pay, all I can reiterate is that it was a moral obligation — 
approximately three months settlement. I would challenge you to call Mr. Cousineau a dud outside of 
the House and see how you make out. 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2412 

MR. KOSKIE: — He didn’t work out very well for you, Madam Minister because he got you into a lot 
of trouble, or else you’re uncontrollable from getting into trouble. 
 
What I want to ask you: since you pulled this so-called competent Tory from Ontario, would you 
indicate . . . 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — That’s a non sequitur; competent Tory is a non sequitur. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Right. The so-called competent Tory, the one that your intuition said was the right 
man for the right job, because Mr. Foley, on your intuition, wasn’t the right man for the right job . . . 
Let’s get back to the initial part of it. 
 
I want to ask you whether . . . Did you have to pay any travelling expenses in order to locate Mr. 
Cousineau here as your deputy? Did you bring him in from another province or was he located in the 
province during the . . . and participating in the general election? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can assure you that Mr. Cousineau is not a Tory hack from Ontario. He 
was not here participating in the election as I know a lot of your colleagues from B.C. and Manitoba 
were in the province at that time. I understand even your leader was out in B.C., but little good did it do. 
 
I might also say that I think the only thing uncontrollable in this House is perhaps the lower part of your 
face. I don’t think Mr. Cousineau was a dud. Mr. Cousineau has a lot of good qualities. He got along 
very well with the people in the department, and I think he added a new bit of spark to the department, 
and for that I appreciated. He kept me well informed. You say he got me into a lot of trouble. I think 
that’s also a matter of a difference of opinion because I really don’t think he did. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — Well, I wanted to give you the benefit of the doubt because I was going to transfer it 
onto this deputy who didn’t perform and then let you out of a . . . But I ask you the specific question and 
it will be without any editorializing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, no, because obviously you 
missed my last question. And what I want to ask, Madam Minister if I could have your attention, eh? All 
right, I have your attention, and what I asked you specifically: did you bring Mr. Cousineau in from 
Ontario, and in fact did you pay any travel expenses in locating him here in Saskatchewan? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I believe it did, as I indicated . . . The contract terms or the pay terms were 
made with the transition team, but I think they followed the normal accepted practice when it comes to 
senior civil servants, and I would say, yes, he probably did get moving expenses. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — You see, that’s the very point that I’m indicating to you. You, or the government, 
with your transition team, went searching for the right man, eh? And they paid to bring him into this 
province. All right. You paid him well, and he decided he wanted to better himself and leave. So not 
only did you pay to bring him into this province with taxpayers’ money, but you paid, I guess, to help 
him go and improve himself. And so I guess what I’m asking you: is this a consistent policy that will be 
followed in the future, that anyone who leaves this government on his own volition, and that’s what you 
said, to better himself, and stayed for a very short period, that you are going to provide that individual a 
severance, unrealistic, at the expense of the taxpayer? 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2413 

Is that your policy? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think the hon. member being a former member of executive Council 
knows that each case is probably handled differently, and of course I can’t give that assurance that that 
is going to be the policy from now on and ever, ever, ever, and ever amen. I mean, that’s just rather not 
possible. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — I just want to show how wonderfully moral you were on this issue, in dealing with 
your specific individual, with Mr. Cousineau who left to better himself. 
 
You know, when we take a look in through here, there’s a Marjorie Lynn Benson who was a deputy 
minister — worked with the government for a number of years — the amount of severance was $26,000; 
a Howard Alfred Leeson, $19,000; and they were with the government for years, not nine months. But 
you know, if you’re a Tory, nine months really conceives a big package under a Tory administration if 
you’re dealing with another Tory. There’s John Earl Sinclair — seven years, seven years with this 
administration; John Sinclair got 23,763. David Walter Goldsmith — 12 years with this government — 
and that transition team, or whoever, gave 13,500 as a severance. Here’s a Wayne G. Walters — four or 
five years — 12,979; a Dr. Gerald John Gartner — eight to 10- years with this government, $28,000: 
compare that eight to 10 years, and outstanding civil servant, Dr. Gerald John Gartner — $28,000. 
 
But a Tory that you plucked out of Ontario, who you paid to bring in here on taxpayers’ money, and 
who only lasted nine months, probably because of incompetence — couldn’t handle it — you give him a 
package of $17,000. And I just want the people of Saskatchewan to know what’s going on. This is a 
rip-off of filling the pockets of Tory supporters at the taxpayers’ expense, and you can’t deny it with the 
record that you have. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think all the people that you listed off, their settlement was negotiated. 
Obviously they were pleased with it. They signed off the release, and they were quite satisfied with what 
they got. I can’t add anything more. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — It was, Madam Minister we were told by the government House Leader, 
according to a formula. I ask you, Madam Minister: was your exceptional display of generosity to Mr. 
Cousineau according to a formula, or was this yet another illustration of the operation of your feminine 
intuition? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — The member asked what formula. It was approximately three months pay 
— three months of his pay. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Yeah, how did you arrive at three months pay? That’s what I was asking. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think the formula used with others was two and one-half months salary 
plus one week for every year served, and we felt it was consistent with that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — No, I don’t think you did, Madam Minister; no, I don’t think you did at all. I 
look at this list and I thin very few of these follow such a formula. No, I don’t think that was the 
formula, Madam Minister. The settlement given to Mr. Cousineau was considerably more generous than 
the settlement given to these individuals. If that was the formula which you used for Mr. Cousineau, 
then by golly, you owe some people 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2414 

some more money. Because they sure didn’t get that. 
 
I’m doing a quick calculation and I can’t do it with great precision, but I know that that wasn’t the 
formula used in at least some of these cases. So I ask you, Madam Minister where’s the formula that you 
purportedly used with Mr. Cousineau? Where did you get it from? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think the normal formula under Public Service Commission is two and 
one-half months plus one weeks salary for every year served. I think it’s very interesting that you should 
say that is so generous, because I can recall one Mr. Pascal who worked for, I think, approximately a 
little under two years for the previous administration; and on his supposedly . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . No, it wasn’t a termination . . . resignation, received one year’s salary in the neighbourhood of 
$34,000. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, that simply is not the formula that you used or that the 
former administration used. Madam Minister, I want you though to deal with the issue of why you pay 
severance to someone who resigned voluntarily. Please do not dredge out of the bottom of the channel 
every conceivable resignation under the former administration. I don’t claim to be intimately familiar 
with them all. I am familiar with the first one you raised and I can tell you that it is not in any way 
comparable. 
 
I want you, Mr. Minister, to tell us or refuse to tell us — if that’s what you’re going to do. It’s an option 
open to you. But tell us, or refuse to tell us, why you pay severance to someone who leaves, Madam 
Minister, let me rephrase the question. Is it available to anyone who leaves to better himself? Is that the 
new rule? Someone who leaves to better himself, he’s entitled to the same severance as someone who’s 
rudely booted out the door? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think I can only reiterate it was a ministerial decision. He was given 
approximately three months pay and that’s all there is to it. Now you may not care for us, on this side of 
the House, to bring up these nice little juicy examples of things that went on when you were . . . You 
know, I’m waiting for you to get into some other areas about tendering, so I can give you some 
examples of what happened when you were a minister. 
 
But you know, you take this attitude that, ‘Oh, I’m so lily-white.’ Well, let me tell you — you’re not. 
 
I can only reiterate, it was a ministerial decision. I felt there was some moral obligation on the part of us, 
and whether it followed a transition formula or a formula that you people had before where you pick and 
chose and whatever, I really don’t know. I can’t answer for the names that you gave me; I wasn’t in on 
those negotiations. You may thin that the circumstances with Mr. Cousineau were completely different 
than those with Mr. Dowdell. I don’t know what happened at that time. I understand that he voluntarily 
resigned and was given a 10,000 settlement. Mr. Cousineau resigned; I felt morally responsible for 
getting him here, therefore I felt it was within reason to give him a three-month settlement, and that’s all 
there was to it. 
 
Now whether you choose . . . Whether you choose as an individual in this House to believe me or not, 
really. I have no control over that. And you can ask this question till the cows come in and I can’t add 
any more to it. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2415 

MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t know, Madam Minister, at what hour the cows come into the 
Legislative Assembly, so I don’t know how long it is going to be before you tell us, Madam Minister, is 
it available to anyone who resigns who has come here from a foreign province and who is leaving to 
return to a foreign province? Is that available to anyone else? Is anyone else going to be treated with 
such magnanimity? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — That’s a hypothetical question. It’s a hypothetical situation which may or 
may not come up, and therefore I really can’t say. I can’t answer your question. We deal with facts. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — What do you mean was your moral obligation? What was your moral obligation to 
this man? You brought him in; you paid to get him here; you paid him well when he was here and was 
leaving to upgrade himself — a better position. That’s what you said was the reason he left. Taxpayers’ 
money. And you say you have a moral obligation. 
 
Explain to me what you mean by all of those circumstances being as I say, and you’re still saying you 
have a moral obligation to resign for misuse of taxpayers’ money. Here is a man you brought in, gave a 
commitment, paid him well, paid his way in, and then you give him a $17,000 severance. And when you 
compare with people that have been here for eight to twelve, ten years, and you pay them 29,000. You 
got a one-sided morality to those who you dismissed — very low severance — and you say they all 
signed off. Well, I want to tell you, they didn’t have any choice. Choice is to sue a government, and you 
people don’t care about how much taxpayers’ money you use to defend your twisted priorities. 
 
So I want to know: what is your morality here, that you are basing your support on? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I mean, it’s obvious that the member from Quill Lakes does not 
understand what morals are or what morals might mean to other people, because I’m sure it’s a word 
that’s foreign in his vocabulary. 
 
Never once did I say Mr. Cousineau was going on to better himself. Mr. Cousineau felt that he was not 
quite suited for public sector rigors and would probably do better in the private sector. Now to say that a 
man is going on to better himself, I mean, that’s where you socialists and us differ. You never know . . . 
If you go to try and start a new business, you never know whether it’s going to be profitable or not, but 
they are willing to take that stake, and I say, ‘Good luck to Mr. Cousineau.’ 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Thank you, Madam Minister, let me recount for you the sequence of events, 
because they don’t flatter you, Mr. Cousineau, or the administration of which you are a part . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Is that a fact? Well, I’m sorry to hear you don’t approve of it. I’m sorry to 
hear the member from Regina North doesn’t approve of it. 
 
Madam Minister, you had got yourself . . . Madam Minister, the then member from P.A.-Duck Lake lost 
a contravert. A by-election was called. His sister-in-law was working for the department of government 
services. Nobody ever denied that Sharon Young was a sister-in-law of an elected member at one point 
in time. As the story goes, she was called in to speak to the deputy minister, who told her she was being 
transferred from Regina to Moose Jaw — P.A. to Regina. She objected. She was told that her politics 
weren’t particularly welcome, and I referred those comments to you in the House, and you did not deny 
them. I’m going to get on to the Sharon Young thing in 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2416 

a minute; that’s a movie who’s yet to come. 
 
But Madam Minister, that preceded, by a matter of a few days, Mr. Cousineau’s resignation, and it gave 
. . . The circumstances under which he resigned, and its proximity to the Sharon Young affair, suggested 
to one and all that Mr. Cousineau had embarrassed you and had embarrassed the administration of which 
you are a member. He then resigned. 
 
The circumstances suggested his resignation was called for by you because of his handling of the Sharon 
Young affair. You told us that isn’t the case — nothing to do with it. He left to better himself elsewhere. 
But Madam Minister, the circumstances under which he resigned call for an explanation for such a 
generous severance package to someone who went to better himself elsewhere, and Madam Minister, to 
say it was a ministerial decision, and we can like it or not, doesn’t really provide the kind of explanation 
which you, as a member of Executive Council, are called upon to give. 
 
I ask you, Madam Minister, to tell us why you give a severance package to someone who leaves to 
better himself elsewhere if it had nothing to do with the Sharon Young affair — and I take your word it 
did not. I have not ever placed your integrity in issue in this discussion . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Now, don’t get difficult. I have gone out of my way not to allow this to degenerate into a discussion 
which would be unworthy of both of us. 
 
Madam Minister, you do owe this Assembly an explanation, an explanation which goes beyond saying it 
was a ministerial decision. I never doubted that. I never doubted. I never suggested it was a decision by 
the janitor or by the Clerk or by the Chairman. I thought it was a ministerial decision. I was questioning 
the wisdom of that decision, and I’m asking you to give us some insight into your wisdom in playing a 
severance package to a deputy who leaves under those circumstances. To put it mildly, Madam Minister, 
those circumstances call for an explanation. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, here we go again. It was a ministerial decision. I felt that it was fairly 
in line with what has been given to other people under a severance package, and I still say to you that we 
are under some moral obligation, having uprooted Mr. Cousineau and his family and bringing him to 
Saskatchewan. You may not think so, but perhaps I do. Perhaps I do. And the case you bring forward . . . 
I can assure the hon. member that the transfer of the person that you were talking about is not even 
relevant to the case of Mr. Cousineau. It had no bearing. It might have had bearing on his own decision 
to resign but it sure never had any bearing on me, and I did not ask him to resign. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I never placed that in issue. I’ve never placed that in issue, Madam 
Minister. I know the minister is not enjoying this line of inquiry, but I tell you that it is a perfectly 
responsible line of inquiry to ask how you could pay that kind of severance pay to someone who 
voluntarily resigns. Apart from dredging up every resignation in the former administration, with which 
you must admit you are not familiar other than the bare details of what existed on paper when you took 
office, can you think of any other example where anybody who voluntarily left to better himself 
elsewhere who was given a severance package at all, never mind that generous? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, it’s not even relevant. But the two examples I gave you run around 
the neighbourhood of $45,000 for two employees that supposedly you 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2417 

claim were under different circumstances, and I can’t add any more to it. Really I can’t. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, are you saying that you don’t have a decent explanation for having 
paid this severance pay to Mr. Cousineau? Is that what you’re admitting at this point in time? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I am not admitting that. I have given you, at your request, my reasons for 
certain actions. Now whether you wish to accept them or not . . . It is not my problem; it is your 
problem. 
 
MR. KOSKIE: — . . . (inaudible) . . . problem. Your actions are in fact . . . need to be surfaced so that 
the people of Saskatchewan can see what you’re doing. Here is Mr. Foley who was the deputy. I think 
that within one or two days . . . 
 
You indicated previously that you threw him out of the office on a woman’s intuition. I want to ask you: 
did you not have any moral obligation when you cast Mr. Foley aside? Was not your moral obligation 
more to him who had served this province — be it all for another government, but who had served the 
province — who on your own admission the only reason he went was on your woman’s intuition? How 
can you say that in one case you have a moral obligation to a person who has only contributed nine 
months of service, left to better himself, and at the same time so callously deal with Mr. Foley? How do 
you justify one decision on morality and the other decision which is so harsh and lacks any compassion? 
There is an inconsistency in respect to your approach, and so I ask you: can you justify your treatment of 
Mr. Foley vis-à-vis your moral obligation to a person who came from another province? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think you’re talking about two different issue, and you know full well that 
a change in senior advisers during a change in government is not the same. You know very well it isn’t, 
as the case you’re trying to relate it to. And I think Mr. Foley got approximately $26,800, which is in 
line with what was paid Mr. Cousineau. I think the formula used was two and one-half months, and one 
weeks pay for every year served, which is what it worked out to. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Madam Minister the unfortunate position — and maybe it’s not 
unfortunate — but the position of someone who is a deputy minister is that they are an order in council 
appointment, and by that appointment they lack the ordinary protection which is given to employees 
which is enforced in courts of law. 
 
Madam Minister, the man who sits on your right I assume is an order in council appointment. His right 
to severance is very, very different than the two who sit behind you, who I assume are not order in 
council appointments. I can tell you, Madam Minister, that had they not been order in council 
appointments — and therefore with no legal right to severance, and that unfortunately is the position of 
someone who takes an order in council appointment — I can tell you that had they been determined in a 
court of law Mr. Foley would have got a whole lot more. And I would just be amazed if you can find a 
reputable lawyer who can give you a legal opinion saying that Mr. Cousineau would have got 10 cents if 
he left to better himself elsewhere. 
 
Madam Minister, I ask you again. Can you think of any other case under your administration — with 
which you should be familiar? I forgive you for misunderstanding the circumstances of resignations 
under the former administration, but can you think of any under your administration in which a person 
who voluntarily left to better himself elsewhere was given a severance pay at all, much less this 
generous? Can you 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2418 

think of any other example . . . 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Not in our department I can’t. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, you’re a member of Executive Council. Presumably these matters 
would have to go to Executive Council. Are you aware of any case coming before Executive Council, of 
which you are a member, in which anyone who voluntarily resigned was given a severance settlement, 
never mind this generous? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think the member knows full well that I do not speak for Executive 
Council. That is the Premier’s job. I speak for the Department of Supply and Services, and the question 
you asked: no, none in this particular department before the House today. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — So, you know of no precedent for it. That’s not surprising in your own 
department. I would be surprised to hear that you have more than one order in council appointment in 
your department. It may not be true. You may have more than one, but I would have thought only the 
deputy would have been an order in council appointment. But I may be wrong about that, I’m not sure. 
The only other one I can think of is Mr. Foley. 
 
AN HON. MEMBER: — Ned, check with your officials. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I’d check with my officials. Yeah. Thanks. 
 
Madam Minister, the . . . and I’m trying to phrase it in a fashion which isn’t too abrasive because I don’t 
want to draw anyone’s personal integrity into issue. But I do want some assurance, and perhaps this is 
what I’m asking, I do want some assurance that there will be no repeat of this incident, whereby 
someone who leaves voluntarily is given a severance package. That is a recipe for financial disaster, 
even of a government where one treats the pockets of the treasurer as being bottomless. 
 
What I guess I want, Madam Minister, is an undertaking from yourself that this will not be a precedent 
for anything and that we will not again, so far as you have any control over it, give a severance package 
to anyone who resigns under these circumstances. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can give the hon. member the assurance that I will act in a responsible 
manner in my capacity as a minister. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I want to then go on, Madam Minister, to the issue of Sharon Young’s 
appointment. We discussed the matter in some detail in the dying days of the last session and your stock 
comment then and the stock comment of the Minister of Finance speaking on behalf of the Public 
Service Commission was that no grievance had been filed. Now, of course, a grievance has been filed so 
we may take it that Sharon Young was not in full approval of her transfer, since she’s filed a grievance. 
 
Madam Minister, I ask you now if you would comment on the circumstances of her departure. I related 
to you my understanding of the circumstances under which she left, under which she was transferred 
from P.A. You didn’t deny those in the last session but you may wish to do so now. But I’d ask you to 
comment on my version of why, of the circumstances under which she left and whether or not you 
would now be willing to transfer her back to P.A. 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2419 

I said to you before, Madam Minister, that for Harry Van Mulligen, P.A. was the equivalent to him of 
Siberia . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I did not say . . . I’m pleased that the goon squad is back here 
trying to disrupt estimates. That’s all the member from P.A. is doing. And I want to say that I think . . . I 
wished he had some contribution to make. I wish the member had some contribution to make rather than 
to move over on this side and disrupt the estimates. But I know that’s the only contribution he’s going to 
make so we will ignore his contribution. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to be careful you do not misunderstand me. I did not say that I regarded P.A. as 
equivalent to Siberia. I suggested that that is what, that that was Mr. Van Mulligen’s view. And in view 
of the fact that he was an alderman here and the minister in charge had the grace and the good sense, and 
if I may say, the measure of character to admit he made a mistake, and he transferred him back. Madam 
Minister, we can dispose of this issue in the same fashion, if you will undertake to transfer Sharon 
Young back to Prince Albert, and to deal with the grievance in that fashion, I think we could put an end 
to this issue as well. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I can indicate to the hon. member that myself and my colleague, the 
Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower, were in Prince Albert Tuesday afternoon to unveil the 
architect’s model of the technical institute, which, I might say, has doubled in capacity and size and 
student places. We had a very, very warm, warm reception from the people of Prince Albert. That’s just 
a little plug for my colleague, the Minister of Advanced Education and Manpower . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh, I doubt it, I doubt it. 
 
With regard to Miss Young, I think you know full well that it is before the normal grievance procedure, 
and either you or myself discussing it at this time would be totally irresponsible on both sides. I can 
indicate that Miss Young has requested a transfer, not specifically to Prince Albert, but a transfer 
somewhere within government, either within the same department, I believe, or another department. But 
to discuss these specific issues surrounding the transfer, I think at this time would be irresponsible by 
both of us. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, do you dispute the circumstances I outlined with respect to 
the nature of her transfer here? Do you dispute that your deputy minister told her politics weren’t 
welcome, first of all, assuming what her politics were, because I don’t think she was asked her politics? 
But do you dispute that version of the facts relating to her transfer? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I will not comment on the facts as you allege, because it is before the 
grievance procedure, and it’s irresponsible on both our parts. I think you, as a former member of the 
Executive Council, should know that. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, the problem with the procedure is it has just broken down. 
There’s a number of grievances which are backed up, and caused by this government’s endless taste for 
retribution against anyone they think is an enemy of the party. It’s nothing to do with being an enemy of 
the state, it’s an enemy of the party with you people. Your endless taste for revenge has meant that the 
grievances are backed up to the point where, when we take office in three years, or four years, or 
whenever this administration has the courage to call an election, we’re going to be left with most of the 
grievances, because they are backed up so far that they are not going to be dealt with in anything like a 
timely fashion. 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2420 

I ask you, Madam Minister, why you won’t show the same measure of character as was shown by the 
minister in charge of the housing corporation, and simply transfer her back and respect the girl’s wishes. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think, you know, that’s a typical type of an approach for a socialist to 
take, these veiled allegations and veiled innuendoes. We have no more grievances against our 
department now than we did in the past. So to stand there and exaggerate like that is total nonsense, and 
it’s totally typical of the type of questions that we get from that side of the House. I can only reiterate 
that Miss Young has taken it to grievance and for me to comment on the so-called facts or circumstances 
as you interpreted them — I won’t do that at this time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, you are stonewalling on the issue. You won’t comment on 
it at all. You are stonewalling on this issue, and it is a basic issue of democratic rights — goes to the 
very basis of a person’s democratic rights. It is one thing, Madam Minister, for you to suggest as you 
apparently did that you didn’t like the politics of Dennis Foley. I don’t think you knew what his politics 
were, quite frankly. He worked as my deputy for several years and I didn’t know what they were. And I 
was quite close to him because I respected him as a competent professional. And I think when you let 
him go because of his politics, I don’t think you understood what they were. 
 
As I was saying, that’s one thing — he works directly as your deputy. but to quarrel with the politics of 
a person who is in the department and who works far removed from you, I suggest is a new, is raising 
the vendetta of this administration against its enemies to a brand-new level. At least the minister in 
charge of the housing corporation offered us — the lamest thing I’ve seen since a one-legged dog, but at 
least he offered the excuse that Mr. Van Mulligen was writing speeches for him. 
 
What conceivable excuse can there be for Mr. Cousineau’s comments to that girl that her politics 
weren’t welcome? What conceivable excuse can there be for that comment? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Quite frankly, I think that you are depending a lot on hearsay which may or 
may not be true. I wasn’t in attendance at that time so I can’t say whether what you are saying is true or 
whether it isn’t. I happen to have heard a different version at the time, so again for me to comment on it 
at this time would be rather irresponsible. And I think you know full well how The Trade Union Act 
works, supposedly democratic, it’s in the grievance procedure right now, and I’m sure through the 
collective bargaining provisions of grievance, it will be settled either way. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, Madam Minister, I invite you to dispute my version. As I told you at 
the time, as I repeat, my version was gained directly from Ms. Young. And we said that at the time, if 
you want to check the Hansard. It wasn’t something I picked up in the bar in P.A., I . . . (inaudible) . . . 
said that at the time. 
 
Now, if your version, I assume you and Mr. Cousineau discussed this; I assume the lines of 
communication were at least that open — that you discussed this sort of a thing. If my version isn’t your 
version, I would like to hear your version of it. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I will tell you one more time. You know full well that the transfer is at the 
grievance table and any discussion as to the alleged circumstances surrounding the before or after the 
fact, are not to be discussed by either yourself or 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2421 

myself. And I think you know that, not only as a former member of Executive Council, but as a lawyer. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, I say, Madam Minister, that if you wanted to redeem yourself on this 
issue, as, I think, the minister in charge of the housing corporation did, when he made a mistake, and as 
the Premier might have, when he made a mistake in his estimates, you might simply transfer Sharon 
Young back to P.A. or where it is you claim now she wants to go. Admit that an error was made. In a 
government of the size of the Saskatchewan government, I can tell you there’s going to be some 
mistakes made. 
 
Because you are a minister of the Crown, and because you speak for that department in this Assembly, 
you have to take responsibility for those mistakes, and they may not have been your mistakes personally. 
But to the extent, Madam Minister, that you’re prepared to admit your mistakes and correct them, your 
stature may increase. I ask you, Madam Minister, whether you have given any consideration to 
honouring Ms. Young’s request for a transfer. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I think I am doing the honourable and responsible thing by not discussing 
an incident which is at the grievance table right now, and I think, perhaps, a little bit of honour and 
responsibility on the other side of the House might serve this whole exercise well. But, given that, I can 
only say again, I will not discuss the circumstances leading to the transfer. I happen not to think that the 
hear say that you hear . . . Whether you hear it straight from, or straight from someone else, I have to 
take your word for it. Right? So, please take my word for it. I am not at liberty to discuss it and you 
know full well. Now, you can stand up there in your nice lawyer manner and try to badger me into 
saying something I’m not supposed to, but listen, one of your constituents told me that if brains were 
water, your head would be a desert, and I’m not going to fall for your trap. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Madam Minister, I was trying to be so nice. I thought we were going to 
conduct these discussions on a civilized level. I can tell you, Madam Minister, that I’m not going to 
respond to that last comment. 
 
I want to get on to a matter which is before the courts, that which I will be interested to hear your 
disclaimer of any intention to discuss, and that is the issue of the court-houses themselves. It is an issue 
which is of concern to the courts, although not before them in the sense that Ms. Young’s is before, is 
being grieved. The court-houses — we are not apparently proceeding with the construction of the 
court-houses, that at least is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well, that’s true, but one J.G. Lane, now 
Attorney-General — the Minister of Justice, I’m sorry — said that Regina and Saskatoon will have to 
wait at least one more year to get their new renovated court-houses. Madam Minister, was this decision 
based on perceived need, and if so, on what was this decision based to postpone the construction to the 
additions to the court-house in Saskatoon and the construction of the . . . I gather it was an annex in 
Regina? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Pure and simply in one word, it was a decision based on economics. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — What would you have had expended in the current year, had you given the 
go-ahead to the project? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It would have been in the early design stage this year, and we could have 
expended upwards to a million dollars on the court-house design. But you 



 
May 19, 1983 
 

 
2422 

must realize that it’s an ongoing thing and we are monitoring it. We might go into the design phase yet, 
but I mean it came down as a member of treasury board, as a member of cabinet. 
 
If cuts have to be made, I would rather postpone some capital projects rather than have to cut back in 
education, or cut back in health, or cut back in the direct services that the people actually require. And 
you know full well that the areas of direct services were not cut back in other areas. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — You’re fortunate that the deaf can’t hear that, because they thought their 
grant was cut back. So it’s fortunate that they’re not able to hear your statement directly. I think they’re 
lucky in that regard. 
 
Madam Minister, though, let me leave that peripheral comment and get back to the court-houses 
themselves. Have you completed the design work on the court-houses? Well, I’ll leave that question at 
that. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — You wanted to know if we have completed the design stage. No, we 
haven’t. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Is that work ongoing this year? Are you completing the design work of the 
court-houses? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — It’s on hold at the present time. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — Well, that’s a curious decision. I took it from your earlier comment that you 
don’t quarrel with the need for these court-houses. This department is bursting at the seams in an area 
with a very high profile. A large number of people see some of those court rooms — indeed, an 
extremely large number of people have seen that court room in the last couple of weeks. I drove by it 
today and I saw that it had a fair audience. There must have been a hundred people out in front of it. 
They seemed to have some comments to make about something that was going on inside, and I wasn’t 
sure which side of the issue they were on, to be quite frank. 
 
Madam Minister, I assume we’re not quarrelling with the need for those court-houses. I assume you’re 
saying it’s economics. But shouldn’t we at least be completing the design work so that when the 
Minister of Finance gets some wind back in his sails, and you’ve got some money, you can start 
immediately with the construction of it and you won’t be a further delay while you do the design work. 
It doesn’t make sense, Madam Minister, to finish the design work, which is not expensive, then put the 
plans on the shelf to await a brighter day perhaps after the next election when a new administration is in 
office. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Yes, I can say that of concern to us, but perhaps we on this side of the 
house aren’t so gung-ho to get sod-turning ceremonies and whatever in the few months prior to election. 
I think that next election we go into, the credibility of this government will stand on its own and we’ll 
probably come back with more members than we do have now. 
 
With regard to the court-houses, I do agree that there is an absolute need for the court-houses. But let me 
tell you, the deterioration of the court-houses now — today — did not happen overnight. You know, it 
was neglect on the part of your administration, with a lot of words and fancy casings and no actual work 
being done. You announced the 



 
May 19, 1983 

 
2423 

court-houses in March 5 of 1981. Good God, you’ve hardly spent a cent on them. And then you glom all 
your capital projects together in the March ’82 budget when you overestimate expenditures by about 
$200 million, and underestimate revenues by almost an equal amount, if not more. And yet you were 
going to do all those great things in one year, and you know darn right that’s just baloney and it’s not 
true. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I didn’t mean to get the minister exercised in that fashion. Madam Minister, I 
wonder if we could get back to the question. Why don’t you complete the design work, so that the need 
— and you admit the need — can go forward, if and when the Minister of Finance is ever able to put the 
finances of this province in order? Why don’t you do the design work, which is not expensive, so that it 
can go forward at the earliest possible opportunity? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — Well, I said to you . . . I thought I answered your question, but obviously 
you either missed it or it went over your head. I told you it was a consideration and hopefully we can 
proceed with the design. But we also think a priority is to get extra space in Saskatoon. You talk about 
deplorable court conditions there in Saskatoon, and I’ll tell you they’ve been around for the last ten 
years, if not more, under your administration and you did nothing. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — I don’t know whether, Mr. Chairman, I’m going to have any success in 
getting the attention of the minister. She’s busily engaged in a debate, but not unfortunately with myself. 
Madam Minister, I don’t know whether or not your comments with respect to Saskatoon are accurate; I 
don’t think they’re relevant however. There was an election. There was a new administration took 
office. They were going to rectify some of what they perceived to be the errors of the former 
administration, but if that never happens the whole election seems to me to have been a waste of time. 
Madam Minister, if you perceive there’s a need — and I gather you do — and if it’s not going forward 
because of the funds, why don’t you at least do the design works so that when the money becomes 
available, there will be the least possible delay in completing the project which we all agree is badly 
needed? 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — I said to you the last two times I answered that same question: that is still 
under consideration and I hope we can proceed with the design work. But a more immediate problem is 
the situation in Saskatoon that we right now are trying to address: to get adequate space to expand the 
very overcrowded situation that we find in Saskatoon. 
 
MR. SHILLINGTON: — In what manner are you trying to address the situation in Saskatoon, then? 
Perhaps you could expand on that. 
 
HON. MRS. DUNCAN: — In February ’83, we . . . (inaudible) . . . were let to at least approximately 
1,400 square metres for the provincial court. And right now, I believe the department is reviewing them, 
and . . . That’s a critical area. Even if we were to . . . (inaudible) . . . start building in the Saskatoon 
court-house today, that doesn’t relieve the very immediate problem and very dire problem, I might add, 
that is there. We would still have to go to a lease proposal for rental space to take care of the interim, 
because the situation is that critical up there. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 7 p.m. 


