






















































Hansard: May 13, 1983


2147 
 

LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
May 13, 1983 

 
The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

WELCOME TO STUDENTS 
 
Mr. Hampton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s with pleasure that I would like to 
introduce to you and to this Assembly a group of 36 grade 8 students from Preeceville School in my 
home town. They’re accompanied by Mr. Bill Gerla, their teacher, Mr. Lawrence Maksymiw, the 
principal, Mr. John Mills, Mrs. Carol Preston and Mrs. Olive Pottle. I welcome the students to the snow 
capital of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to tell you that I will be meeting with you at about 11:15 this morning in the rotunda area for 
pictures, after which we will be going for refreshments. 
 
I hope you enjoy your stay here today and I hope I’m ahead of your bus going home. There’s enough 
there; they can push me through. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: — Hear, hear! 
 

QUESTIONS 
 

Government Position on Pepin Plan 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, I have a question for the Minister of Agriculture. Several days have passed 
since the introduction of Pepin’s legislation. Has Allen Gregg had time to complete the polling for you 
so that you’ve been able to figure out what your position will be on the Pepin plan that’s now before 
parliament? Will you tell the farmers of Saskatchewan that: number one, are you going to fight this bad 
legislation with everything you’ve got; or, number two, are you going to join with the Trudeau Liberals 
in negotiating away the Crow rate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, firstly, Mr. Speaker, it should be clearly understood that if we did call in 
the services of one Allen Gregg you can bet your biffy that it would be sound and sage advice, as it was 
in B.C., and Saskatchewan and Bermuda, and Nova Scotia, and Ontario, Prince Edward Island and 
Ontario and a few others. But we didn’t do that, Mr. Speaker, no. What we did instead as to consult with 
the producer organizations, the farmers of Saskatchewan, as to the impact of the tabled legislation. Last 
Tuesday I believe it was tabled. We, on Wednesday, got a copy of that legislation. We’ve done an 
analysis of that legislation and I think, had you communicated with your House Leader this morning, he 
has an agenda of today’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — No, we haven’t. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — . . . should have had. Check with your staff people. The agenda, in any case, 
Mr. Speaker — and if you don’t have it, it was inadvertently missed, Mr. Speaker — but the agenda sets 
out that there will in fact be a statement today by the Hon. Eric Berntson, relative to the federal Crow 
legislation. 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2148 

Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t ask the question. Are you going to fight this legislation, 
or are you going to help the Trudeau Liberals to negotiate away our Crow rate? What has your detailed 
review of the legislation told you about the legislation that you didn’t already know last week? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, if patience were a virtue the hon. member that just sat down 
would be the most lustful individual I’ve ever met in my life. I’ve just told him, Mr. Speaker, that I will 
be making a statement following question period. I think immediately following oral questions there’s 
an item under routine proceedings that says: ministerial statements. When we get to that I’ll be making a 
statement relative to the federal legislation. 
 

Government Response to Opposition Questions 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A question to the Premier. I have a report of an 
interview with a member of the government caucus, which everyone thought a joke until you elevated it 
to the level of a serious problem. It’s a report from the Moose Jaw Times-Herald interview with the 
Conservative MLA from Moose Jaw South, and I’ll quote for your benefit very briefly. It says: 
 

As for opposition charges that the government is being arrogant by refusing to answer questions, 
Smith says, it’s a function of those in power not to give full answers to the opposition on issues. 

 
In light of these recent events, I ask the Premier: was the member for Moose Jaw South expressing the 
position of your government when he says that it’s not your job to tell the whole truth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, two observations: one, I can’t really comment on the accuracy of the 
press statement — it may or may not have been accurate; second, I don’t know in what context it was 
made. But, third, with respect to information that the opposition or the public may ask about government 
operations, clearly very much of the information is public and that is carried on in terms of estimates and 
question period and so forth. But much of it, as the hon. member knows, and he’s been a minister, is not. 
 
We are in negotiations. I believe the Attorney-General can vouch for this. We’re trading and negotiating 
on probably 60 to 70 to 80 different items alone with the federal government from time to time or at one 
time. And it would not be in the public’s best interest to share that intimate information about the 
province of Saskatchewan or about the agreements, whether it’s on environment or education or 
agriculture or water or whatever it may be. And the member, if that’s what he did say, Mr. Speaker, is 
absolutely correct that much of the information — I’m sure the hon. member knows this when he was a 
minister — is not public all the time, because you’re in some very serious negotiations with other 
jurisdictions and other administrations and private participants who do not want to have information 
revealed. So it’s clearly a balance. 
 
We have a very open administration. We now have television in the legislature. The whole world can 
see and listen and react to the questions. We provide all that information. Public accounts is now open. 
So I would say that with this administration there is open government, but that doesn’t mean everything 
is public, because clearly we want to do what’s best for the province of Saskatchewan in dealing with all 
kinds of  



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2149 

issues and all kinds of jurisdictions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Speaker, new question. I want to ask in fact the same question again. The 
member from Moose Jaw South did not appear to have been talking about freedom of information. The 
member from Moose Jaw South appeared to have been talking about the function of a government 
shading the truth so that the opposition does not get a full answer. He was not referring to no answer; he 
used the word ‘full’ answer. My question to the Premier is: do you agree with the member from Moose 
Jaw South, or disagree? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it is quite difficult for me to comment on what the hon. 
member says appears to be the position of an individual. I could say that, from my recollection, it would 
appear to be that the former administration didn’t give very much information when they were 
nationalizing the potash mines. People would ask for that. They didn’t appear to give very much 
information when they would be buying oil property, or in terms of SGI, or in terms of many other 
things that they may have been buying or nationalizing. People asked; all kinds of people asked, but 
there was no information, because it was something that the government was doing in terms of this 
secret purchase. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I can only comment and reiterate what I’ve said before: much of what goes on is 
public, and the estimates are public, and the information is provided; but much isn’t, and the former 
member knows as well as anybody else that that’s the case. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — New question, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to read the quotation for you one more time. 
‘Smith says it’s a function of those in power not to give full answers to the opposition.’ Question, Mr. 
Premier: should the government be telling the truth, or half-truth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, this government, and the members of this government, always tell 
the truth in this Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Devine: — And they will continue to tell the truth in this Assembly — every single member. I 
have nothing more to add with respect to a member of this legislature saying that not all information is 
public. Anything that is public with respect to estimates and departments and so forth is public and we 
will be, and continue to be, a very open government, open administration. Some things aren’t and the 
hon. member knows that. For the defence and the protection of Saskatchewan interests when we’re in 
negotiations with all kinds of different jurisdictions and private companies and other governments, it 
won’t be public until it’s in the best interest of the public, and they expect that. 
 

Tabling of Letter re Lake Diefenbaker Pipeline 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A new question, Mr. Speaker, to a new minister — this time for the Minister of 
Urban Affairs. Yesterday in this House, Mr. Minister, you claimed that you sent a letter off to Ottawa 
which warns them that Saskatchewan will soon be coming forward with a formal application out of a 
special recovery projects program. You’ll understand that given the events of the last few days we want 
confirmation of  



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2150 

these things as soon as we can. I would ask the minister, are you prepared to table your letter to the 
federal government before the end of the day? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated yesterday that the letter had been sent. The letter has 
been sent. I see no reason to table the letter. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Why not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, as has been indicated, we are in a complex negotiating position 
with the two cities at the immediate time. We hope, and intend, to be in an even more complex 
negotiating position with the federal government in very short order, hence the letter would serve no 
purpose and is part of that negotiation. So, as the Premier has simply indicated to you three or four 
times, when it’s in the public interest and we have an answer, we will let you know what the information 
is. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, Mr. Minister, that’s not what you said yesterday. What you said yesterday 
was that you had no formal proposal before the federal government and this letter was warning them that 
one was coming. Now you tell us that you are negotiating what I assume is a proposal. Now which is it? 
Do you have a formal proposal before the federal government that you are negotiating, or was your 
letter, as you said yesterday, simply warning them that one might come sometime in the future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, we have presented to the two cities a formal position. They have 
responded with a formal position. We will be meeting next Friday when Mr. Schneider returns in order 
to negotiate those two positions. Those two positions in fact are public. We have had contact at a 
number of levels with the federal government, as I indicated yesterday. The Minister of Finance has 
talked directly to the federal Minister of Finance. We have sent a letter indicating that we will be coming 
to them with a proposal — a specific proposal — and consequently we are in fact in a negotiating 
position with the federal government, with the cities, and I think that’s the answer to the question. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Supplementary, Mr. Minister, if you are at some point in time coming to them with 
a proposal, how can your letter be construed as part of the negotiations? Surely if you haven’t got a 
proposal before them, you can’t be negotiating it. I ask you again, Mr. Minister: do you have a formal 
proposal before the federal government, and if not, why won’t you table the letter telling them that one’s 
coming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, the previous administration sat on this problem for the total time 
of their administration. In a short year we have moved dramatically, I would say, towards a resolution. 
The letter is in fact a part of the negotiations that are, and will continue, to take place as we move 
towards resolution of this problem, and consequently I don’t see any need to table it. When the 
information is available, when we have a final answer, we will certainly make it public. 
 

Liquor Board Pricing Policy 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to direct a question to the minister in charge of the 
Saskatchewan Liquor Board. Yesterday I had asked a question and because of time restraint had not had 
an opportunity to ask supplementaries. As I recall the minister’s answer, he advised me that the liquor 
board would no longer be negotiating with the breweries, and he represented this as being part of a 
business  



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2151 

arrangement. Can the minister explain what sort of business carries on its affairs by agreeing to the price 
that the vendor sets and not in any way bargaining the price which the vendor sets when buying the 
products? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, I explained to the Hon. Leader of the Opposition yesterday that 
this policy is consistent with the treatment given to other suppliers of alcoholic beverages in this 
province. The suppliers of spirits set their price; the liquor board adds their mark-up. The suppliers of 
wine set their price; the liquor board adds their mark-up. So this is consistent with the treatment given to 
other suppliers of alcoholic beverages in this province. And we feel, being an open government and 
believing that the market-place should determine the price of the product, give the same treatment to the 
breweries of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 
Liquor Board. Mr. Minister, with respect to spirits, there are literally dozens of suppliers of spirits in the 
world, very few of whom are located in Saskatchewan, and accordingly the liquor board has little 
interest in knowing whether they buy barrels or Dewar’s Scotch Whisky. We have a great interest in 
knowing whether we’re buying Bohemian manufactured in Prince Albert or Calgary beer manufactured 
in Calgary. There are only three breweries in Saskatchewan. We want to buy their product. Are we 
going to allow them to set the price or are we going to bargain as any normal buyer would bargain when 
he was buying a product? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, I would reiterate that this move is in line with the government’s 
overall policy to reduce the amount of interference in the market-place in Saskatchewan — interference 
that that government carried on with for the previous 11 years and I don’t know how many years before 
that. That’s not our philosophy; that’s not the way we carry on business here. 
 
Under this new system, the breweries will be able to decide what price to sell their products to the liquor 
board, with the board applying their mark-up on the product. That’s simple. The breweries will be able 
to compete for the customers based on price, which was not possible before. And as I indicated to the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition yesterday, it’s a system that Manitoba’s going to. So if your New 
Democratic brothers in Manitoba think it’s good enough for them, why isn’t it good enough for the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a supplementary. Do I understand the minister to say that the 
operations of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board are going to be on the basis that they will do no 
negotiating for price with products that they buy, and that their role is simply to accept any price 
dictated by a supplier, or three suppliers in the case of three breweries in Saskatchewan; and to pass 
along that price to the customers of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, the breweries of Saskatchewan realize that if they put their price, 
the price of their product, way out of line that no one is going to buy it. The consumption of beer is 
down substantially in the province of Saskatchewan; it’s down right across the country. Common sense 
would dictate that the breweries are not going to put the price of their product out of line, or the people 
of Saskatchewan are not going to purchase it. So it’s the market-place that determines what the price is. 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2152 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Supplementary — I was going to say to the minister of revenue, supply and 
services but they don’t appear to be here — I’ll ask the Minister of Finance. Supplementary to the 
Minister of Finance. A new question to the Minister of Finance, perhaps, because I need a short 
preamble. 
 
The minister has made clear that he proposes to simply accept the price that the breweries offer, and that 
the liquor board will not bargain price. As some other hon. member said, ‘Just like automobiles.’ My 
question is: is this government proposing to buy its automobiles on the basis of taking the price which 
any care dealer names and paying it, or any car manufacturer pays and naming it, or are they going to 
bargain price and try to get the best price for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t believe that the analogy drawn by the Leader of the 
Opposition is a valid analogy. Obviously the purchasing policies of the Department of Supply and 
Services will be to provide, or to purchase the product for the province of Saskatchewan, the supplies for 
the province of Saskatchewan, at the best possible price. With the caveat, of course, Mr. Speaker, is that 
given the situation across the country now, we would always like to see that product being purchased as 
much as possible from Saskatchewan business people; and the reason for that, of course, is that we 
would like to see the businesses in Saskatchewan gain from that government services. The minister, I 
take it, has made some announcements with regards to changes in some of the policies with regards to 
the government, so that we provide perhaps an equal benefit to many of the small businesses in 
Saskatchewan so they can compete, in fact, with the purchases of products by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. With regard to the open pricing system, I certainly don’t want to say anything more than 
the minister has said. It is a policy clearly that is being developed across the country. The breweries 
know the situation with regard to the consumption of beer. It is our view that they certainly are not going 
to try to price that product higher and higher with regards to eliminating the sales. The only thing I could 
add to that as the Minister of Finance (and I’m sure the Leader of the Opposition would not be critical of 
me) is that the province of Saskatchewan would tend to continue to like to have a small bite on any of 
the spirits and beer that is sold in the province of Saskatchewan. We think that is an excellent way to 
raise revenues, clearly a policy that we would continue, and perhaps we might even increase in some 
future time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, a new question to the minister in charge of the Saskatchewan 
Liquor Board. The Minister of Finance has made rather clear that he assumes that it’s the obligation of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, when buying automobiles from three main suppliers or their dealers, 
to bargain to get the best price possible for the people of Saskatchewan. Why does the minister in charge 
of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board believe that it is not the obligation of the Saskatchewan Liquor Board 
to bargain to get the best price possible for the people of Saskatchewan from the three main suppliers of 
beer in this province? Why does he feel that that ought to be totally open where his colleague, the 
Minister of Finance, agrees that his obligation and his colleague’s obligation is to bargain to get the best 
price for automobiles? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sandberg: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite clear that the bargaining will go on between the 
breweries. If I may quote from an item from the Leader-Post, referring to the Manitoba position in 
regards to open pricing. I’ll quote a paragraph: 
 

But both brewery A and brewery B plan to drop prices. Brewery B, on its light beer will drop its 
charge for a 12-pack by $1. Brewery A plans to drop so many cents from the price of its product. 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2153 

It’s quite clear that the competition between the breweries will keep the prices down. If the public of 
Saskatchewan thinks the price of that product is too high, they won’t buy it, Mr. Speaker. The breweries 
will then be forced to keep their prices down. That’s what the open market-place does and that’s what 
socialists don’t understand, Mr. Speaker. They believe that government should control everything. They 
believe that they should buy up all the industries of the province. I didn’t want to buy . . . I didn’t want 
to own Intercontinental Packers when I was living in Saskatoon. I’m still living in Saskatoon — partly in 
Regina. And the competition, Mr. Speaker, will keep the price down. 
 

Renovations of Ministers’ Offices 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister of government services. It has to do 
with orders for return nos. 15 and 47, which indicate for the last six months your government has spent 
more than $30,000 in renovating ministers’ offices in the Legislative Building. I wonder if, in general 
terms, you can explain to me what kind of renovations that might be, to run up a bill of $30,000 in 
renovating ministers’ offices in the first six months. 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — I believe, Mr. Speaker, that the renovations to the ministers’ offices are part of 
the total regeneration of the building. It’s a 10-year program. We’re in the sixth year of a program. It’s 
just a general upgrading. I might add that I think that $30,000 that we’ve spent since we have taken 
office pales in comparison to the renovations that went on to one minister’s office for furniture totalling 
I think in the neighbourhood of $15,000 — I think one of them here today. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, supplement to the minister. She . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Order, please. Give the member the opportunity to ask his question. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Speaker, it was a little difficult hearing myself ask the question, but the 
question remains. And if the minister would mind answering it, what renovations and what furnishings 
were done in the offices to amount to $30,000 in the first six months? Can you give me a list of the 
desks or items that were purchased to add up to $30,000? 
 
Hon. Mrs. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll be pleased to supply the hon. member with that information. 
It’ll take me just a little bit of time to compile it all. But yes, I will . . . I’ll report back to the House. 
 

Multimodal Station in Regina 
 
Mr. Shillington: — A question to the Minister of Urban Affairs. Mr. Minister, in the last session, when 
the noise wasn’t quite as bad and we could hear each other . . . Mr. Minister, in the last session I recall 
questioning you on the multimodal station in Regina. I recall your response at that time being one of 
reservations about the multimodal station, but still having the matter under discussion. Nothing has been 
heard now for six months. Is it fair to assume, Mr. Minister, that the multimodal station in Regina can 
now be considered dead, another victim of a Tory wrecking crew? 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — Mr. Speaker, I have a little problem understanding how the member opposite 
can say that nothing has been heard on multimodal in the last six months, considering the fact that the 
Leader-Post is their major research agent. There  



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2154 

was an article last week indicating a number of steps that were being taken in terms of multimodal. And 
the answer to your question is, quite simply, no. 
 
Mr. Shillington: — Well, perhaps you’d be good enough to . . . Last fall you were . . . The matter was 
before CIC to determine whether or not the program should go ahead, if my memory serves me correct. 
Perhaps you could report to the House on something more than your ongoing guerrilla warfare with the 
media. Perhaps you could go on and tell us what CIC is doing about the project, or your department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Schoenhals: — As briefly as I can, Mr. Speaker, CIC reported back — presented a couple of 
options. We presented those to VIA. They rejected those. I have suggested since that in order to 
facilitate the thing and reach some type of resolution on it, it might be a little more intelligent — again, a 
question of reorganization — if the discussions took place directly between my colleague, the Minister 
of Highways, and the STC board. It seems like a rather obvious step to eliminate that middleman, which 
is really all the Minister of Urban Affairs was in the previous administration — is now. So we took that 
step. We have made moves through my other portfolio to begin considering and in fact begin the process 
of designating the Union Station as a heritage property. We feel that is an essential aspect and that it 
certainly qualifies as a provincial heritage property. 
 
We have also indicated that we would be interested in exploring alternate uses, if and when in fact 
multimodal does not take place. But multimodal is being considered now between the Minister of 
Highways and Mr. Murray from VIA. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Executive Council Staff Changes 
 

Hon. Mr. Devine: — Mr. Speaker, because I am leaving the province today for a couple of weeks and 
because some people may be interested, I thought I would provide this information. 
 
The deputy minister of Executive Council will be stepping down the end of the month. He will be 
performing other responsibilities for the government with respect to trade, particularly in the United 
States, Europe and various other places in the world. The Clerk of the Executive Council will become 
the acting deputy minister and hopefully, Mr. Speaker, to prevent any future confusion or difficulties, he 
will be responsible for the information regarding Executive Council estimates. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, neither of the two individuals will receive the 6 per cent salary increase. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll make a brief reply. I assume that the comments by the Premier 
mean that the deputy minister of Executive Council, Mr. Bedson, will no longer be located in Regina 
and that he will be assuming duties elsewhere. I speculate that he will be located in London, as a base, 
but we may well be wrong on that. It would have been helpful if the Premier had indicated whether or 
not Mr. Bedson will be a roving ambassador located in Regina, or at some other location. 
 
With respect to the Clerk of the Executive Council, Mr. Smith-Windsor, being appointed the acting 
deputy minister, we are pleased to have that information and we  



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2155 

noted with interest the arrangements with respect to salary increases for the two officials named. We 
will note with interest whether or not they and/or all other members of the staff of the Premier will 
continue to be on staff, or whether or not other arrangements will be made. 
 

Crow Rate 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, over the past weeks our government has been conducting a 
campaign on behalf of the Saskatchewan farmer, the Saskatchewan people and Canada as a whole. Our 
campaign has been rational, constructive and positive. It has been aimed, Mr. Speaker, at correcting 
what we believe are glaring flaws in the federal government’s plans to abolish the historic Crow rate for 
grain transport and substitute in its place an entirely new, untried freight rate mechanism. Believing that 
as Canadians we were all in this together, we not only took Saskatchewan’s interests into consideration 
in analysing the federal proposals but the interests of all Canadians, no matter where they lived or what 
they did for a living. Our stand, Mr. Speaker, is well known. Based on initial plans by the federal 
government announced in February, we concluded that within one decade the net income of our farmers 
would be drastically reduced. In fact, our analysis shows the cut in income from the proposed new 
freight rate levels would be so drastic that many of our farmers would not be able to afford the input 
costs necessary to operate their farms. Furthermore, the ability to grow and market the grain has been 
such a boost to our national economy in recent years would be severely hampered. 
 
Let me put this into perspective, Mr. Speaker. Last year our farmers sold some 27 million metric tons of 
grain on the export market and brought into this nation some $6 billion. If our farmers can’t afford to 
grow grain in such volumes and ship it through an efficient transportation system and grain handling 
system, the ramifications to this nation can easily be seen. No Canadian, no matter where he or she lives 
or what he or she does for a living, will escape the ripple effects of such a serious impairment to our 
national economy. The textile worker in Quebec will suffer, the worker on the automobile production 
line in Ontario will suffer, the fisherman in the Maritimes will suffer, and so will the fruit farmer in 
British Columbia. 
 
These truths are, as they say, self-evident. At least our government thought they were self-evident. We 
offered the federal government alternative suggestions. We make no apologies as a provincial 
government representing first and foremost the people of Saskatchewan for defending the interests of 
Saskatchewan farmers. However, I should stress that our suggestions and proposals were reasonable and 
not made only with our own province in mind but with the economic health of the entire nation. Our 
proposals were aimed neither at promoting the narrow interests of a special interest group, nor did we 
capitulate to any particular lobby. 
 
We expected a similar stand, Mr. Speaker, from the federal government as it reviewed its own initial 
proposals and considered our suggestions. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, a preliminary review of the federal 
proposals, as tabled in the House of Commons on Tuesday, May 10th, showed this not to be the case. 
The legislation is a hodgepodge of ideas and concepts — if, buts, and maybes — attempts to mollify this 
group or that area and hastily conceived in an attempt to meet some completely artificial deadline. It is a 
maze within a maze; it has loopholes within loopholes. It is almost completely incomprehensible, Mr. 
Speaker. It is a house of cards that will collapse from its own weak foundations and faulty architecture. 
It will become a political and bureaucratic nightmare. 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2156 

When our government reviewed the initial proposals from the federal government on this matter in 
February, we thought nothing could be worse. How much we underestimated that government, Mr. 
Speaker. The federal government has turned its back completely on the real world. It has produced 
something that is completely unworkable. It has produced something that is very, very dangerous; and 
knowingly, it has drawn up a scenario that will wreck Saskatchewan’s economy, and seriously damage 
the Canadian economy. The political ramifications from this will come home to haunt Ottawa for years 
to come. The federal government pretends it has drawn up a masterful piece of legislation that will 
herald a new age of prosperity for all Canadians. 
 
The truth is that the federal government hasn’t drawn up a masterful piece of legislation, and to suppose 
for one second that the legislation will herald a new age of prosperity is a pipe-dream of the most foolish 
kind. The reverse is true, Mr. Speaker. The legislation is bad and riddled with flaws. Prosperity will be 
seriously eroded rather than enhanced by this legislation. 
 
Let me point out some of the flaws, Mr. Speaker. First, there is virtually no economic benefit 
whatsoever for Saskatchewan in the new proposals. There is nothing that will fundamentally enhance 
agricultural processing in this province. Second, there are no real guarantees or penalties to ensure the 
railways will carry out their investment plans, or meet performance commitments on a day-to-day basis. 
Third, there are loopholes that will allow the railways to impose hidden costs on shippers above and 
beyond the base rate. Railways will be in a position to manipulate charges by stop-off cross-switching 
costs, and a dozen more other technical ways. 
 
There are no real guarantees the proper number of grain cars will be on hand at the right time, at the 
right place, and this poses a real possibility that our farmers will suffer lost sales through no fault of their 
own. There are loopholes that will enable the railways to pass on to the grain farmer costs no actually 
incurred by the shipment of grain. Deferred maintenance costs are one example, and there are others. 
The 31.1 million metric ton lid on grain that can come under the program remains. This is a huge 
disincentive to our farmers, who on the one hand are told to be more productive, win more export 
dollars, and on the other hand told if they do, they will be penalized for it. 
 
There is no firm commitment to bringing in a full range of special crops under the program. Again, on 
the one hand, our farmers are urged to diversify. On the other hand, they are told if they do diversify 
they better not count on Ottawa. There is a real possibility that the federal government will be eventually 
able to ease out of its commitment on paying the Crown benefits. I see a number of loopholes here. If 
the federal government does ease out of paying the benefits, the burden will fall on our farmers. This 
simply cannot be allowed to happen. Freight rates, Mr. Speaker, under this proposal will be set by 
Ottawa bureaucrats. This means there will be no statutory rate. The establishment of a senior grain 
transportation committee, as outlined in the legislation, does not allow proper representation by 
Saskatchewan. In fact the senior grain transportation committee, Mr. Speaker, will serve the interests of 
eastern consumers, shippers, railroad companies, but not the interests of the prairie producer. The 
question of method of payment has been handled in an arbitrary manner, Mr. Speaker, and faced with 
the absence of any real consensus on this question our government believes that a reasonable 
compromise would have been the compromise advanced by the United Grain Growers — that being a 
50-50 split, with review after ’85-86. 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2157 

Our rural communities are left exposed to economic devastation. No one knows how the exact rates will 
affect the rural communities. Their survival will be left in the hands of some far-off bureaucrats. They 
will be left in a no man’s land, a world of economic uncertainty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In a nutshell, the federal government is telling us that there will be no statutory guarantees or safeguards 
for our farmers. There will only be increased costs and no real benefits to our farmers. Our farmers will 
lose their competitive position in the world market-place. The federal government is basing its plans on 
flimsy, theoretical objectives, rather than well-thought-out practicalities. There are no guarantees. 
 
The truth is that the more one looks at this legislation, the more badly flawed one sees it is. It has been 
hastily drawn up, and the haste is seen in its inconsistencies. It is a piece of patchwork designed to 
appease some eastern groups. As such, it is a compromise to both common sense and fairness, Mr. 
Speaker. Above all, it is a piece of legislation this government could never support as long as we fulfil 
our duty to represent the people of this province and maintain our commitment to the well-being of this 
nation as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government rejects the Pepin plan as tabled. It is a very complex piece of legislation 
and requires additional detailed analysis, and when that additional detailed analysis is completed I will 
be prepared to share it with this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Speaker, on May the 4th, ‘Western Transportation Bill to be Tabled’ was a news 
release, dated no. 82-83 for release May the 4th, 1983. At that time I asked the minister: would he please 
state Saskatchewan’s opposition to a transportation initiative? They say the Crow benefit will be paid 
entirely to the railways as grain transportation subsidy, and a link will be established. They talked about 
a few things, but nothing was said in there on the devastating effect it was going to have. The minister 
refused to put some emphasis on behalf of Saskatchewan’s farmers and encourage Pepin not to 
introduce this legislation. He sat idly by, and today he still tells us what the devastating things are in the 
resolution, and I agree with that. He suggested that a reasonable compromise might have been a 50-50 
split. I did not understand what the minister was saying in that regard. I’m perturbed about that. 
 
Why doesn’t this government get on the blower and inform their members in Ottawa, their colleagues, 
the MPs that are our federal opposition, to do everything in their power to prevent this bill from passing? 
I think what we’ve had before us today was a long and wordy explanation of what was in that bill, and 
nothing was in it saying what you are going to do, and how you’re going to fight it. You’re still going to 
wait for more analysis. 
 
We have here a bill that is going to destroy the Crow rate. We have a bill before us that is going to make 
a sweetheart deal for the railways. It’s exactly what like we’ve been telling you right along. Gilson 
announced the plan; Pepin made it even worse; and here we have a minister standing up and telling us 
what’s bad about it, but doesn’t suggest what he’s going to do to prevent that bill from passing. I’m very 
disappointed in his action, Mr. Minister. He’s been sitting on the fence. He left us with the information 
today that he’s still sitting on the fence. He never told the farmers of Saskatchewan what you’re going to 
do to fight the plan. I think this is very serious, Mr. Minister. Here we have a general that’s gone and left 
the farmers on their own, and I think that’s very sad news for Saskatchewan today. 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2158 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 49 — An Act respecting Co-operatives 
 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I move first reading of a bill respecting co-operatives. 
 
Motion agreed to and the bill ordered to be read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

STATEMENT BY MR. SPEAKER 
 

Answers to Questions in Question Period 
 
Mr. Speaker: — Under orders of the day yesterday, a point of order was raised by the member from 
Shaunavon, and I’d just like to give you a brief statement. I took time this morning to review the record, 
and I’d like to touch briefly on the situation as I see it. 
 
Yesterday a point of order was raised regarding answers to questions in question period. In particular, a 
problem arose when the Premier answered one question, then, while still on his feet, offered an answer 
to an earlier question. While members should not object to receiving answers to their questions, I would 
like to advise all ministers that if they wish to present answers to questions for which they have taken 
notice, they should seek to be recognized by the Chair for that purpose. This will prevent the member’s 
line of questioning from being interrupted and will facilitate a more orderly question period. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Bill No. 38 — An Act to amend The Agricultural Incentives Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I move, seconded by the Minister of 
Health, with leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the order for second reading of Bill No. 38, An Act to amend The Agricultural Incentives Act, 
be discharged and the bill withdrawn. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Not debatable) 
 

Return No. 111 
 
Mr. Engel moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 111) showing: 
 

(10) The total cost to the Government of the Agriculture Outlook Conference held in Saskatoon on 
February 7 and 8, 1983, and particulars of: (a) the cost of rental of facilities; (b) the cost of all meals, 
lunches and banquets provided; (c) the cost of entertainment at the banquet on February 7, 1983; (d) 
the cost of receptions; (e) the cost of expenses and fees for each speaker  



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2159 

at the conference; (f) other expenses. (2) the amount paid to or on behalf of each person who 
received or benefited from the payment of expenses by the Government of Saskatchewan or any of 
its agencies or crown corporations for attendance at the conference. 

 
An Hon. Member: — Debate. 
 

Return No. 112 
 
Mr. Engel moved that an Order of the Assembly do issue for a Return (No. 112) showing: 
 

A copy of all contracts and agreements entered into by the Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation 
since its inception with railway companies or with the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 

An Hon. Member: — Debate. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 46 — An Act respecting the Consequential Amendments resulting from the enactment of 
The Department of Finance Act, 1983 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Yes, the officials are Mike Costello, ADM of Finance, and Gerry Kraus, 
comptroller. 
 
Mr. Chairman, prior to proceeding with that bill, a question raised by the Leader of the Opposition 
respecting the remissions under $1,000 — I have a House amendment to correct a drafting error to the 
effect that all remissions, whether passed by OC or not, shall appear in the Public Accounts. Therefore, 
no change in current practice as far as the Public Accounts are concerned; we will introduce the same 
amendment to correct the same error in the new finance act at the appropriate time. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter: — Mr. Chairman, my colleague, the member from Elphinstone, who will be taking 
this through, has just stepped out for a second and he’ll be right back. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I might indicate to the Leader of the Opposition, with regard to the point raised 
with regard to remissions under $1,000, that I have a House amendment to correct the drafting error — 
the $1,000, all remissions whether passed by OC or not, shall appear in the Public Accounts, therefore 
no change to the current practice as far as Public Accounts are concerned; and that an appropriate 
change would also be made when the finance act comes before committee of the whole as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I will welcome that House amendment and I 
think no one wishes to argue the desirability of removing some of the  



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2160 

paper flow that flows across the cabinet table. I think the minister has accepted the proposition we put 
forward that when a minister of the Crown is forgiving a debt to the Crown, at least it should be 
published in some public document. He’s going to do it in the Public Accounts and I think that should 
work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I understand that the bill called was not in fact The Department of Revenue and 
Financial Services Act, but The Department of Finance Consequential Amendment Act. We’re not 
proceeding with that particular act today, but with The Department of Revenue and Financial Services 
Act. So if we could make that correction here now, then we could proceed with that. 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the Department of Revenue and Financial Services 
 
Clauses 1 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, with respect to generally clause 6 and the ones 
following under the heading, ‘Duties and Powers of the Ministers,’ is there any substantial change in the 
duties and powers of the ministers from the existing legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — No, and clause 6, I can advise, is the standard section being used in all bills. 
There is no intention here to extend the powers of the ministers at all. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, with respect to the duties and powers — and I 
could raise it under other sections but basically it has to do with duties and powers — there is a power to 
appoint advisers and advisory committees, and if they operate for a period of less than one year then no 
cabinet approval is necessary. Is it the policy of the government, with respect to these matters, to make 
available to the legislature the names of advisers to retained and the remuneration paid to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, I’m advised that anything in excess of $10,000 would have to appear in the 
Public Accounts. The details would be there. Also, the opposition would have the opportunity to ask 
those types of questions with regards to estimates, so I think the mechanism is in place for an opposition, 
clearly, to find any of that information that they wish to have. So, from that point of view, I wouldn’t see 
it as taking away any power from the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 13 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, with respect to the board of revenue 
commissioners, is the board of revenue commissioners, in personnel, the same people as the Local 
Government Board? Has that custom been continued, or . . .? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It is our understanding that it is. It’s not an area that we’ve looked to change, but 
I could undertake to confirm that to make sure that is in fact correct. I believe it’s . . . The Local 
Government Board is one and the same as the board of revenue commissioners. And I don’t think that 
has been changed, but I will undertake to confirm that for you. 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2161 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Clause 13 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 14 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 24 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I had noted a change in the wording of this 
matter when I spoke on second reading, indicating that the previous legislation required the 
Lieutenant-Governor in Council to appoint a comptroller. This one says he may appoint a comptroller. 
Does this represent simply the selection of words by the legislative draftsperson or does it represent any 
significant change in the approach of the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, clearly there’s no intention of the government to do anything but to 
appoint a comptroller. That’s point number one and I take it that the ‘may’ versus the ‘shall’ would be a 
product of the legislative draftsman. And that’s clearly the case. 
 
I think you also made the point in second reading that it would be a significant departure with 
tremendous wrath if there was no comptroller in fact in place, and we would not see that situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I wonder if the minister could give us a brief 
comment on why it’s felt that it’s a good idea to move the comptroller function from Finance to revenue 
supply. I had sort of thought of it as a function directed primarily to the paying out of money as opposed 
to the gathering of money, and I’ve thought in my mind that the paying out of money was Finance’s 
function and the pulling in of money was Revenue’s function. Perhaps the minister could make a 
comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Two points. With regard to the earlier question on the revenue commissioners, 
there has in fact been no change. 
 
With regard to the comptroller going to this new Department of Revenue and Financial Services, my 
understanding is that a few years ago the revenue branch was also in the Department of Finance. It was 
then moved out of the Department of Finance. What we have done now is taken the element of revenue, 
supply and services that would deal primarily with the government purchasing, that type of thing, and 
put it over to this department, the Revenue. We have then moved the comptroller into with the revenue 
collectors which are audit-type areas of work. The two departments now, we would see as sister 
departments. Both would report to treasury board and would work sort of cap in hand, if you like. 
 
I suppose ultimately the decision would come, did you want to move Revenue back into Finance and 
create a larger department, or did you want to tend to put that management-type thing in one department 
and the Finance, maybe dealing with a more specific area, in another? 
 
I suppose it’s a balancing act. I suppose I could respond by: what was the rationale of moving Revenue 
out, and it should have been moved back, or this type of thing. So I suppose, it’s a judgement call. We 
hope it will function properly. We in the Department 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2162 

of Finance would still see a fairly close working relationship with the comptroller’s branch and perhaps 
even a closer working relationship now with Revenue as well. 
 
Clause 24 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 25 to 27 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 28 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Perhaps, Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, this makes my point. We are now 
going to have payments out of the Consolidated Fund made under the direction of the comptroller, who 
is an employee of the Minister of Revenue, by a cheque on an account of the Minister of Finance. And it 
struck me that that added a possible extra tier. I admit that they’re the same body, and probably at the 
outset there will be no difference in procedures. 
 
But clearly, to pay a bill now — let me say a Department of Highways bill — the citizen now submits 
his bill to the Department of Highways for some machinery that he supplied, for example, or services 
rendered. The Highways people, in effect, authenticate it and say, ‘Yeah, we received that piece of 
machinery.’ And then they send it up to the comptroller or to the pre-audit, which is basically 
comptroller, and then somebody raises a cheque on the basis of it. 
 
Highways starts the process, but it has to go through the comptroller and then be paid out. It now looks 
as if it’s going to the Department of Highways for this authentication that the machine was received, to 
the comptroller to authenticate that Highways had the money and all of the pre-audit functions, and then 
to Finance to get the cheque out. And it looks like it’s going through one extra department. It used to go 
through two; now will go through three. 
 
I don’t know whether the minister sees that as a possibility of slowing up payments, and I’m sure the 
minister has the same desire that every other Minister of Finance has ever had to see if he could chop 
three days off the average time of payment of cheques out. And it’s a problem that everybody in 
government acknowledges as something we owe to the citizen, to get the government’s bills paid as fast 
as we can. I raise the fear that because we’re going through three departments rather than two we may be 
in fact slowing the process by a day or two, and thereby doing what we don’t want to do, and I ask the 
minister to comment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — I’m advised that there’s really going to be no change in the payment process, and 
it will not unduly delay the present speed by which we pay the cheques. The prime area there is, the 
Minister of Finance will still approve all bank accounts; it would simply then proceed. Clearly, if the 
situation proved it to be the other way, then we would certainly look at this down the road, but our 
advice now is that it would not in any way create any extra work and not delay it any further. 
 
Clause 28 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 29 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 32 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2163 

Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Just with respect to 30, 31, and 32, is it the intention that the public employees’ 
benefits agency will in effect operate all of the plans? And I’m sure that it is intended that they operate 
the two public service superannuation plans, and the group life, and the dental plan and the rest of it. I’m 
really asking about, let’s say, the power corporation superannuation plan. That’s a good enough 
example. If the power corporation has a dental plan, would it be thought that it would be operated by the 
public employees’ benefit agency, or by somebody at the power corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Well, the object of this is to, not so much in the legislation, but the approach we 
tend to want to take is to try to rationalize that whole area as much as possible. We’re attempting to 
bring in things like the teachers’ plan, etc. I take it that very often the way government works is that that 
process is slow. We have come to no decision with regard to the crowns at this point in time. I think 
perhaps an argument could be made for them to be under that plan, but clearly no decision has been 
made at this point in time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I note that under section 31 it’s provided that 
the agency — that is, the public employees benefit agency — can act as an agent of a board that is 
responsible for administering a benefits program. Now, they’re, let’s say in this case, the power 
corporation superannuation board. And that is there in order that it can do some things for the power 
corporation superannuation board, e.g. the investment of funds, but not necessarily at this stage of the 
game that it would simply take over the functions of the board. Do I understand your position? 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — That’s correct. 
 
Clause 32 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 33 to 39 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 40 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — If I might explain that amendment, it was an amendment suggested by the 
Provincial Auditor, and it, in his view, would be redundant if we left it there. And that’s the reason for 
that House amendment. 
 
Clause 40 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 41 agreed to. 
 
Clause 42 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 43 and 44 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Blakeney: — Mr. Chairman and Mr. Minister, I didn’t catch us dealing with the amending of 
section 42(5). Perhaps we did, but . . . That’s a little one which says that not only the remissions under 
subsection (1), but all the remissions are going to be published in the Public Accounts. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — It says, read, indicated at the last two lines, the amendment to section 42(5) of 
the printed bill by striking out subsection (1) in the second line and substituting this section. I think that 
covers it. 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2164 

Mr. Chairman: — I read it all off at once. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Okay, sorry I missed it in the going by. 
 
Clause 45 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 46 and 47 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the bill as amended. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 33 — An Act respecting the Department of Revenue and Financial Services 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the amendments be now read a first and 
second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Andrew: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, I move that the bill with amendments be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and bill read a third time. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

CONSOLIDATED FUND BUDGETARY EXPENDITURE 
 

AGRICULTURE 
 

Ordinary Expenditure — Vote 1 
 

Item 1 
 
Mr. Chairman: — Would the minister introduce his officials? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yes, Mr. Chairman. On my right is Jack Drew, the deputy minister of 
agriculture. And immediately behind him is Stuart Kramer, assistant deputy minister. And behind me is 
Wes Mazer, director of administration. Additional support staff are behind the rail and will be 
introduced as necessary. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, as one looks at the Department of Agriculture and what should 
agriculture’s role be in our economy, and particularly when you have a right-wing government that’s 
been campaigning on the basis of getting the government out of the lives of people, and I suppose you 
see your new department as one that would provide information and possibly a little research and just 
kind of a watch-dog that sees things roll around and watch farmers trying to cope with the problems 
they’re in, is that a part of an assessment of what your plans are in Agriculture? Could you give us a 
short overview on just what you see your role as Minister of Agriculture, and how do you see as one that 
would provide or what you don’t provide for the farmers of Saskatchewan in these times? 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2165 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you’re right as far as we go. We provide a little information, 
and we provide a little service. And we provide a little incentive, and we provided a beef stabilization 
program. And we’ve provided a farm purchase program, and we’ve provided a reduction interest rates in 
the Farm Credit Corporation. And we’ve provided . . . Oh, I could go on. And I suppose what we’re 
looking at is, as will unfold as legislation is dealt with later this session and in following sessions, an 
enhanced intensity of agriculture in Saskatchewan through irrigation, through value-added secondary 
industries, etc. And I think it can be fairly accurately reflected simply by taking a look at the budget. If 
you’re comparing apples and apples, there is in the neighbourhood of a 20 per cent increase for 
Agriculture in this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Engel: — It’s an interesting statement that you’d wind up with . . . that there’s a 20 per cent 
increase in Agriculture. Do you feel that . . . your general statement indicates beef stabilization, interest 
subsidy, irrigation and secondary industry. Do you feel that 20 per cent increase is a general blanket that 
would touch those areas, or where would the bulk of that 20 per cent be going to? What major emphasis 
are you beefing up? Because government 6 and 7 or inflation-minus-one would indicate . . . standing up 
and saying now ’20 per cent increase’ would kind of indicate that you’ve used your ‘weight’ in a very 
effective way in there in the treasury board meetings, and got an additional 13 per cent there. And I was 
just wondering where you’re applying that special emphasis. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, firstly I don’t sit on treasury board, so my influence — what little I have 
— doesn’t come from being able to persuade treasury board. It comes from an inherent understanding 
and common sense in our caucus as to the importance of agriculture in Saskatchewan. And I’m sorry 
that I misled the member in my earlier statements when I talked about 20 per cent. In fact it’s 21.9 per 
cent increase, when you’re talking about comparable totals. 
 
In ’82-83 the printed estimate total was $89,144,800; ’83-84 would appear to be a reduction at 
$79,771.350. However to compare proper comparables, you must delete the $8,877,000 of the grain car 
corporation, which we have restructured; you must delete the $4.25 million of drought payments, 
because we don’t anticipate a drought this year and if one comes then the program will obviously have 
to be looked at, and that would be included in the final number. Those are a couple of the items that I 
point out that should not be in the comparison. So for comparable totals it works out to: ’82-83, $76 
million as opposed to $92.6 million for ’83-84. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Just on that totals, where did you get the additional from 79 to 92? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — $13,300,000 from the agricultural division of the heritage fund. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I’m aware of that, but wouldn’t that same amount be in ’82-83? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There was no agricultural division in the heritage fund in ’82-83. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Just a further comment or clarification on those general figures. I see that you have in 
your budget now (and I would say that I’m pleased to see it there), from intergovernmental affairs you 
brought in a million dollars — I just can’t find the number right off hand — one million for grants 
through that matching grants program through  



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2166 

SCIC. Have you taken that into account to come up with your 21 per cent there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — That’s included on the ’83-84 number, the additional 1 million. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That actually would reflect a smaller percentage than the minister’s trying to build here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, to balance that off we lost the Indian liaison unit; we lost the transportation 
agency to Highways; and we lost native policy secretariat. Those three agencies were lost. So you know, 
that’s a balancing effect there. 
 
Mr. Engel: — In talking about the transportation agency, Mr. Minister, do you still have staff or people 
involved, that will help you in your battle to retain the Crow rate, that were involved in the 
transportation agency before? Did you split that off or did they go Highways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. The agency is responsible to the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. The arrangement that was made to effect government reorganization for preparation of 
this blue book was that I, as minister responsible for that agency during the commencement of the Crow 
battle, so to speak, would have free access to all staff and support from that agency until this battle is 
concluded. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I believe after listening to your . . . I would just like to take a moment to deal with that 
particular topic to start with, I suppose. When you read your statement this morning, I believe the term 
‘free access’ would be quite typical, and we could be using that literally because it didn’t sound as 
though you had intentions of going to the wall, like a previous statement that was made in this 
legislature, for the farmers; or by your boss, the Premier, saying that we’re going to make treasury 
available, and we’ll spend millions if necessary. 
 
I was looking for a statement from you this morning, Mr. Minister, to be quite honest and very frank, 
that would spell out some battle lines, and spell out some weapons you intend to use to fight this vicious 
plan that’s going to have that tremendous effect on our rural economy. And I agree with you on the 
implications, and the statement you read, the kind of punishment it is going to do. I agree with you. 
When it talks about a scriptural reference, saying that the lambs who were led to the slaughter were 
blind. In Saskatchewan’s case, the farmers aren’t blind. They know what’s happening; they know what 
the Crow rate’s going to do. They know the kind of a sharp weapon Pepin is planning to use to destroy 
that Crow rate, and that heritage, that benefit we had on a constitutional part of our agreement. 
 
This free access you have to the officials in the transportation agency — just what are you planning to 
do? And then what are your urgent actions that would come on, as far as top priority of your department 
in the next little while? We don’t have very long in this battle. I’m sure you’ll agree. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — And I’m sure even the hon. member will agree that constitutionally we don’t 
have the power to declare war on our senior government. And they have absolute jurisdiction as it 
relates to transportation in Canada. We have, as a government, lobbied with some degree of vigour — 
and I mean really worked at it. Our Premier, our Minister of Finance, myself and others have lobbied 
intensely in eastern Canada and other jurisdictions in western Canada — industry and politicians, the 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2167 

whole ball of wax. We continue and will continue to do just that. 
 
As it relates to putting the treasury on the line to protects agriculture, if the legislation gets through — 
and heaven forbid that it should, in its present form at least — but if the legislation gets through, it won’t 
be effective till August 1, and then the effect of that legislation won’t be felt, at least in the short term. 
 
But we will be monitoring for negative impact. We are today developing programs that I will be 
prepared to announce sometime down the road. There may in fact, on some of them, be legislation 
introduced this session — certainly if not this session, in the fall session — to deal with some of those. 
But I won’t anticipate that. I will just tell you that we will be monitoring for negative impact. We will be 
supporting our livestock industry and our agricultural industry in Saskatchewan, and we quite simply, to 
whatever extent we can, will not allow the centralists in Ottawa to destroy what is the backbone of our 
economy here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I appreciate the good intentions of you and your department as far as monitoring the 
effect that Crow change will have, and possibly even putting programs in place and studying ahead. But 
as the general leading this fight to save the Crow rate, boy, it looks an awful lot from an observer’s point 
of view that you’ve turned tail, you’ve dropped your weapons, and you’re running for cover. It looks to 
me as though you’ve given up on this battle. 
 
I can’t hear you say anything that you’re going to be doing now, tomorrow, this week-end, to spell out 
some battle lines. I suggested them to you the day you opened your special conference up at Saskatoon. I 
made public some battle lines. If you would have got involved that time and taken some advice, I’m sure 
today we would have never gotten to this place where we’d see the Minister of Agriculture admitting 
defeat. And the bill is just introduced. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Firstly, no one on this side of the house admits defeat until the last breath is 
drawn. Secondly, had I taken your advice every step of the way, I would hate to think where we would 
be sitting now. It was you that stood up in this House last week and said, ‘Please react to this news 
release; please react to what Pepin now says he’s going to do. He’s going to increase the commodity 
base. He’s going to bring in the linkage. He’s going to remove the 31.1 ceiling. He’s going to do all of 
these things.’ When we analyse the legislation, there’s provision for none of those things — none of 
those things. 
 
You maybe have more trust in the boys in Ottawa than I do. Quite frankly, any that I did have is 
seriously eroded as a result of events of the last few days and weeks. But I guess what I’m saying is that 
we intend to do battle to the best extent we possibly can, in the interests of the agricultural community in 
Saskatchewan. And we don’t even mind taking a little advice from you from time to time, but we’ll 
decide as to whether it’s good advice or bad advice, and which we’re going to act on and which we’re 
not. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You’re trying to mislead my colleagues and the rest of the people in this legislation, 
because what I suggested this past Tuesday, after I had a copy of Pepin’s press release . . . I never once 
suggested that the 31 million tonne ceiling was gone. Just the opposite is true. 
 
I said, from the press release we know that: (a) variable rates are there. It was obvious  



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2168 

that he was going to make it possible for the railways to come up with a program that would be 
detrimental to our branch lines and to our branch line elevators. I suggested to you, although it sounds 
good, although it sounds good to increase additional crops . . . I think that’s great. When I look at 
increases that have taken place in canola and lentils, and some of these other crops, I’m sure that 
sunflowers and a lot of these other crops will come up and take just as large a portion of it. 
 
But the question I was raising, and the seriousness of that aspect is, that’s all fine and good if you take 
off the 31 million tonnes, but they didn’t. The ceiling, that limit was still there, as far as I can see in 
these 45-or 60-page bill we’ve got down there, and we could take a week studying that one. I don’t want 
to get into debating that bill as such. 
 
But what I want to debate here today is to encourage you to get involved in forming an alliance. I 
suggested early to you that this Crow coalition sounded like a good thing. When a prominent citizen, as 
we have here in Saskatchewan, decided even to head it up, I suggested that it wasn’t the money; it was 
just give him some assurance; endorse what he’s doing. Send an official of your caucus in there to 
officially endorse a coalition to help mould the opinion of that group that has a broad spectrum. It goes 
from the farmers union right across to the co-ops —all of them. There’s a broad spectrum. Palliser 
decided not to join that group. I can assure you, but there’s another question and we’ll talk about Palliser 
later on. 
 
But the issue is: do you have a plan of action? Have you a plan where you’re going to say, ‘We’ll 
support a coalition that represents a broad stroke of Saskatchewan farmers. We’ll support that coalition. 
We’ll lobby (there are four points, remember) with your colleagues in Ottawa like I did my colleagues in 
our side of the House. We’ll make sure that we get together and do everything we can, and throw up all 
the road blocks we can’? 
 
You have a colleague, the leader in Ottawa; he reminds me an awful lot of you — the same kind of 
background, same kind of training, same kind of discipline to authority. I appreciate that aspect of you, 
but I say to you; call on your past experience. Set up some lines where we’re not going to retreat 
beyond. I thought that’s what you did when you passed that piece of paper we did here, where you got 
unanimous agreement by trickery and every other way to get me to sign a statement that I don’t entirely 
endorse. But I compromised just so we’d have a unified front. 
 
I encouraged my friends in Winnipeg to do the same. You’ve missed the boat by not getting Alberta to 
do it. You really fell down on your job, and consequently, you’re still dragging your feet. You know, 
you should get into an exercise program, or something, to get a little more trim if you can’t carry the 
battle. Do something, but please, don’t waste all question periods day after day after day trying to hurl 
insults at me hoping that I’ll back off. I don’t intend to. I don’t intend to. I don’t mind the insults; that’s 
okay, it helps the ego a little bit. But please, get on with this battle, and tell us just what you intend to do. 
What kind of method have you in place that we can assure the farmers? They’re sitting home; it’s 
snowing; they’re discouraged. In my country half of them are done seeding, but they’re saying, ‘Does it 
pay to finish seeding if I’m not going to have a decent opportunity?’ 
 
You were concerned about the 27 . . . you mentioned in your statement, getting off to more specifics at 
the . . . There was 27 million tons of grain marketed for $6 billion. I agree with those numbers, but 
would you suggest that we had any problem with the rail transportation system getting that to market 
last year? 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2169 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, a few other things that you raised, I’ll deal with them and then get to 
your specific question. The first thing, you make reference to this 50- or 60-page bill emanating from 
Ottawa, and you suggested that it would take a week to analyse that, and it would take a long time. And 
he’s saying it from his seat right now — it would take a long time. Yet when we got one in our hands 
last Wednesday, you were begging and pleading with us to come down and react to this bill the very 
next day. And at the same time you say that at least you would require a week, or at least a very long 
time, to come up with the same analysis, and I’m not here to insult you. I’m just using your own words 
and giving them back to you. And I just make that point. 
 
Then you come up with the Crow coalition, and why haven’t we joined the Crow coalition. I said in this 
House before that I don’t deny anyone access to any coalition or agricultural organization or whatever. I 
wouldn’t deny any one of our members to go to the Crow coalition. I wouldn’t deny them to go to 
Palliser. I wouldn’t deny them to go to the NFU. Some of them have, and some of them are very active 
in all of the organizations that I’ve mentioned. And you say that we should be lobbying in Ottawa. We 
are. We are encouraging the various commodity groups and agricultural organizations to do that as well. 
And in fact . . . Would you get me Gary Lane for a minute? Before I tell you about that one, I want to be 
absolutely sure. 
 
But the lobby goes on. We’ve produced a Crow pamphlet, and we’ve produced the ad that you’ve 
probably heard something about. And I think in the neighbourhood of $80,000 the cost will be for those 
particular efforts. In addition to that, the Minister of Finance, the Premier, and myself have lobbied right 
across this country — no small effort. 
 
And, yes, we did move 27 million metric tons to export position last year and brought in $6 billion to the 
Canadian economy, and your question was: did we experience any difficulty in that movement? And I’d 
say last year, minimal. Last year there was minimal, as it relates to bottlenecks in the system. But I point 
out to you that with a very serious downturn in the world economy commodities such as potash and 
sulphur and coal and other bulk commodities were not moving. And I would suggest to you if those 
commodities were moving to their maximum potential that we would have experienced serious 
difficulties in getting that grain to export position. 
 
Mr. Engel: — If the minister would, I will just take one line to explain the difference between doing . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, I didn’t think I needed to repeat it three times. But, you suggested that I 
was basically being contradictory when I said that, make a response to the bill, and then I turned around 
and say that if we want to go into details studying that bill it’ll likely take as long or longer than it’s 
doing in Ottawa. 
 
An analogy of that would be: here we have a road mine planted in the road. It doesn’t take me long to 
tell my colleague, ‘Look, don’t go down that road; it’s going to blow up your vehicle if you hit that 
mine.’ And that’s what I was trying to tell you to do. Now, if we’re going to take and defuse that mine 
and go into an analysis of what that 60-page mine contains . . . That mine is there. If that gets passed and 
if it’s there, it’s going to blow an awful lot of Saskatchewan farmers out of the business, and that’s the 
point I’m trying to make. And all your job as minister here in Saskatchewan is saying to friends at 
Ottawa and to the troops that are marching down here, saying, ‘Look, stop. You can’t go beyond this 
point, because this is what it’s going to do for Saskatchewan. And they’re marching on me.’ They’ve 
only got a few weeks left and it’ll be done. And you are saying, ‘Oh, I can sit back and if I find anything 
more out about that bomb I’ll let you know. I’ll let  



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2170 

you know.’ 
 
You’re sitting on the fence and saying, ‘That’s fine, boys. There’s a bomb there but don’t worry about 
it.’ And that’s the point I’m trying to make, Mr. Minister. I’m not saying that we can tell you in detail 
how terrible that’s going to be, but when you’re blown up it doesn’t really matter. You know, if the leg’s 
gone it doesn’t really matter what happened to your one toe-nail. It doesn’t happen to make that much 
difference, because the destructive effort is there. 
 
I think the point I’m trying to get you to tell us is: if you’re going to go to the wall, where is this wall? 
How much further back are you going to back off in this battle? Because I feel there’s a battle there. 
You promised me and the rest of the farmers in Saskatchewan, that, ‘Boy, once I find out what’s there 
I’ll go to the wall for you.’ We know what’s there. We know what it’s going to do. We know that it’s as 
vicious and as detrimental as Gilson said it would be. We know that it’s as bad as what Pepin first said 
when he announced his initiative before Gilson was ever appointed, and now we have the actual bill 
there. There isn’t very much good about it. I agree with your analysis of that aspect of it, but I don’t 
agree with your inactivity, and why don’t you tell the House just what you propose to do in the next 
week to stop the passage of that bill? I think you have some muscle and some authority and some 
position here in Saskatchewan, because 60 per cent of the people affected by that bill live within your 
jurisdiction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, a couple of things, Mr. Speaker. Firstly, I want to make it clear that there 
has been no backing off. Period. We have continued our lobby from day one. We have encouraged, 
begged, argued, fought, kicked and screamed and gouged, and everything that we have to do, or can 
possibly do, and will continue to do just that. 
 
As it relates to the mine in the middle of the road, I suppose the difference between your colleagues and 
mine is mine wouldn’t have to be told not to step on it. And they would recognize right off that it was a 
dangerous thing, so they’d immediately get to the analysis in hopes of finding something there that we 
can build on. Obviously it’s not there. And so the fight goes on. 
 
We will continue our lobby. We will be urging commodity groups, and farm organization and 
agricultural people, to do the same thing, and I say the fight goes on. I don’t know where your 
perception of backing off comes from, but it just doesn’t happen to be the case. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I suppose we could continue. Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, we could continue this war of 
words for a long time and you just are failing to respond. The legislation was introduced on Tuesday. I 
heard no telegram. I heard no message. I heard no words, no letter. And then on Wednesday is day two; 
Thursday is day three. Today we are day four, and the minister is sitting back and saying, ‘The fight 
goes on, I’m not backing off.’ Four days hiding in the trenches or crawling backwards is what it looks 
like to me. 
 
I think the minister should be indicating that he’s . . . What this means is saying that here we do a battle 
line so far and no further and here’s where we’re going to hold and strengthen the stakes, and whatever 
you’re going to do. There should be some indication, with the competent staff you have — and as I look 
across the various departmental heads you have here, you have a fine complement of people that can 
mount a top-notch attack on Pepin’s legislation. And I don’t think you’ve succeeded in doing so. And if 
you have, would you please forward some copies of telegrams, or night 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2171 

letters, or cables, or wire, or anything? Show us some sign of what you’ve done since Tuesday. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to provide — not today, it’ll take me a while to pull 
it together — I’m prepared to provide a package of all the telegrams, night letters, ads, whatever, that 
we’ve sent to Ottawa to argue our position relative to the Pepin proposal, and prior to that, the Gilson 
proposal, and more recently, the analysis of the legislation as it was tabled. And I’m prepared to provide 
the hon. member with that package, providing he will show the same degree of patience that he’s shown 
in this House in previous estimates. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, my patience was stretched, because it took till just recently — in fact, within a 
week of the new estimates — that I got some answers from the time before. But I wasn’t going to, you 
know, deflect your staff’s attention to important matters by just answering some questions from the 
Agriculture critic because they had a battle to do. 
 
If the minister would please — and I could get insultive like you sometimes do with me and my 
colleagues — use some good description . . . My colleagues have used some descriptions. But you 
weren’t listening. You weren’t listening. I asked you; what have you done since the bill’s been tabled on 
Tuesday? I have a copy of the ad you did, and I have some information on what you did in the past. I’d 
like to have a truckload of material, or however much it takes, of all the effort you’ve put into this thing 
since the bill’s been tabled on Tuesday, or since effort’s been made by Pepin to get the bill in on 
Tuesday. 
 
I understand that my colleagues gave us a day’s grace with stalling, not providing traditional first 
reading. And then there was some other time gained. But since you’re aware of what’s happened, just if 
you can assure us that you’ll tell us what you’re doing, and give us in verbal, now, some proposal of 
some activity that you intend to do. Or are you indirectly telling us that, ‘Ah, maybe a change isn’t so 
bad. And so, what the heck, we’ve had the Crow a long time. Let it go? Is that basically what your 
attitude is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chairman, I don’t know how I can get through to the 
hon. member beyond repeating and repeating, and maybe eventually penetrate. But what I’ve said since 
the bill was tabled on Tuesday . . . I think it was about 4 o’clock Wednesday that we got a copy of it, and 
late into Wednesday evening we were busy digesting it. Thursday, as the hon. member knows, was a 
rather busy day in this particular legislature. And today the ministerial statement was given relative to 
the legislation, and we have . . . If it hasn’t been done, it is our intention to immediately communicate 
that statement to all jurisdictions affected by the proposal and the legislation. 
 
And we intend to continue our lobby. I don’t know what’s on my book for next week; I don’t know 
what’s on it for tomorrow, but if my book tomorrow says I should be in Ottawa tomorrow night, I’ll be 
there. And if on Monday it says Ottawa or Toronto or wherever, I’ll be there. But we intend to continue 
the fight to protect western Canadian agriculture, and particularly the livestock industry, as this 
legislation does serious violence to the livestock industry without doing any positive things for the grain 
industry. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I could belabour the point, I suppose, and go to a lot of press releases  



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2172 

here that I had planned on dealing with. And just the one analysis here that says, ‘Affordability is the 
key issue in the Pepin plan,’ and then the other one where I referred to in one question period where the 
minister was involved in discussions over the Crow issue. And as recently as May the 5th, where Miller 
was being quite vocal, and a spokesman from your office, a spokesman for Berntson’s office refused to 
confirm or deny the meeting and said only, ‘The minister is conducting ongoing meetings with Pepin.’ 
But Miller said, ‘The two ministers have held a series of meetings to discuss what changes to the 
proposed legislation would make it acceptable to Saskatchewan.’ Both sides are quite open-minded,’ he 
said. ‘Pepin is giving serious consideration to a number of changes.’ 
 
I suppose the one issue that scares me the most in our position, over the period of time from as far back 
as when Otto Lang was the Minister of Transport and Ralph Goodale was his executive assistant, and 
they came out with this famous saying that, ‘There’s a user-pay policy.’ And I get quite concerned when 
I see percentages thrown around and when I hear you talking, quite glibly, about the fact that farmers are 
prepared to pay more. I agree with Emmett Hall when he says that, ‘Once you change it, even a little bit, 
we’re in trouble,’ because then ensuing governments and different people and different staff members, 
particularly as it relates to this bill where that link will be in regulation rather than in statute . . . 
 
I appreciated your press statement, or your official statement, this morning in part, but the part that 
frustrates me is because if you’re circulating that broadly, it doesn’t encourage your colleagues, the MPs 
— I’d suggest send it to them. And all the . . . Send it to our guys too, you know. But it doesn’t really 
put a bottom line down saying what the net effect is going to be once you open the door. And frankly, 
Mr. Minister, I think you have a tremendous staff around you, but I’m not so sure that I’d be that 
complimentary to the staff that is surrounding Mr. Pepin. 
 
I met with some of them. I was fortunate enough to spend a week with two of your colleagues in 
Winnipeg at a conference when we got to rub shoulders with these guys, and we went out on train trips 
and the works. And those fellows there were just as anxious and just as vicious to change the Crow rate 
as the CPR and CNR officials themselves. 
 
And that’s where it’s really frustrating, because I know the decisions you make and the statements you 
read in this House — you rely on your staff and you have some input likely in what direction they 
should take. But basically you have to rely on your staff. And here Pepin is asking the farmers of 
Saskatchewan to rely on some of the things . . . and I could name some of the federal staff members; I’m 
not going to bother. Some of them really don’t understand what will happen if that Crow is changed in 
statute. 
 
And my bottom-line question would be; what are you prepared to let go as far as your negotiations are 
concerned with Pepin? . . . And what Miller talks about here that you had some amiable meetings and 
talks and set out the position Saskatchewan would be prepared to live with. What is that bottom line, Mr. 
Minister? What percentage would you accept? Would it be one that rates could be 12 per cent, six times 
Crow, five and a half times Crow? What are you prepared to live with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. The member has asked about the discussions between myself and the 
federal minister, and there have been many. Off the top of my head, I can’t even tell you how many — 
but many. And in every instance I’ve advanced the same arguments, and I suppose that any of the 
conditions that I’ve advanced arguments for  



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2173 

that we win, I can compliment the federal minister for giving in to those. 
 
We don’t want any of our points missed. And our points briefly — and you know them as well as I do 
— but we’ve said from the outset that it must be statutory, must remain statutory. We’ve said that the 
linkage should be there as a safety net and cost protection. And I don’t know where you pick up the 12 
per cent; I think 12 per cent is unrealistic. I think if, as is projected by the federal government, that there 
is a strengthening in commodity prices, 12 per cent could be as high as 10 time current rate and that’s 
clearly unacceptable. So the principle of the linkage, I think, is acceptable but would have to be at a 
reasonable level, and certainly 12 per cent is not reasonable. 
 
I would sharpen up my pencil, I suppose, to come up with what I believe to be a reasonable level. Off 
the top of my head, I would say 6 to 7 per cent. 
 
Additional commodities — I have advanced that argument every meeting that we’ve ever had, that a 
broader spectrum of commodity should be covered. I think in principle that that’s sound and most 
people would agree with that. However, as I’ve said earlier, in the absence of any absolute as to what 
those additional commodities might be, I’m not prepared to endorse the federal minister in that 
particular item either until I see what commodities may or may not be covered. If all we get is what 
we’ve got plus pumpkins, it’s really not much benefit to us, now is it? 
 
The 31.1 ceiling — We don’t like to see that there. We view it as an impediment or a disincentive to 
increase productivity, and we’ve argued that that should be removed. And I guess the last point I’ll make 
— and you’re aware of all the nine points that we made in our resolution — the method of payment 
wasn’t included in our resolution. We said at that time that consensus on that particular question should 
come from the producer. Now, we’ve come to the position that, in the absence of any consensus, a 
reasonable compromise would be the 50-50, with review after ’85-86. That was, I believe, the position 
first advanced by United Grain Growers. And I think it can be argued that that is a reasonable 
compromise in the absence of consensus any place on the question of method of payment. 
 
You talked about . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, I’m going to stay positive, so I won’t get into what 
I was going to say next. And essentially, that’s where we are. Now we argue for every one of those 
points. Any one that we get would improve the legislation. But we argue for every one of them. And I 
don’t know if any one or all of them would really improve this particular legislation to the level where it 
would be acceptable to us. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I think, on that note, although I don’t agree with all of your analysis of that, I’ll leave the 
Crow rate for further questions in question period, I suppose, as things progress. 
 
Just a couple of points as to your basic philosophy. You’re saying that there’s general beefing up of 21 
per cent — 21.9 I think, even the number used. You named four key areas, and that’s awful close to the 
areas I was going to talk about. 
 
But before I get into that, the Leader-Post on the 9th had an article, ‘Agriculture is still the core of the 
province’s economy.’ Do you agree with these figures that farming brought in about $3.8 billion in gross 
revenue last year, about one-quarter of the value of all the goods and services purchased in the province? 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2174 

That would once have told most of the story. Is that basically the same figure as the Department of 
Agriculture would estimate is the gross revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Without absolute precision, the 3.8 to 3.9. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Getting to the numbers as far as the net income for last year, what would Agriculture’s 
estimate be there then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We don’t have that here. We can get it and provide you with it, but we don’t 
have it within easy access. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Well, Mr. Minister, the numbers would serve as a degree to underline the issue that I 
wanted to raise and . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, just roughly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — From memory, and I don’t want to be held to this, net farm incomes were down 
in the neighbourhood of 17 per cent last year. 
 
Mr. Engel: — In that same article, a vice-president of Sask Wheat Pool, Garf Stevenson, is quoted as 
saying that: 
 

Garf Stevenson, first vice-president of Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has worries about the province’s 
approximately 70,000 farmers. They have trouble keeping up with rising farm input prices for at 
least a decade. Farmers keep going on loans for which they qualified because the value of their land 
was increasing. Now that land values are falling behind, the general economic unrest, many farmers 
find a financial vice closing in, Stevenson said, ‘They need more money to pay for new equipment 
and old debts, but their borrowing power has shrunk.’ 

 
Do you agree with the general assessment that Sask Wheat Pool makes of the farm situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, in general tenor, yes. I suppose it’s a matter of degree. I don’t know if I 
would go so far as to say that it’s as serious as you’ve implied, but there’s no question it is a serious 
problem. Input costs, including interest, energy, herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers — all have had a 
devastating effect on the margins that we once enjoyed. And there’s no question, the margins simply 
aren’t there as they used to be. 
 
What have we done? Since we don’t have any control over commodity prices, we have to attack the 
input side, and some of the things that we’ve done obviously don’t have an immediate impact. But one 
that I will talk about briefly is the rural gas distribution system that was announced by our minister some 
time ago. It’s a 10-year program to gasify, so to speak, rural Saskatchewan. Natural gas, as a source of 
energy, is about 60 per cent of the cost of our traditional energy sources, and that would be a very 
significant input cost reduction, if we could get natural gas to the farms. 
 
We’ve also brought in a Crown land lease policy. I think, that offers some security for those people 
living and farming on leased land. We’ve brought in a farm purchase program and provided for easier 
intergenerational transfers and in fact easier first-time purchasers of farmland. Oh, I could name a few 
more, and if you insist, I will, but I’m going to have to sit down and think about it for a while. 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2175 

Mr. Engel: — Well, I wish the minister would, because you come into the House here and just a simple 
question from the Department of Agriculture as to what the net income is for last year, and you say it’s 
down about 17 per cent and you can’t give me the number of how many millions or billions of dollars it 
is, just a general little figure like that. And then you turn around and start talking about farmers spending 
money to put in rural gasification; then they’re supposed to spend some money to buy the Crown land 
that they’re leasing; and they’re supposed to borrow some more money to get involved in the farm 
purchase plan — when Garf Stevenson says that farmers are kept going on loans. 
 
So to finance their working capital and their cash flow, they’re making additional loans for which they 
qualified because the price of the land went up. When they first borrowed money on a quarter section of 
land, they maybe got $35,000. When that land jumped to $100,000, they likely were able to borrow 
$60,000. Now all of a sudden that land’s coming back down, and the squeeze is on, and the Minister of 
Agriculture stands up in this House and says, ‘Look, fellows, borrow $3,500 to put in natural gas.’ He 
didn’t tell us that that natural gas is going up in one jump by 25 per cent, before they’ve even got it. Did 
you take that into account when you said there was a 60 per cent margin to use natural gas, even with a 
20 per cent increase, or 25, 28? And tell me to borrow money to put the gas in. 
 
I was in a little group at Woodrow that was working out some details, and we thought we were going to 
get natural gas in ’82. All of a sudden, Sask Power says, ‘Sorry, boys, the project’s out,’ and the seven 
of us are sitting there waiting. Now my buddies maybe can’t afford it any more, but I don’t know if I 
can. I don’t know if I can, but . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’m saying that the farmers that are in a 
squeeze. 
 
When somebody that represents 70 per cent of these 70,000 farmers, or close to 50,000 farmers, he’s 
saying the vice is closing in on them. Those of you that are farmers know what a big vice is; this one has 
jaws about six feet long. And they’re starting to put the squeeze on these guys. I know fellows . . . A 
fellow from your constituency, Mr. Minister, was in and dropped into my leader’s office and they called 
me in to visit with these two gentlemen. And he had the squeeze put on him. They came out and 
collected his cattle, and they sold his equipment at an auction sale. And, you know, things are tough — 
things are tough. 
 
The other guy, he had seven quarters of land, and he had some young sons out looking for jobs. I 
suggested, ‘Well, why don’t you go up to the minister’s office and get yourself an application for the 
farm purchase program and sell your young boys the land, and take the money and retire?’ And he says, 
‘I wouldn’t strap them with that kind of debt. Things are too tough to make the payments.’ And you’re 
telling me that everything you’ve said here spells out, ‘Spend more money.’ You’ve got to spend money 
to buy the Crown lease land. You can’t get by with just paying your lease. You’ve got to spend . . . I 
think you said, 15 per cent down. That’s a lot of money 15 per cent down, and then you get 10 per cent 
money over a 15-year period, which is another 10 per cent a year. The guy’s got to borrow money to get 
into the program, as good as it might sound. 
 
I think if I talk about some ranchers down in my area that have a lot of lease land, that it didn’t really 
bother them over the last 75 years to have that land leased. Why all of a sudden the big urgency to sell 
it? What is your alternative? Has there been any program here where there is 21 per cent of your 
increase for something that will help them, or is it all for telling him to spend more money? 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2176 

Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Sometimes the logic of the member who just sat down, Mr. Speaker, escapes 
most people, but I’m going to try and bring things back into perspective. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker and Mr. Chairman, lease land that all of a sudden becomes owned land, where 
equity is building, and with equity building — he’s not making now rental payments, but payments on 
equity. He’s actually getting a bigger piece of the action. The 15 per cent down with amortization over 
15 years with the first 10 years guaranteed at 10 per cent, I believe, I think is very, very reasonable. So if 
he’s then . . . And it’s pointed out to me that in rural credit unions agricultural loans are down, deposits 
are building, which tells me that someone out there is doing all right, and perhaps this particular 
program will create some demand and we will see some improvement in economic activity out there in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, as it relates to the farm purchase program, I don’t know how it would compare across the 
province. In certain areas of the province, I would think that 8 per cent money is not too far off what 
would be expected on rural gasification, no, I didn’t calculate any increase in gas in the short term, and I 
don’t think you could either without some wild projections because when it has to be approved by 
PURC (public utilities review commission) before it’s in fact a reality. So you may be critical of those 
programs, but I can tell you there are whole lot of folks in rural Saskatchewan that are very, very pleased 
that the programs are in place. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, did the Attorney-General just give you the information that PURC agreed 
to the 25 per cent? That is not a wild shot in the arm — sorry, Mr. Minister. If you’d take some time to 
answer the questions and face the music, we could get on with it because I have quite a list of material 
here, and it’s tough because I’m not even into my material yet. 
 
You suggested that a wild estimate was 25 per cent. I can’t leave it go at that because it’s before PURC. 
The numbers are out there and you tell the farmers that there’s a 60 per cent savings when you know it’s 
going to cost them 25 per cent more. The minister told me 60 per cent — there’s a 60 per cent traditional 
saving for to go into rural gas. I wrote down the numbers and we’ll check with Hansard to see if that’s 
right. But the minister is confusing the issue. 
 
Credit unions that I talked to . . . and getting down to the farm purchase plan, a credit union loans 
manager tells me that he’s having some problem with the length of turn-around time it takes for a person 
to get his information back whether he’s going to be approved or not. What on the average would you 
consider a reasonable turn-around time from when a person has had his loan approved by the Farm 
Credit Corporation and goes to your office? How long should that take before they find out whether or 
not that loan will in fact receive the 8 per cent funding? What would you consider a reasonable 
turn-around time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — My understanding, Mr. Chairman, is that the average turn-around time is in the 
neighbourhood of three weeks. And to your previous question, it never comes to my office. I’ve never 
yet seen an application. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Are you not responsible for the office that approves? I suppose I’ll have to be very 
careful with the sensitive minister on his political program here, and say the office that the minister is in 
charge of approving. I will reword that if you’re that  



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2177 

sensitive about it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — There had been over 7,000 interviews under the farm purchase program, and 
about something over 3,000 actually signed up. The turn-around time initially was in the neighbourhood 
of the three weeks that I’ve talked about. In some instances now the turn-around at Farm Credit can be 
as long as six weeks simply because of the volume of applications they are dealing with. But there is no 
delay in the decision as to whether they qualify under the farm purchase program or not, or whether they 
qualify for the rebate. And out of those 7,000-odd interviews there have been in the neighbourhood of 
20 or 25 applications that went to the office of Mr. Jim Webster, who is heading up our program. And 
those are the only applications that anyone in Agriculture has ever seen because the program is 
administered totally by the farm purchase program — or the Farm Credit Corporation. 
 
On a point of clarification, eventually all of the approvals come to the office. But the only ones where 
Mr. Webster had to make a decision on them were those 20 or 25 our of the 7,000 interviews. 
 
Mr. Engel: — You’re saying that 3,000 were signed out — you mean that have been approved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — In the neighbourhood. Something over 3,000 are already active in the program, 
approved. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Can you just take me quickly through the process, Mr. Minister? Farmer John wants to 
— A or B, or call him what you want — the farmer wants to get into farming. He goes to Farm Credit 
Corporation, makes an application. What are the qualifying terms that Farm Credit Corporation use to 
qualify for this loan? We went through that, but when I reread the estimates in the past couple of days on 
the answers you gave me, it wasn’t clear. You were telling us — talking with a forked tongue would be 
a nice way to put it, maybe. 
 
But what are the terms of reference that a person has to qualify for? Say the parcel of land sells for 
$150,000. How much does he need down? What would Farm Credit Corporation require? What process 
does he go through to get that money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, I want to go back to your earlier question because I gave you, 
inadvertently, some bad numbers. There have been in the neighbourhood of 3,000 deemed to be eligible. 
In fact, 1,500, approximately, are already approved and in the system and working. I just wanted to 
make that clarification. 
 
As it relates to Farm Credit Corporation eligibility criteria, I can only tell you what they have the power 
to do. What they do from time to time is completely within their own bailiwick. And their criteria really 
have nothing to do with qualifying under the farm purchase program or not. 
 
Our criteria are, as it relates to off-farm income, net worth, serviceability, those things, and I think we’ve 
. . . 
 
Mr. Engel: — Run the $150,000 loan by me just quickly. What would you suggest? What would you 
suggest if you wanted to borrow $150,000? Because I think you said that’s your average loan. 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2178 

Mr. Chairman: — Order, order! If you’re going to make comments, do it from your feet, sir. Your light 
is on, so it’s recorded in the Hansard. 
 
Mr. Engel: — I’ve just required some information here. I suggested earlier that he runs a $150,000 loan 
through us quickly, as to what criteria would be involved, what kind of an . . . 
 
Shall we start over? Now, all I was asking, Mr. Minister, is farmer — I call him John, maybe, or Farmer 
A — needs to borrow $150,000 to buy a parcel of land next . . . (inaudible) . . . to make this $150,000 
loan. What would you suggest are the criteria involved? What kind of loan is he going to sign up? What 
will be the base interest rate, and how will the subsidy work? Just tell us the numbers on that. In fact, I 
could make it easier for your staff by saying $100,000. I’ll knock it off. The recession’s on; we’ll sell the 
land for a hundred thousand bucks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Again, it’s not for me to tell you what the criteria set out by Farm Credit . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No, our program is the farm purchase program. Farm Credit Corporation has 
to be satisfied as to their eligibility requirements as well. I understand in the banking community they 
are limited by law to lending only up to 75 per cent of appraised value for land. The Farm Credit 
Corporation has, I understand, more latitude than that and can in fact go up to 90 per cent. So what can 
you buy with $150,000? Well, in my corner of the world you’d probably buy about three quarters of 
land; in your corner of the world you’d probably buy one. It varies on the basis of assessment and 
productivity and market pressures, etc. But I can tell you that with 7,000 applications and 3,000-plus 
deemed to be eligible, the program has obviously been well received. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, you’re sure using some fancy statements. I said a young person wants to 
buy a piece of land worth $100,000 — two quarters in your area, three-quarters of a quarter down . . . 
(inaudible) . . . You said that ‘Our program’s a farm purchase program. Well, I’m wanting to know how 
this works to purchase that land, and you tell me you can’t tell me. Is it a farm purchase program or isn’t 
it? 
 
If Farmer John, we’ll call him . . . John wants to buy this parcel of land. You came up and told me: how 
much land is involved? I didn’t say. We don’t need to know if it’s one or two or three quarters. He wants 
to borrow $100,000. That’s what the farmer is going to charge him for that parcel of land. And to get 
that $100,000 you’ve got a farm purchase program. There was a program in place administered by the 
former government that was a land bank program. And the land bank would have bought that parcel of 
land; we could have told you what the criteria were to rent it to Farmer John so he’d be farming. You’ve 
got a farm purchase program and tell me that you don’t know what’s quality. What does he get, what 
does he need, what’s the interest rates going to be, what kind of contract is he writing up and what kind 
of guarantees is he going to have on that $100,000? You must have staff sufficient to be able to do that 
one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, obviously I have to go back to square one again and take you through the 
whole process. The farm purchase program is not a lending agency. The Farm Credit Corporation is the 
lending agency. So you go into the Farm Credit Corporation — your Farmer John or whoever it is 
you’re talking about — you go into the Farm Credit Corporation and you make application for a loan to 
buy this land. If you meet the Farm Credit Corporation eligibility, the next step is for the Farm Credit 
Corporation to determine whether you would meet the criteria as set out under the farm  



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2179 

purchase program to have the interest rebate applied. Okay? If you meet the criteria as set out by the 
farm purchase program, you will have the rebate applied which will write the interest rate down from, I 
think, twelve and a quarter today, down to eight per cent — twelve and three-quarters down to eight per 
cent — that’s based on amortization of 10 years. 
 
If you want me to spell out the criteria to qualify under the farm purchase program; you must not have 
exceeded $35,000 off-farm income in the previous three years average; you must not have a net worth of 
more than 300,000; the maximum loan is 350,000, and you must demonstrate serviceability. 
 
Mr. Engel: — The farm purchase program is not a lending agency. It’s not the place where he gets his 
money from in the first place. On hindsight, shouldn’t you have accepted my amendment to change the 
name, and say that it should be called, ‘a loan reduction program’? Because basically all that the farm 
purchase program does is reduces the loan. Is that right or isn’t it? Yes or no — just a simple . . . 
(inaudible) . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Basically what it does is that it facilitates the desire of a lot of young farmers to 
own land. And we do write down interest rates today from twelve and three-quarters down to eight per 
cent. And we’ve had over 7,000 applicants; over 3,000 deemed to be eligible ; over 1,500 written up 
already. And, I don’t care, quite frankly, what you call it. If it’s working and doing a good job, that’s 
fine with me. 
 
Mr. Engel: — At least that should deserve a great round of applause, because that for somehow entitles 
it to be called the farm purchase program. Well, if that’s the misnomer you want to give it. 
 
What would your staff suggest would be the going rate of the interest at a credit union today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I don’t have the foggiest. I’ll send one of my officials out to phone them if you 
like. Do you want me to check with the Royal Bank and the Bank of Montreal and Credit Financier, and 
some of those as well? Are you going to buy some land? 
 
Mr. Engel: — Are you actually informing this House that with the 20 or so officials you have sitting 
around you that they don’t monitor what the going interest rate is and to see if your 8 per cent plan is 
good? You don’t have a ball-park figure what you could borrow money for land for? Is this what you’re 
telling us? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I can tell you what interest rate I’m paying on my credit union loan, but I don’t 
think it’s any of your business — a first point. The second point: it varies. It varies all over the map as to 
risk, as to what the loan is for. And surely the member understands that. I don’t know if any of my 
officials — they’re all very well paid and they probably don’t have loans, but I don’t expect them to go 
down and check the credit union every morning on the way to work. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, at the outset you suggested that under a free enterprise government system 
your job is to monitor Agriculture. Your job is to keep an eye on the industry as far as what’s happening. 
Your job is to be involved in helping with research and developing new programs and in general 
creating an environment where Saskatchewan farmers can get in and make some money. 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2180 

And you’re trying to sit here and tell us that you don’t know what an average loan would be written for a 
piece of land where you have some good security and you get it at a good, depressed price. Because the 
farmers are in this vice . . . You agreed that there is farmers kept going on loans for which they qualified 
because the value of their land was increasing. Now that values are falling and the general economic 
unrest and many farmers find a financial vice closing in on them, and you don’t know what the interest 
rate is. Well, let me tell you. 
 
A credit union loans manager in one of our leading credit unions in my riding tells me that the red tape 
involved in trying to get a Farm credit Corporation loan and the stalls involved . . . Now your program 
was announced last, and is effective, January 1. Seven thousand young farmers were anxious to get into 
the act and get some land and establish themselves as farmers. Where do you suppose the other 5,500 
farmers are, Mr. Minister? Where do you suppose they went? What do you suppose they’re doing? This 
is the middle of May. Our boys are half done seeding. 
 
Do you suppose they’re still waiting for that transaction to go through and waiting for you? How many 
of these other 1,500 that are deemed . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A lot of red tape. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Minister, keep some order. My voice is going. Keep some order; my voice is . . . 
(inaudible) . . . Thank you. 
 
Mr. Minister, you told me that 3,000 were deemed to be eligible, and made it look as though that might 
be, as many were signed out, were the words used first. And then you qualified it by cutting it in half 
and you’re quite sure that 1,500 have some money and got their land and are farming. Great. I’ll accept 
that. But those other 5,500 farmers, Mr. Minister, what do you suppose they’re doing? You’re a farmer. 
You can’t wait to buy land, sitting in the middle of May, ‘deemed to be eligible’ — ‘signed out.’ What 
are they going to do this year? 
 
You know, I was very upset with you and your department, when you decided last year . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — They all are. 
 
Mr. Engel: — And a lot of my farmers were, too. And you decided to axe 700 guys — and those are 
your numbers — you decided to axe 700 guys that were ready to go farming under the land bank 
program. I know you don’t like land bank, but those 700 were approved. They were deemed to be 
farmers, two years ago already. The second season is on. They are now in this little list here, ‘deemed to 
be eligible.’ 
 
What does it mean to a young fellow – and I could give you some names of guys that are in the process 
of financing — and that’s why I know what the credit union rates are. And it is almost an ineffective 
program you’ve got here. How many of those that you feel are ‘named to be eligible’ are going to be 
farming this spring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I want to talk a moment, Mr. Chairman, about the efficiencies under the 
previous administration’s plan. They had, Mr. Chairman, 10 years, 10 years under their plan to find time 
for the writing up of, at the very, very peak, about 2,800 leases. And during the course of that 10 years, 
they found time, somehow, to write up  



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2181 

sales agreements for about 151 of those tenants, and I think that that’s not really an excellent record by 
any stretch of the imagination. 
 
In four months, Mr. Chairman, in four months we have, in capital dollars through Farm Credit, about 
$194 million out there and 1,500-plus clients under the farm purchase program that we’re writing down 
to a per cent. My understanding is that there are — what? — 3,000 . . . Yeah, there are 3,000 that are 
deemed to be eligible, and in all likelihood will be approved. And six weeks turn-around time — I 
apologize if it’s too slow, but I can tell you that six weeks turn-around time — I apologize if it’s too 
slow, but I can tell you that six weeks is not very long compared to the waiting list that you guys had 
under your program — they were going to wait forever. You talked about 700, or whatever it was, or 
7,000 on the waiting list, and the way your program was moving they were going to wait forever, 
because quite frankly you couldn’t find enough money in the corporate coffers to buy up all that land to 
release it, in any event. We’ve captured another vehicle to do the capitalizing and we are writing down 
the interest rate, and it’s been very well received. And we make no apology for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Now, would you stand up one more time and tell us where those 1,500 are going to be 
farming, or what they’re going to be doing, that are deemed to be eligible? That’s the only question I 
asked. I didn’t ask for all that other garbage. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — About 60 per cent of them, Mr. Speaker, will be farming their dads’ farms; it’s 
an intergenerational transfer. It’s a mechanism to facilitate intergenerational transfers as, to some extent, 
land bank was. The difference, of course: we believe in transferring through ownership, as opposed to 
transferring through tenancy. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Maybe we can clarify that a little bit further. Of the 3,000, how many would you say are 
first-time farmers, that haven’t farmed before, that were new farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Yeah, we don’t have that statistic now, and I give no commitment that we will 
have it at year end either. I’ll make some effort to provide it for you, but I don’t guarantee it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — When these applications are run through the computer and are entered, do you not check 
out the qualifications of the person applying? Because you have a criteria there: did he make $35,000 
before or not, and did he do this? Are you saying that you don’t have a print-out sheet that a staff 
member could go and ask the computer and out would come the answer 30 seconds later? Are you trying 
to tell me that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — On the application form there’s provision for off-farm income. But I’m a 
farmer; I’ve been a farmer for some time and I have off-farm income, so just because someone on his 
application says off-farm income it doesn’t necessarily mean he’s a first-time farmer. That’s the problem 
we have in coming out with that statistic. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Actually in applying and when Farm Credit Corporation is entering them . . . And this is 
where I got some numbers when you first introduced the legislation. Farm Credit Corporation would just 
go and ask . . . sit down at a terminal and out would come the results. They’d have the numbers there. 
They know who’s applying. They know what the criteria of that individual are. They know his 
background. They know his farming experience or non-farming experience, and they know his source of 
funding. And are you saying that you can’t get the information as to how many of these  



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2182 

3,000 were previous farmers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — I’m not saying, Mr. Chairman, that we can’t get the information. What I’m 
saying is: we don’t have that statistic now, today. And I did say earlier that if it’s available we will get it, 
but I don’t give you any guarantee that we can get it. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Of these 3,000 people, can you also provide me with written information (I don’t need 
that today), can you provide me with information as to numbers in the various farm credit corporation 
districts? They have their district offices throughout the province. I believe . . . Are there eight districts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We can . . . You’re talking about the number of applications and approvals. 
We’ll get that for you. 
 
Mr. Engel: — What I’d really like to know is: I’d like to see what areas of Saskatchewan are going for 
it, because I know from land bank you could tell which areas were more accessible to it. Just as a matter 
of getting an overall picture, if you can provide me that information. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — We can even break it down, I understand, to RMs, if you like. We can break it 
down to anything you want. I think you’ll find that the program is so popular that it’s a fairly evenly 
distributed program right across the province. 
 
Mr. Engel: — If that information will include how many people you’ve helped to get into a viable 
operation — that is, a young farmer had three-quarters of land; he went to Farm Credit Corporation to 
buy two more — and how many were new farmers? That’s the only other breakdown I’d like to have on 
that issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. I don’t know if that statistic is easily available because all of the 
operations that FCC would lend to would be considered to be viable or they wouldn’t lend. I understand 
your question: if the young fellow has a half section that’s deemed to be less than self-sufficient, and his 
off-farm income is keeping it alive, would this program through his additional purchase make his unit a 
viable unit? And I understand the question, and we will try to get the information, but I don’t know if 
that statistic is kept. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Minister, I have a question on the purchase of land by land bank lessees. How 
many of the land bank lessees have purchased their land through the farm purchase program to this 
point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Chairman, the activity under the farm purchase program is largely 
privately held land. Crown land, and that includes both what was land bank land and what was held 
under lands branch land, accounts for between 1.5 and 2 per cent of the total activity under the farm 
purchase program. If you want more precise information than that, in terms of real numbers, we’re going 
to have to go back and do some digging because it’s not readily available. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, what you’re saying then is that farm purchase program 
really hasn’t assisted the people that had land bank land in purchasing too much of this land to this point, 
and they may not be able to because of the cost of the land and the base they may have had or may not 
have had prior to getting land bank land. 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2183 

In the land that has been sold, the land bank land that has been sold, can you give me an estimate of 
what the average price was of that land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — The average price — approximation — $350 an acre, of Crown land across the 
board. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — How do you arrive at the figure or the appraisal of the land that’s being sold — the land 
bank land? Do you make an appraisal? I imagine you make an appraisal of every parcel individually, but 
what criteria do you use in making that appraisal of the land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay, the vast, vast majority of them are done by in-house appraisers based on 
comparables in the area of land activity. 
 
Mr. Lusney: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, then the people that are buying that land at this point — 
the lessees that are buying the land bank land – are paying comparable rates to the private land that’s 
being sold in a given area, so really there’s no advantage to them to purchase that land. Well, really, 
there is no advantage then to purchase the land bank land or to purchase private land, in comparison to 
private land. So, what you’re saying then, is that the method you’re using for selling land bank now is 
totally different than what you have been indicating when you were in opposition — that the land should 
be sold, not at a huge profit to the government, but should be sold basically a little above what was paid 
for that land at the time that it was purchased by the government. This is what you have been indicating 
in the past. Are you considering doing that with any of the parcels and the lessees — selling the land 
back to the lessees at an amount a little above what they had paid for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there were some of my colleagues that argued that what you 
suggest would have been the proper course of action. I’ve never argued that. I’ve argued — and I guess 
it’s fair to say that I won this argument — that Crown land sold should be sold either at public tender or 
to the lessee for fair market value. 
 
What this program does to the Crown land holder, or for the Crown land holder, is it provides him with 
the opportunity to buy a small section of his holding at a time, as he is financially able to handle the 
transaction, without destroying his total holding. And obviously, the land bank holder is on a viable unit 
or he wouldn’t have received the lease in the first place under the criteria of the land bank. So I think, in 
part, that accounts for the small percentage of activity on the Crown side under the farm purchase 
program, because they will buy a piece at a time as their financial situation allows them to do that, 
without any risk of destroying the viable unit that they’ve had from the outset. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Just on that purchase of the Crown lands. Your announced statement, as I read it, 
indicates that they need 15 per cent down. Are you using that as a criteria to guarantee that kind of a 
loan, or are you actually going to carry the paper and be involved in a mini-banking system yourself? 
What kind of program do you see envisioned there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. On the most recent policy, the lands branch policy that was announced 
recently, with the 15 per cent down and 10 per cent guarantee for 10 years of a 15-year term, it is an 
agreement for sale — title held by the department until final payment is made. Or title held in the name 
of the Crown, I should say, until final payment is made. 



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2184 

Mr. Engel: — You are actually telling this House that this free enterpriser is going in competition with 
the banks and the credit unions of the province, and you’re going to be holding and doing the paper 
yourself. I’m not saying I’m against the program; don’t stand up and say that again. I’m not saying I’m 
against the program; don’t stand up and say that again. I’m just asking you if you have a little socialism 
left in that nice big heart of yours — what is it, a sweetheart, I think are the words you used. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not in competition with anyone, because obviously before 
we came here the land wasn’t on the market, so there wasn’t any money going to be lent. So we’re 
putting the land on the market; we’re offering agreements for sale. And again, the program has been 
very well received. And, you know, if you think that Tories don’t have a heart, I guess we’ve just shot a 
hole in your theory. 
 
Mr. Engel: — That wasn’t part of my theory. Now you’re saying that this Crown land is for sale. As 
you’re familiar with Saskatchewan, and particularly with a large portion of my colleague from 
Shaunavon, my riding — there are tracts of Crown land down there that you would actually call that. 
There are huge parcels of Crown land. Is it the department’s intention of selling off small blocks of land 
within those large tracts of land . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Go back again. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Is it the department’s intention of selling off small parcels of land, and start chipping 
away at or whittling away at those large tracts of land down in the southern parts of our two ridings? Is 
that some of the land that will be up for sale or are you just moving into a sales program of land that was 
up for sale under . . . Like the program that we had in place with the previous administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — It’s basically all Crown land for sale, except those lands deemed to be 
environmentally fragile, those lands deemed to be critical to wildlife habitat, and those lands deemed to 
be in the name of public good best held in the name of the Crown. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Your new administration seems to be real apt at some functions. You maybe call it heart, 
you maybe call it some things or other. But how long has the province had the responsibility of the large 
tracts of land, the wilderness area in southern Saskatchewan? When did the province receive the 
responsibility to administer and look after that portion of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Okay. The bulk of it was transferred in ’30-31, but there has been ongoing 
acquisitions for one reason or another. I’m sure the member is aware of some of those as well. 
 
Mr. Engel: — When this land was transferred to provincial jurisdiction, did the province accept any 
responsibility as to how they would administer that Crown land and what they would do with it before 
we accepted that responsibility? 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — No, just responsible administration. And I don’t think anyone would quarrel 
that what we’re doing is indeed responsible administration. 
 
Mr. Engel: — Mr. Chairman, we’re touching on a very important topic here. There’s a large tract of 
land that’s native to creation. That is one of the few pieces of land left in the 



 
May 13, 1983 

 
2185 

world other than the peaks of some of our mountain tops, that are there exactly like they were created, or 
originally deposited there or whatever theory you like to believe in. The province took over the 
administration of that, and it was at a time, unfortunately, very shortly after we inherited some of the 
worst financial conditions that this province has ever seen, and that was the last time we had a Tory 
government. But in spite of that, Mr. Minister, I think that land was given to Saskatchewan. 
 
That land was given to Saskatchewan — and on this note I’ll close — and we were charged with the 
responsibility of maintaining for heritage purposes, for wildlife purposes, and just for plain history, the 
best short-grass area in the world. That land hasn’t been touched; it hasn’t been cultivated. There are 
very strict rules in your department that have been administered by an able department that administers 
the lands branch. And you couldn’t even drive on that land, because when they went to seismographic 
tests in the grasslands area, that’s done in the winter-time when there’s a snow cover to protect the 
delicate nature of that piece of land. And if you’re saying that in your ambition to sell some Crown land, 
and with your responsibility to charge up this deficit and pay for it by selling off our heritage, Mr. 
Minister, you’re going to have some answering to do to some people in Saskatchewan that are very 
concerned. 
 
And let me just read it into the record, because this is the most important aspect, Mr. Chairman, of the 
entire Agriculture estimates, is the minister’s careless, reckless use of that delicate piece of land. The 
ranchers that are down there controlled it. The Anderson family has had land in their family for over 100 
years and they haven’t allowed that land to change; they’ve been good stewards of it. But here you come 
along and say, ‘We’re going to sell it off. We’re going to sell it to private farmers.’ 
 
And with the value of land . . . As you admitted a while ago, in our area cultivated land’s worth 
$100,000 or $150,000 a quarter. People are going to buy that stuff up, and they’re going to start 
cultivating it. It’s flat, level land in places, and they’re going to cultivate and rip up the valleys and put it 
to grain and try and make money with it and try and develop the best . . . And for a dollar — for a dollar 
— you’d sell off that heritage. Sure you say it’s sensitive. And what kind of rules are in there? I think 
the minister should reconsider that. 
 
I was on a committee. I was the minister’s Legislative Secretary when we opened up and started looking 
at selling some land. The lands branch has some nuisance quarters and parcels of land — a section, five 
quarters, three quarters, two quarters; scattered here, there, and all over — that are a little bit of a 
problem to administer. And so he says, ‘Great, sell that off.’ I like the program where you’ve even 
getting into the banking system to help people buy that; that’s good — fantastic. But, Mr. Minister, 
don’t go selling little pieces of land and start chipping away on our heritage that we have down in the 
south country. 
 
I’m a supporter, a proponent, of the proposals of a grasslands park for only one reason, and that’s to 
protect that sensitive area. I would like to read into the record a story from today’s paper: 
 
‘Bad news for wildlife.’ And the editorial staff could have even made that headline still bigger and said, 
‘Bad news for people of the world.’ 
 

I am writing to express the appreciation of the Saskatchewan Natural History Society for your 
editorial on the sale of Crown lands. Unfortunately, the lands in question include most of what is left 
of wildlife habitat in the province, a  



 
May 13, 1983 
 

 
2186 

resource that has been declining at the rate of 3 per cent per year. 
 
‘Saskatchewan Open for Business’ may be bad news for wildlife and for nature. The government 
seems reluctant to impose any restrictions whatever on entrepreneurs, other than to make a ritual 
commitment that land crucial to wildlife will not be sold. That is rather like trying to determine 
which cigarette gave you a cancer. 
 
The proposed Grasslands national park is in danger as the province drags its feet lest something 
worth exploring turns up. We are not certain that we cannot give land to the government to be 
protected under the Ecological Reserves Act, so great is their horror of entrepreneurial regulation. 
 
Extensive sale of Crown land will be a Devine thunderbolt for nature in this province, and 
contributions such as your editorial are important at this time. Lance Irving. 
 

Irving is a corresponding secretary, Saskatchewan Natural History Society, from Yorkton. Mr. Speaker, 
I think you should reconsider your policy on the sale of Crown land and not sell land within a country 
mile of that beautiful country. 
 
Hon. Mr. Berntson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very interested in the comments of the member who just 
sat down, and before I respond directly to his comments I will respond to the writers of the editorial who 
were obviously misinformed as to the program that we put in place to sell Crown land, number one. And 
because the editorial writers were misinformed, of course, anyone who read it and believed it would also 
be misinformed. I would invite the member opposite to show up at the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ 
convention in Yorkton next month and advance his arguments there. I think they wouldn’t be very well 
received there either. 
 
I’m a little upset that the member opposite would suggest that the ranchers in his constituency, and your 
words were ‘careless and reckless use of the land’ . . . Careless and reckless use of the land. I think, I 
think the vast majority, the vast majority, the vast majority of people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, 
we’re not selling it on public auction. We’re selling it, Mr. Chairman, on agreements for sale at 10 per 
cent, 15 per cent down amortized over 15 years. 
 
And I would also like to point out to the member, Mr. Chairman, that we were in consultation with the 
Saskatchewan Wildlife Federation. They are in agreement with our policy. We have talked to all of the 
people who would be concerned with such a policy. We have their support. We have said, Mr. 
Chairman, that land deemed to be environmentally fragile would not be sold. 
 
We have said, Mr. Chairman, that land critical to wildlife habitat would not be sold and we have said, 
Mr. Chairman, that land otherwise deemed to be best held in the name of the Crown for the public good 
would not be sold. I don’t know . . . Well, your paranoia borders on terminal and, Mr. Speaker, with that 
I move we rise, report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 1:06 p.m. 


